Produced by Sue Asscher ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES.
OR THE PRESERVATION OF FAVOURED RACES IN THE STRUGGLE FOR LIFE.
By Charles Darwin, M.A., Fellow Of The Royal, Geological, Linnaean, Etc.
, Societies; Author Of 'Journal Of Researches During H.M.S. Beagle's Voyage Round The World.
' LONDON: JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.
1859.
Down, Bromley, Kent, October 1st, 1859.
"But with regard to the material world, we can at least go so far as this--we can perceive that events are brought about not by insulated interpositions of Divine power, exerted in each particular case, but by the establishment of general laws".
W. Whewell: Bridgewater Treatise.
"To conclude, therefore, let no man out of a weak conceit of sobriety, or an ill-applied moderation, think or maintain, that a man can search too far or be too well studied in the book of God's word, or in the book of God's works; divinity or philosophy;
Bacon: Advancement of Learning.
CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION.
CHAPTER 1.
VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION.
Causes of Variability.
Effects of Habit.
Correlation of Growth.
Inheritance.
Character of Domestic Varieties.
Difficulty of distinguishing between Varieties and Species.
Origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more Species.
Domestic Pigeons, their Differences and Origin.
Principle of Selection anciently followed, its Effects.
Methodical and Unconscious Selection.
Unknown Origin of our Domestic Productions.
Circumstances favourable to Man's power of Selection.
CHAPTER 2.
VARIATION UNDER NATURE.
Variability.
Individual Differences.
Doubtful species.
Wide ranging, much diffused, and common species vary most.
Species of the larger genera in any country vary more than the species of the smaller genera.
Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in being very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having restricted ranges.
CHAPTER 3.
STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.
Bears on natural selection.
The term used in a wide sense.
Geometrical powers of increase.
Rapid increase of naturalised animals and plants.
Nature of the checks to increase.
Competition universal.
Effects of climate.
Protection from the number of individuals.
Complex relations of all animals and plants throughout nature.
Struggle for life most severe between individuals and varieties of the same species; often severe between species of the same genus.
The relation of organism to organism the most important of all relations.
CHAPTER 4.
NATURAL SELECTION.
Natural Selection: its power compared with man's selection, its power on characters of trifling importance, its power at all ages and on both sexes.
Sexual Selection.
On the generality of intercrosses between individuals of the same species.
Circumstances favourable and unfavourable to Natural Selection, namely, intercrossing, isolation, number of individuals.
Slow action.
Extinction caused by Natural Selection.
Divergence of Character, related to the diversity of inhabitants of any small area, and to naturalisation.
Action of Natural Selection, through Divergence of Character and Extinction, on the descendants from a common parent.
Explains the Grouping of all organic beings.
CHAPTER 5.
LAWS OF VARIATION.
Effects of external conditions.
Use and disuse, combined with natural selection; organs of flight and of vision.
Acclimatisation.
Correlation of growth.
Compensation and economy of growth.
False correlations.
Multiple, rudimentary, and lowly organised structures variable.
Parts developed in an unusual manner are highly variable: specific characters more variable than generic: secondary sexual characters variable.
Species of the same genus vary in an analogous manner.
Reversions to long-lost characters.
Summary.
CHAPTER 6.
DIFFICULTIES ON THEORY.
Difficulties on the theory of descent with modification.
Transitions.
Absence or rarity of transitional varieties.
Transitions in habits of life.
Diversified habits in the same species.
Species with habits widely different from those of their allies.
Organs of extreme perfection.
Means of transition.
Cases of difficulty.
Natura non facit saltum.
Organs of small importance.
Organs not in all cases absolutely perfect.
The law of Unity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence embraced by the theory of Natural Selection.
CHAPTER 7.
INSTINCT.
Instincts comparable with habits, but different in their origin.
Instincts graduated.
Aphides and ants.
Instincts variable.
Domestic instincts, their origin.
Natural instincts of the cuckoo, ostrich, and parasitic bees.
Slave-making ants.
Hive-bee, its cell-making instinct.
Difficulties on the theory of the Natural Selection of instincts.
Neuter or sterile insects.
Summary.
CHAPTER 8.
HYBRIDISM.
Distinction between the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids.
Sterility various in degree, not universal, affected by close interbreeding, removed by domestication.
Laws governing the sterility of hybrids.
Sterility not a special endowment, but incidental on other differences.
Causes of the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids.
Parallelism between the effects of changed conditions of life and crossing.
Fertility of varieties when crossed and of their mongrel offspring not universal.
Hybrids and mongrels compared independently of their fertility.
Summary.
CHAPTER 9.
ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD.
On the absence of intermediate varieties at the present day.
On the nature of extinct intermediate varieties; on their number.
On the vast lapse of time, as inferred from the rate of deposition and of denudation.
On the poorness of our palaeontological collections.
On the intermittence of geological formations.
On the absence of intermediate varieties in any one formation.
On the sudden appearance of groups of species.
On their sudden appearance in the lowest known fossiliferous strata.
CHAPTER 10.
ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS.
On the slow and successive appearance of new species.
On their different rates of change.
Species once lost do not reappear.
Groups of species follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as do single species.
On Extinction.
On simultaneous changes in the forms of life throughout the world.
On the affinities of extinct species to each other and to living species.
On the state of development of ancient forms.
On the succession of the same types within the same areas.
Summary of preceding and present chapters.
CHAPTER 11.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.
Present distribution cannot be accounted for by differences in physical conditions.
Importance of barriers.
Affinity of the productions of the same continent.
Centres of creation.
Means of dispersal, by changes of climate and of the level of the land, and by occasional means.
Dispersal during the Glacial period co-extensive with the world.
CHAPTER 12.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION--continued.
Distribution of fresh-water productions.
On the inhabitants of oceanic islands.
Absence of Batrachians and of terrestrial Mammals.
On the relation of the inhabitants of islands to those of the nearest mainland.
On colonisation from the nearest source with subsequent modification.
Summary of the last and present chapters.
CHAPTER 13.
MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS: MORPHOLOGY: EMBRYOLOGY: RUDIMENTARY ORGANS.
CLASSIFICATION, groups subordinate to groups.
Natural system.
Rules and difficulties in classification, explained on the theory of descent with modification.
Classification of varieties.
Descent always used in classification.
Analogical or adaptive characters.
Affinities, general, complex and radiating.
Extinction separates and defines groups.
MORPHOLOGY, between members of the same class, between parts of the same individual.
EMBRYOLOGY, laws of, explained by variations not supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding age.
RUDIMENTARY ORGANS; their origin explained.
Summary.
CHAPTER 14.
RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION.
Recapitulation of the difficulties on the theory of Natural Selection.
Recapitulation of the general and special circumstances in its favour.
Causes of the general belief in the immutability of species.
How far the theory of natural selection may be extended.
Effects of its adoption on the study of Natural history.
Concluding remarks.
ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES.
INTRODUCTION.
When on board H.M.S. 'Beagle,' as naturalist, I was much struck with certain facts in the distribution of the inhabitants of South America, and in the geological relations of the present to the past inhabitants of that continent.
These facts seemed to me to throw some light on the origin of species--that mystery of mysteries, as it has been called by one of our greatest philosophers.
On my return home, it occurred to me, in 1837, that something might perhaps be made out on this question by patiently accumulating and reflecting on all sorts of facts which could possibly have any bearing on it.
After five years' work I allowed myself to speculate on the subject, and drew up some short notes; these I enlarged in 1844 into a sketch of the conclusions, which then seemed to me probable: from that period to the present day I have steadily pursued the
I hope that I may be excused for entering on these personal details, as I give them to show that I have not been hasty in coming to a decision.
My work is now nearly finished; but as it will take me two or three more years to complete it, and as my health is far from strong, I have been urged to publish this Abstract.
I have more especially been induced to do this, as Mr. Wallace, who is now studying the natural history of the Malay archipelago, has arrived at almost exactly the same general conclusions that I have on the origin of species.
Last year he sent to me a memoir on this subject, with a request that I would forward it to Sir Charles Lyell, who sent it to the Linnean Society, and it is published in the third volume of the Journal of that Society.
Sir C. Lyell and Dr. Hooker, who both knew of my work--the latter having read my sketch of 1844--honoured me by thinking it advisable to publish, with Mr. Wallace's excellent memoir, some brief extracts from my manuscripts.
This Abstract, which I now publish, must necessarily be imperfect.
I cannot here give references and authorities for my several statements; and I must trust to the reader reposing some confidence in my accuracy.
No doubt errors will have crept in, though I hope I have always been cautious in trusting to good authorities alone.
I can here give only the general conclusions at which I have arrived, with a few facts in illustration, but which, I hope, in most cases will suffice.
No one can feel more sensible than I do of the necessity of hereafter publishing in detail all the facts, with references, on which my conclusions have been grounded; and I hope in a future work to do this.
For I am well aware that scarcely a single point is discussed in this volume on which facts cannot be adduced, often apparently leading to conclusions directly opposite to those at which I have arrived.
A fair result can be obtained only by fully stating and balancing the facts and arguments on both sides of each question; and this cannot possibly be here done.
I much regret that want of space prevents my having the satisfaction of acknowledging the generous assistance which I have received from very many naturalists, some of them personally unknown to me.
I cannot, however, let this opportunity pass without expressing my deep obligations to Dr. Hooker, who for the last fifteen years has aided me in every possible way by his large stores of knowledge and his excellent judgment.
In considering the Origin of Species, it is quite conceivable that a naturalist, reflecting on the mutual affinities of organic beings, on their embryological relations, their geographical distribution, geological succession, and other such facts, might
Nevertheless, such a conclusion, even if well founded, would be unsatisfactory, until it could be shown how the innumerable species inhabiting this world have been modified, so as to acquire that perfection of structure and coadaptation which most justly
Naturalists continually refer to external conditions, such as climate, food, etc.
, as the only possible cause of variation.
In one very limited sense, as we shall hereafter see, this may be true; but it is preposterous to attribute to mere external conditions, the structure, for instance, of the woodpecker, with its feet, tail, beak, and tongue, so admirably adapted to catch
In the case of the misseltoe, which draws its nourishment from certain trees, which has seeds that must be transported by certain birds, and which has flowers with separate sexes absolutely requiring the agency of certain insects to bring pollen from one
The author of the 'Vestiges of Creation' would, I presume, say that, after a certain unknown number of generations, some bird had given birth to a woodpecker, and some plant to the misseltoe, and that these had been produced perfect as we now see them; but
It is, therefore, of the highest importance to gain a clear insight into the means of modification and coadaptation.
At the commencement of my observations it seemed to me probable that a careful study of domesticated animals and of cultivated plants would offer the best chance of making out this obscure problem.
Nor have I been disappointed; in this and in all other perplexing cases I have invariably found that our knowledge, imperfect though it be, of variation under domestication, afforded the best and safest clue.
I may venture to express my conviction of the high value of such studies, although they have been very commonly neglected by naturalists.
From these considerations, I shall devote the first chapter of this Abstract to Variation under Domestication.
We shall thus see that a large amount of hereditary modification is at least possible, and, what is equally or more important, we shall see how great is the power of man in accumulating by his Selection successive slight variations.
I will then pass on to the variability of species in a state of nature; but I shall, unfortunately, be compelled to treat this subject far too briefly, as it can be treated properly only by giving long catalogues of facts.
We shall, however, be enabled to discuss what circumstances are most favourable to variation.
In the next chapter the Struggle for Existence amongst all organic beings throughout the world, which inevitably follows from their high geometrical powers of increase, will be treated of.
This is the doctrine of Malthus, applied to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms.
As many more individuals of each species are born than can possibly survive; and as, consequently, there is a frequently recurring struggle for existence, it follows that any being, if it vary however slightly in any manner profitable to itself, under the
From the strong principle of inheritance, any selected variety will tend to propagate its new and modified form.
This fundamental subject of Natural Selection will be treated at some length in the fourth chapter; and we shall then see how Natural Selection almost inevitably causes much Extinction of the less improved forms of life and induces what I have called
In the next chapter I shall discuss the complex and little known laws of variation and of correlation of growth.
In the four succeeding chapters, the most apparent and gravest difficulties on the theory will be given: namely, first, the difficulties of transitions, or in understanding how a simple being or a simple organ can be changed and perfected into a highly
In the next chapter I shall consider the geological succession of organic beings throughout time; in the eleventh and twelfth, their geographical distribution throughout space; in the thirteenth, their classification or mutual affinities, both when mature
In the last chapter I shall give a brief recapitulation of the whole work, and a few concluding remarks.
No one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as yet unexplained in regard to the origin of species and varieties, if he makes due allowance for our profound ignorance in regard to the mutual relations of all the beings which live around us.
Who can explain why one species ranges widely and is very numerous, and why another allied species has a narrow range and is rare?
Yet these relations are of the highest importance, for they determine the present welfare, and, as I believe, the future success and modification of every inhabitant of this world.
Still less do we know of the mutual relations of the innumerable inhabitants of the world during the many past geological epochs in its history.
Although much remains obscure, and will long remain obscure, I can entertain no doubt, after the most deliberate study and dispassionate judgment of which I am capable, that the view which most naturalists entertain, and which I formerly
I am fully convinced that species are not immutable; but that those belonging to what are called the same genera are lineal descendants of some other and generally extinct species, in the same manner as the acknowledged varieties of any one species are the
Furthermore, I am convinced that Natural Selection has been the main but not exclusive means of modification.
1.
VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION.
Causes of Variability.
Effects of Habit.
Correlation of Growth.
Inheritance.
Character of Domestic Varieties.
Difficulty of distinguishing between Varieties and Species.
Origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more Species.
Domestic Pigeons, their Differences and Origin.
Principle of Selection anciently followed, its Effects.
Methodical and Unconscious Selection.
Unknown Origin of our Domestic Productions.
Circumstances favourable to Man's power of Selection.
When we look to the individuals of the same variety or sub-variety of our older cultivated plants and animals, one of the first points which strikes us, is, that they generally differ much more from each other, than do the individuals of any one species or
When we reflect on the vast diversity of the plants and animals which have been cultivated, and which have varied during all ages under the most different climates and treatment, I think we are driven to conclude that this greater variability is simply due
There is, also, I think, some probability in the view propounded by Andrew Knight, that this variability may be partly connected with excess of food.
It seems pretty clear that organic beings must be exposed during several generations to the new conditions of life to cause any appreciable amount of variation; and that when the organisation has once begun to vary, it generally continues to vary for many
No case is on record of a variable being ceasing to be variable under cultivation.
Our oldest cultivated plants, such as wheat, still often yield new varieties: our oldest domesticated animals are still capable of rapid improvement or modification.
It has been disputed at what period of life the causes of variability, whatever they may be, generally act; whether during the early or late period of development of the embryo, or at the instant of conception.
Geoffroy St. Hilaire's experiments show that unnatural treatment of the embryo causes monstrosities; and monstrosities cannot be separated by any clear line of distinction from mere variations.
But I am strongly inclined to suspect that the most frequent cause of variability may be attributed to the male and female reproductive elements having been affected prior to the act of conception.
Several reasons make me believe in this; but the chief one is the remarkable effect which confinement or cultivation has on the functions of the reproductive system; this system appearing to be far more susceptible than any other part of the organisation,
Nothing is more easy than to tame an animal, and few things more difficult than to get it to breed freely under confinement, even in the many cases when the male and female unite.
How many animals there are which will not breed, though living long under not very close confinement in their native country!
This is generally attributed to vitiated instincts; but how many cultivated plants display the utmost vigour, and yet rarely or never seed!
In some few such cases it has been found out that very trifling changes, such as a little more or less water at some particular period of growth, will determine whether or not the plant sets a seed.
I cannot here enter on the copious details which I have collected on this curious subject; but to show how singular the laws are which determine the reproduction of animals under confinement, I may just mention that carnivorous animals, even from the
Many exotic plants have pollen utterly worthless, in the same exact condition as in the most sterile hybrids.
When, on the one hand, we see domesticated animals and plants, though often weak and sickly, yet breeding quite freely under confinement; and when, on the other hand, we see individuals, though taken young from a state of nature, perfectly tamed,
Sterility has been said to be the bane of horticulture; but on this view we owe variability to the same cause which produces sterility; and variability is the source of all the choicest productions of the garden.
I may add, that as some organisms will breed most freely under the most unnatural conditions (for instance, the rabbit and ferret kept in hutches), showing that their reproductive system has not been thus affected; so will some animals and plants withstand
A long list could easily be given of "sporting plants;" by this term gardeners mean a single bud or offset, which suddenly assumes a new and sometimes very different character from that of the rest of the plant.
Such buds can be propagated by grafting, etc.
, and sometimes by seed.
These "sports" are extremely rare under nature, but far from rare under cultivation; and in this case we see that the treatment of the parent has affected a bud or offset, and not the ovules or pollen.
But it is the opinion of most physiologists that there is no essential difference between a bud and an ovule in their earliest stages of formation; so that, in fact, "sports" support my view, that variability may be largely attributed to the ovules or
These cases anyhow show that variation is not necessarily connected, as some authors have supposed, with the act of generation.
Seedlings from the same fruit, and the young of the same litter, sometimes differ considerably from each other, though both the young and the parents, as Muller has remarked, have apparently been exposed to exactly the same conditions of life; and this
To judge how much, in the case of any variation, we should attribute to the direct action of heat, moisture, light, food, etc.
, is most difficult: my impression is, that with animals such agencies have produced very little direct effect, though apparently more in the case of plants.
Under this point of view, Mr. Buckman's recent experiments on plants seem extremely valuable.
When all or nearly all the individuals exposed to certain conditions are affected in the same way, the change at first appears to be directly due to such conditions; but in some cases it can be shown that quite opposite conditions produce similar changes
Nevertheless some slight amount of change may, I think, be attributed to the direct action of the conditions of life--as, in some cases, increased size from amount of food, colour from particular kinds of food and from light, and perhaps the thickness of
Habit also has a decided influence, as in the period of flowering with plants when transported from one climate to another.
In animals it has a more marked effect; for instance, I find in the domestic duck that the bones of the wing weigh less and the bones of the leg more, in proportion to the whole skeleton, than do the same bones in the wild-duck; and I presume that this
The great and inherited development of the udders in cows and goats in countries where they are habitually milked, in comparison with the state of these organs in other countries, is another instance of the effect of use.
Not a single domestic animal can be named which has not in some country drooping ears; and the view suggested by some authors, that the drooping is due to the disuse of the muscles of the ear, from the animals not being much alarmed by danger, seems
There are many laws regulating variation, some few of which can be dimly seen, and will be hereafter briefly mentioned.
I will here only allude to what may be called correlation of growth.
Any change in the embryo or larva will almost certainly entail changes in the mature animal.
In monstrosities, the correlations between quite distinct parts are very curious; and many instances are given in Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire's great work on this subject.
Breeders believe that long limbs are almost always accompanied by an elongated head.
Some instances of correlation are quite whimsical; thus cats with blue eyes are invariably deaf; colour and constitutional peculiarities go together, of which many remarkable cases could be given amongst animals and plants.
From the facts collected by Heusinger, it appears that white sheep and pigs are differently affected from coloured individuals by certain vegetable poisons.
Hairless dogs have imperfect teeth; long-haired and coarse-haired animals are apt to have, as is asserted, long or many horns; pigeons with feathered feet have skin between their outer toes; pigeons with short beaks have small feet, and those with long
Hence, if man goes on selecting, and thus augmenting, any peculiarity, he will almost certainly unconsciously modify other parts of the structure, owing to the mysterious laws of the correlation of growth.
The result of the various, quite unknown, or dimly seen laws of variation is infinitely complex and diversified.
It is well worth while carefully to study the several treatises published on some of our old cultivated plants, as on the hyacinth, potato, even the dahlia, etc.
; and it is really surprising to note the endless points in structure and constitution in which the varieties and sub-varieties differ slightly from each other.
The whole organisation seems to have become plastic, and tends to depart in some small degree from that of the parental type.
Any variation which is not inherited is unimportant for us.
But the number and diversity of inheritable deviations of structure, both those of slight and those of considerable physiological importance, is endless.
Dr. Prosper Lucas's treatise, in two large volumes, is the fullest and the best on this subject.
No breeder doubts how strong is the tendency to inheritance: like produces like is his fundamental belief: doubts have been thrown on this principle by theoretical writers alone.
When a deviation appears not unfrequently, and we see it in the father and child, we cannot tell whether it may not be due to the same original cause acting on both; but when amongst individuals, apparently exposed to the same conditions, any very rare
Every one must have heard of cases of albinism, prickly skin, hairy bodies, etc.
, appearing in several members of the same family.
If strange and rare deviations of structure are truly inherited, less strange and commoner deviations may be freely admitted to be inheritable.
Perhaps the correct way of viewing the whole subject, would be, to look at the inheritance of every character whatever as the rule, and non-inheritance as the anomaly.
The laws governing inheritance are quite unknown; no one can say why the same peculiarity in different individuals of the same species, and in individuals of different species, is sometimes inherited and sometimes not so; why the child often reverts in
It is a fact of some little importance to us, that peculiarities appearing in the males of our domestic breeds are often transmitted either exclusively, or in a much greater degree, to males alone.
A much more important rule, which I think may be trusted, is that, at whatever period of life a peculiarity first appears, it tends to appear in the offspring at a corresponding age, though sometimes earlier.
In many cases this could not be otherwise: thus the inherited peculiarities in the horns of cattle could appear only in the offspring when nearly mature; peculiarities in the silkworm are known to appear at the corresponding caterpillar or cocoon stage.
But hereditary diseases and some other facts make me believe that the rule has a wider extension, and that when there is no apparent reason why a peculiarity should appear at any particular age, yet that it does tend to appear in the offspring at the same
I believe this rule to be of the highest importance in explaining the laws of embryology.
These remarks are of course confined to the first APPEARANCE of the peculiarity, and not to its primary cause, which may have acted on the ovules or male element; in nearly the same manner as in the crossed offspring from a short-horned cow by a
Having alluded to the subject of reversion, I may here refer to a statement often made by naturalists--namely, that our domestic varieties, when run wild, gradually but certainly revert in character to their aboriginal stocks.
Hence it has been argued that no deductions can be drawn from domestic races to species in a state of nature.
I have in vain endeavoured to discover on what decisive facts the above statement has so often and so boldly been made.
There would be great difficulty in proving its truth: we may safely conclude that very many of the most strongly-marked domestic varieties could not possibly live in a wild state.
In many cases we do not know what the aboriginal stock was, and so could not tell whether or not nearly perfect reversion had ensued.
It would be quite necessary, in order to prevent the effects of intercrossing, that only a single variety should be turned loose in its new home.
Nevertheless, as our varieties certainly do occasionally revert in some of their characters to ancestral forms, it seems to me not improbable, that if we could succeed in naturalising, or were to cultivate, during many generations, the several races, for
Whether or not the experiment would succeed, is not of great importance for our line of argument; for by the experiment itself the conditions of life are changed.
If it could be shown that our domestic varieties manifested a strong tendency to reversion,--that is, to lose their acquired characters, whilst kept under unchanged conditions, and whilst kept in a considerable body, so that free intercrossing might check,
But there is not a shadow of evidence in favour of this view: to assert that we could not breed our cart and race-horses, long and short-horned cattle, and poultry of various breeds, and esculent vegetables, for an almost infinite number of generations,
I may add, that when under nature the conditions of life do change, variations and reversions of character probably do occur; but natural selection, as will hereafter be explained, will determine how far the new characters thus arising shall be preserved.
When we look to the hereditary varieties or races of our domestic animals and plants, and compare them with species closely allied together, we generally perceive in each domestic race, as already remarked, less uniformity of character than in true
Domestic races of the same species, also, often have a somewhat monstrous character; by which I mean, that, although differing from each other, and from the other species of the same genus, in several trifling respects, they often differ in an extreme
With these exceptions (and with that of the perfect fertility of varieties when crossed,--a subject hereafter to be discussed), domestic races of the same species differ from each other in the same manner as, only in most cases in a lesser degree than, do
I think this must be admitted, when we find that there are hardly any domestic races, either amongst animals or plants, which have not been ranked by some competent judges as mere varieties, and by other competent judges as the descendants of aboriginally
If any marked distinction existed between domestic races and species, this source of doubt could not so perpetually recur.
It has often been stated that domestic races do not differ from each other in characters of generic value.
I think it could be shown that this statement is hardly correct; but naturalists differ most widely in determining what characters are of generic value; all such valuations being at present empirical.
Moreover, on the view of the origin of genera which I shall presently give, we have no right to expect often to meet with generic differences in our domesticated productions.
When we attempt to estimate the amount of structural difference between the domestic races of the same species, we are soon involved in doubt, from not knowing whether they have descended from one or several parent-species.
This point, if it could be cleared up, would be interesting; if, for instance, it could be shown that the greyhound, bloodhound, terrier, spaniel, and bull-dog, which we all know propagate their kind so truly, were the offspring of any single species, then
I do not believe, as we shall presently see, that all our dogs have descended from any one wild species; but, in the case of some other domestic races, there is presumptive, or even strong, evidence in favour of this view.
It has often been assumed that man has chosen for domestication animals and plants having an extraordinary inherent tendency to vary, and likewise to withstand diverse climates.
I do not dispute that these capacities have added largely to the value of most of our domesticated productions; but how could a savage possibly know, when he first tamed an animal, whether it would vary in succeeding generations, and whether it would
Has the little variability of the ass or guinea-fowl, or the small power of endurance of warmth by the rein-deer, or of cold by the common camel, prevented their domestication?
I cannot doubt that if other animals and plants, equal in number to our domesticated productions, and belonging to equally diverse classes and countries, were taken from a state of nature, and could be made to breed for an equal number of generations under
In the case of most of our anciently domesticated animals and plants, I do not think it is possible to come to any definite conclusion, whether they have descended from one or several species.
The argument mainly relied on by those who believe in the multiple origin of our domestic animals is, that we find in the most ancient records, more especially on the monuments of Egypt, much diversity in the breeds; and that some of the breeds closely
Even if this latter fact were found more strictly and generally true than seems to me to be the case, what does it show, but that some of our breeds originated there, four or five thousand years ago?
But Mr. Horner's researches have rendered it in some degree probable that man sufficiently civilized to have manufactured pottery existed in the valley of the Nile thirteen or fourteen thousand years ago; and who will pretend to say how long before these
The whole subject must, I think, remain vague; nevertheless, I may, without here entering on any details, state that, from geographical and other considerations, I think it highly probable that our domestic dogs have descended from several wild species.
In regard to sheep and goats I can form no opinion.
I should think, from facts communicated to me by Mr. Blyth, on the habits, voice, and constitution, etc.
, of the humped Indian cattle, that these had descended from a different aboriginal stock from our European cattle; and several competent judges believe that these latter have had more than one wild parent.
With respect to horses, from reasons which I cannot give here, I am doubtfully inclined to believe, in opposition to several authors, that all the races have descended from one wild stock.
Mr. Blyth, whose opinion, from his large and varied stores of knowledge, I should value more than that of almost any one, thinks that all the breeds of poultry have proceeded from the common wild Indian fowl (Gallus bankiva).
In regard to ducks and rabbits, the breeds of which differ considerably from each other in structure, I do not doubt that they all have descended from the common wild duck and rabbit.
The doctrine of the origin of our several domestic races from several aboriginal stocks, has been carried to an absurd extreme by some authors.
They believe that every race which breeds true, let the distinctive characters be ever so slight, has had its wild prototype.
At this rate there must have existed at least a score of species of wild cattle, as many sheep, and several goats in Europe alone, and several even within Great Britain.
One author believes that there formerly existed in Great Britain eleven wild species of sheep peculiar to it!
When we bear in mind that Britain has now hardly one peculiar mammal, and France but few distinct from those of Germany and conversely, and so with Hungary, Spain, etc.
, but that each of these kingdoms possesses several peculiar breeds of cattle, sheep, etc.
, we must admit that many domestic breeds have originated in Europe; for whence could they have been derived, as these several countries do not possess a number of peculiar species as distinct parent-stocks?
So it is in India.
Even in the case of the domestic dogs of the whole world, which I fully admit have probably descended from several wild species, I cannot doubt that there has been an immense amount of inherited variation.
Who can believe that animals closely resembling the Italian greyhound, the bloodhound, the bull-dog, or Blenheim spaniel, etc.
--so unlike all wild Canidae--ever existed freely in a state of nature?
It has often been loosely said that all our races of dogs have been produced by the crossing of a few aboriginal species; but by crossing we can get only forms in some degree intermediate between their parents; and if we account for our several domestic
, in the wild state.
Moreover, the possibility of making distinct races by crossing has been greatly exaggerated.
There can be no doubt that a race may be modified by occasional crosses, if aided by the careful selection of those individual mongrels, which present any desired character; but that a race could be obtained nearly intermediate between two extremely
Sir J. Sebright expressly experimentised for this object, and failed.
The offspring from the first cross between two pure breeds is tolerably and sometimes (as I have found with pigeons) extremely uniform, and everything seems simple enough; but when these mongrels are crossed one with another for several generations, hardly
Certainly, a breed intermediate between TWO VERY DISTINCT breeds could not be got without extreme care and long-continued selection; nor can I find a single case on record of a permanent race having been thus formed.
ON THE BREEDS OF THE DOMESTIC PIGEON.
Believing that it is always best to study some special group, I have, after deliberation, taken up domestic pigeons.
I have kept every breed which I could purchase or obtain, and have been most kindly favoured with skins from several quarters of the world, more especially by the Honourable W. Elliot from India, and by the Honourable C. Murray from Persia.
Many treatises in different languages have been published on pigeons, and some of them are very important, as being of considerable antiquity.
I have associated with several eminent fanciers, and have been permitted to join two of the London Pigeon Clubs.
The diversity of the breeds is something astonishing.
Compare the English carrier and the short-faced tumbler, and see the wonderful difference in their beaks, entailing corresponding differences in their skulls.
The carrier, more especially the male bird, is also remarkable from the wonderful development of the carunculated skin about the head, and this is accompanied by greatly elongated eyelids, very large external orifices to the nostrils, and a wide gape of
The short-faced tumbler has a beak in outline almost like that of a finch; and the common tumbler has the singular and strictly inherited habit of flying at a great height in a compact flock, and tumbling in the air head over heels.
The runt is a bird of great size, with long, massive beak and large feet; some of the sub-breeds of runts have very long necks, others very long wings and tails, others singularly short tails.
The barb is allied to the carrier, but, instead of a very long beak, has a very short and very broad one.
The pouter has a much elongated body, wings, and legs; and its enormously developed crop, which it glories in inflating, may well excite astonishment and even laughter.
The turbit has a very short and conical beak, with a line of reversed feathers down the breast; and it has the habit of continually expanding slightly the upper part of the oesophagus.
The Jacobin has the feathers so much reversed along the back of the neck that they form a hood, and it has, proportionally to its size, much elongated wing and tail feathers.
The trumpeter and laugher, as their names express, utter a very different coo from the other breeds.
The fantail has thirty or even forty tail-feathers, instead of twelve or fourteen, the normal number in all members of the great pigeon family; and these feathers are kept expanded, and are carried so erect that in good birds the head and tail touch; the
Several other less distinct breeds might have been specified.
In the skeletons of the several breeds, the development of the bones of the face in length and breadth and curvature differs enormously.
The shape, as well as the breadth and length of the ramus of the lower jaw, varies in a highly remarkable manner.
The number of the caudal and sacral vertebrae vary; as does the number of the ribs, together with their relative breadth and the presence of processes.
The size and shape of the apertures in the sternum are highly variable; so is the degree of divergence and relative size of the two arms of the furcula.
The proportional width of the gape of mouth, the proportional length of the eyelids, of the orifice of the nostrils, of the tongue (not always in strict correlation with the length of beak), the size of the crop and of the upper part of the oesophagus; the
The period at which the perfect plumage is acquired varies, as does the state of the down with which the nestling birds are clothed when hatched.
The shape and size of the eggs vary.
The manner of flight differs remarkably; as does in some breeds the voice and disposition.
Lastly, in certain breeds, the males and females have come to differ to a slight degree from each other.
Altogether at least a score of pigeons might be chosen, which if shown to an ornithologist, and he were told that they were wild birds, would certainly, I think, be ranked by him as well-defined species.
Moreover, I do not believe that any ornithologist would place the English carrier, the short-faced tumbler, the runt, the barb, pouter, and fantail in the same genus; more especially as in each of these breeds several truly-inherited sub-breeds, or species
Great as the differences are between the breeds of pigeons, I am fully convinced that the common opinion of naturalists is correct, namely, that all have descended from the rock-pigeon (Columba livia), including under this term several geographical races
As several of the reasons which have led me to this belief are in some degree applicable in other cases, I will here briefly give them.
If the several breeds are not varieties, and have not proceeded from the rock-pigeon, they must have descended from at least seven or eight aboriginal stocks; for it is impossible to make the present domestic breeds by the crossing of any lesser number:
The supposed aboriginal stocks must all have been rock-pigeons, that is, not breeding or willingly perching on trees.
But besides C. livia, with its geographical sub-species, only two or three other species of rock-pigeons are known; and these have not any of the characters of the domestic breeds.
Hence the supposed aboriginal stocks must either still exist in the countries where they were originally domesticated, and yet be unknown to ornithologists; and this, considering their size, habits, and remarkable characters, seems very improbable; or they
But birds breeding on precipices, and good fliers, are unlikely to be exterminated; and the common rock-pigeon, which has the same habits with the domestic breeds, has not been exterminated even on several of the smaller British islets, or on the shores of
Hence the supposed extermination of so many species having similar habits with the rock-pigeon seems to me a very rash assumption.
Moreover, the several above-named domesticated breeds have been transported to all parts of the world, and, therefore, some of them must have been carried back again into their native country; but not one has ever become wild or feral, though the
Again, all recent experience shows that it is most difficult to get any wild animal to breed freely under domestication; yet on the hypothesis of the multiple origin of our pigeons, it must be assumed that at least seven or eight species were so thoroughly
An argument, as it seems to me, of great weight, and applicable in several other cases, is, that the above-specified breeds, though agreeing generally in constitution, habits, voice, colouring, and in most parts of their structure, with the wild
Hence it must be assumed not only that half-civilized man succeeded in thoroughly domesticating several species, but that he intentionally or by chance picked out extraordinarily abnormal species; and further, that these very species have since all become
So many strange contingencies seem to me improbable in the highest degree.
Some facts in regard to the colouring of pigeons well deserve consideration.
The rock-pigeon is of a slaty-blue, and has a white rump (the Indian sub-species, C. intermedia of Strickland, having it bluish); the tail has a terminal dark bar, with the bases of the outer feathers externally edged with white; the wings have two black
These several marks do not occur together in any other species of the whole family.
Now, in every one of the domestic breeds, taking thoroughly well-bred birds, all the above marks, even to the white edging of the outer tail-feathers, sometimes concur perfectly developed.
Moreover, when two birds belonging to two distinct breeds are crossed, neither of which is blue or has any of the above-specified marks, the mongrel offspring are very apt suddenly to acquire these characters; for instance, I crossed some uniformly white
We can understand these facts, on the well-known principle of reversion to ancestral characters, if all the domestic breeds have descended from the rock-pigeon.
But if we deny this, we must make one of the two following highly improbable suppositions.
Either, firstly, that all the several imagined aboriginal stocks were coloured and marked like the rock-pigeon, although no other existing species is thus coloured and marked, so that in each separate breed there might be a tendency to revert to the very
Or, secondly, that each breed, even the purest, has within a dozen or, at most, within a score of generations, been crossed by the rock-pigeon: I say within a dozen or twenty generations, for we know of no fact countenancing the belief that the child ever
In a breed which has been crossed only once with some distinct breed, the tendency to reversion to any character derived from such cross will naturally become less and less, as in each succeeding generation there will be less of the foreign blood; but when
These two distinct cases are often confounded in treatises on inheritance.
Lastly, the hybrids or mongrels from between all the domestic breeds of pigeons are perfectly fertile.
I can state this from my own observations, purposely made on the most distinct breeds.
Now, it is difficult, perhaps impossible, to bring forward one case of the hybrid offspring of two animals CLEARLY DISTINCT being themselves perfectly fertile.
Some authors believe that long-continued domestication eliminates this strong tendency to sterility: from the history of the dog I think there is some probability in this hypothesis, if applied to species closely related together, though it is unsupported
But to extend the hypothesis so far as to suppose that species, aboriginally as distinct as carriers, tumblers, pouters, and fantails now are, should yield offspring perfectly fertile, inter se, seems to me rash in the extreme.
From these several reasons, namely, the improbability of man having formerly got seven or eight supposed species of pigeons to breed freely under domestication; these supposed species being quite unknown in a wild state, and their becoming nowhere feral;
In favour of this view, I may add, firstly, that C. livia, or the rock-pigeon, has been found capable of domestication in Europe and in India; and that it agrees in habits and in a great number of points of structure with all the domestic breeds.
Secondly, although an English carrier or short-faced tumbler differs immensely in certain characters from the rock-pigeon, yet by comparing the several sub-breeds of these breeds, more especially those brought from distant countries, we can make an almost
Thirdly, those characters which are mainly distinctive of each breed, for instance the wattle and length of beak of the carrier, the shortness of that of the tumbler, and the number of tail-feathers in the fantail, are in each breed eminently variable; and
Fourthly, pigeons have been watched, and tended with the utmost care, and loved by many people.
They have been domesticated for thousands of years in several quarters of the world; the earliest known record of pigeons is in the fifth Aegyptian dynasty, about 3000 B.C., as was pointed out to me by Professor Lepsius; but Mr. Birch informs me that
In the time of the Romans, as we hear from Pliny, immense prices were given for pigeons; "nay, they are come to this pass, that they can reckon up their pedigree and race".
Pigeons were much valued by Akber Khan in India, about the year 1600; never less than 20,000 pigeons were taken with the court.
"The monarchs of Iran and Turan sent him some very rare birds;" and, continues the courtly historian, "His Majesty by crossing the breeds, which method was never practised before, has improved them astonishingly".
About this same period the Dutch were as eager about pigeons as were the old Romans.
The paramount importance of these considerations in explaining the immense amount of variation which pigeons have undergone, will be obvious when we treat of Selection.
We shall then, also, see how it is that the breeds so often have a somewhat monstrous character.
It is also a most favourable circumstance for the production of distinct breeds, that male and female pigeons can be easily mated for life; and thus different breeds can be kept together in the same aviary.
I have discussed the probable origin of domestic pigeons at some, yet quite insufficient, length; because when I first kept pigeons and watched the several kinds, knowing well how true they bred, I felt fully as much difficulty in believing that they could
One circumstance has struck me much; namely, that all the breeders of the various domestic animals and the cultivators of plants, with whom I have ever conversed, or whose treatises I have read, are firmly convinced that the several breeds to which each
Ask, as I have asked, a celebrated raiser of Hereford cattle, whether his cattle might not have descended from long horns, and he will laugh you to scorn.
I have never met a pigeon, or poultry, or duck, or rabbit fancier, who was not fully convinced that each main breed was descended from a distinct species.
Van Mons, in his treatise on pears and apples, shows how utterly he disbelieves that the several sorts, for instance a Ribston-pippin or Codlin-apple, could ever have proceeded from the seeds of the same tree.
Innumerable other examples could be given.
The explanation, I think, is simple: from long-continued study they are strongly impressed with the differences between the several races; and though they well know that each race varies slightly, for they win their prizes by selecting such slight
May not those naturalists who, knowing far less of the laws of inheritance than does the breeder, and knowing no more than he does of the intermediate links in the long lines of descent, yet admit that many of our domestic races have descended from the
SELECTION.
Let us now briefly consider the steps by which domestic races have been produced, either from one or from several allied species.
Some little effect may, perhaps, be attributed to the direct action of the external conditions of life, and some little to habit; but he would be a bold man who would account by such agencies for the differences of a dray and race horse, a greyhound and
One of the most remarkable features in our domesticated races is that we see in them adaptation, not indeed to the animal's or plant's own good, but to man's use or fancy.
Some variations useful to him have probably arisen suddenly, or by one step; many botanists, for instance, believe that the fuller's teazle, with its hooks, which cannot be rivalled by any mechanical contrivance, is only a variety of the wild Dipsacus; and
So it has probably been with the turnspit dog; and this is known to have been the case with the ancon sheep.
But when we compare the dray-horse and race-horse, the dromedary and camel, the various breeds of sheep fitted either for cultivated land or mountain pasture, with the wool of one breed good for one purpose, and that of another breed for another purpose;
We cannot suppose that all the breeds were suddenly produced as perfect and as useful as we now see them; indeed, in several cases, we know that this has not been their history.
The key is man's power of accumulative selection: nature gives successive variations; man adds them up in certain directions useful to him.
In this sense he may be said to make for himself useful breeds.
The great power of this principle of selection is not hypothetical.
It is certain that several of our eminent breeders have, even within a single lifetime, modified to a large extent some breeds of cattle and sheep.
In order fully to realise what they have done, it is almost necessary to read several of the many treatises devoted to this subject, and to inspect the animals.
Breeders habitually speak of an animal's organisation as something quite plastic, which they can model almost as they please.
If I had space I could quote numerous passages to this effect from highly competent authorities.
Youatt, who was probably better acquainted with the works of agriculturalists than almost any other individual, and who was himself a very good judge of an animal, speaks of the principle of selection as "that which enables the agriculturist, not only to
It is the magician's wand, by means of which he may summon into life whatever form and mould he pleases".
Lord Somerville, speaking of what breeders have done for sheep, says:--"It would seem as if they had chalked out upon a wall a form perfect in itself, and then had given it existence".
That most skilful breeder, Sir John Sebright, used to say, with respect to pigeons, that "he would produce any given feather in three years, but it would take him six years to obtain head and beak".
In Saxony the importance of the principle of selection in regard to merino sheep is so fully recognised, that men follow it as a trade: the sheep are placed on a table and are studied, like a picture by a connoisseur; this is done three times at intervals
What English breeders have actually effected is proved by the enormous prices given for animals with a good pedigree; and these have now been exported to almost every quarter of the world.
The improvement is by no means generally due to crossing different breeds; all the best breeders are strongly opposed to this practice, except sometimes amongst closely allied sub-breeds.
And when a cross has been made, the closest selection is far more indispensable even than in ordinary cases.
If selection consisted merely in separating some very distinct variety, and breeding from it, the principle would be so obvious as hardly to be worth notice; but its importance consists in the great effect produced by the accumulation in one direction,
Not one man in a thousand has accuracy of eye and judgment sufficient to become an eminent breeder.
If gifted with these qualities, and he studies his subject for years, and devotes his lifetime to it with indomitable perseverance, he will succeed, and may make great improvements; if he wants any of these qualities, he will assuredly fail.
Few would readily believe in the natural capacity and years of practice requisite to become even a skilful pigeon-fancier.
The same principles are followed by horticulturists; but the variations are here often more abrupt.
No one supposes that our choicest productions have been produced by a single variation from the aboriginal stock.
We have proofs that this is not so in some cases, in which exact records have been kept; thus, to give a very trifling instance, the steadily-increasing size of the common gooseberry may be quoted.
We see an astonishing improvement in many florists' flowers, when the flowers of the present day are compared with drawings made only twenty or thirty years ago.
When a race of plants is once pretty well established, the seed-raisers do not pick out the best plants, but merely go over their seed-beds, and pull up the "rogues," as they call the plants that deviate from the proper standard.
With animals this kind of selection is, in fact, also followed; for hardly any one is so careless as to allow his worst animals to breed.
In regard to plants, there is another means of observing the accumulated effects of selection--namely, by comparing the diversity of flowers in the different varieties of the same species in the flower-garden; the diversity of leaves, pods, or tubers, or
See how different the leaves of the cabbage are, and how extremely alike the flowers; how unlike the flowers of the heartsease are, and how alike the leaves; how much the fruit of the different kinds of gooseberries differ in size, colour, shape, and
It is not that the varieties which differ largely in some one point do not differ at all in other points; this is hardly ever, perhaps never, the case.
The laws of correlation of growth, the importance of which should never be overlooked, will ensure some differences; but, as a general rule, I cannot doubt that the continued selection of slight variations, either in the leaves, the flowers, or the fruit,
It may be objected that the principle of selection has been reduced to methodical practice for scarcely more than three-quarters of a century; it has certainly been more attended to of late years, and many treatises have been published on the subject; and
But it is very far from true that the principle is a modern discovery.
I could give several references to the full acknowledgment of the importance of the principle in works of high antiquity.
In rude and barbarous periods of English history choice animals were often imported, and laws were passed to prevent their exportation: the destruction of horses under a certain size was ordered, and this may be compared to the "roguing" of plants by
The principle of selection I find distinctly given in an ancient Chinese encyclopaedia.
Explicit rules are laid down by some of the Roman classical writers.
From passages in Genesis, it is clear that the colour of domestic animals was at that early period attended to.
Savages now sometimes cross their dogs with wild canine animals, to improve the breed, and they formerly did so, as is attested by passages in Pliny.
The savages in South Africa match their draught cattle by colour, as do some of the Esquimaux their teams of dogs.
Livingstone shows how much good domestic breeds are valued by the negroes of the interior of Africa who have not associated with Europeans.
Some of these facts do not show actual selection, but they show that the breeding of domestic animals was carefully attended to in ancient times, and is now attended to by the lowest savages.
It would, indeed, have been a strange fact, had attention not been paid to breeding, for the inheritance of good and bad qualities is so obvious.
At the present time, eminent breeders try by methodical selection, with a distinct object in view, to make a new strain or sub-breed, superior to anything existing in the country.
But, for our purpose, a kind of Selection, which may be called Unconscious, and which results from every one trying to possess and breed from the best individual animals, is more important.
Thus, a man who intends keeping pointers naturally tries to get as good dogs as he can, and afterwards breeds from his own best dogs, but he has no wish or expectation of permanently altering the breed.
Nevertheless I cannot doubt that this process, continued during centuries, would improve and modify any breed, in the same way as Bakewell, Collins, etc.
, by this very same process, only carried on more methodically, did greatly modify, even during their own lifetimes, the forms and qualities of their cattle.
Slow and insensible changes of this kind could never be recognised unless actual measurements or careful drawings of the breeds in question had been made long ago, which might serve for comparison.
In some cases, however, unchanged or but little changed individuals of the same breed may be found in less civilised districts, where the breed has been less improved.
There is reason to believe that King Charles's spaniel has been unconsciously modified to a large extent since the time of that monarch.
Some highly competent authorities are convinced that the setter is directly derived from the spaniel, and has probably been slowly altered from it.
It is known that the English pointer has been greatly changed within the last century, and in this case the change has, it is believed, been chiefly effected by crosses with the fox-hound; but what concerns us is, that the change has been effected
By a similar process of selection, and by careful training, the whole body of English racehorses have come to surpass in fleetness and size the parent Arab stock, so that the latter, by the regulations for the Goodwood Races, are favoured in the weights
Lord Spencer and others have shown how the cattle of England have increased in weight and in early maturity, compared with the stock formerly kept in this country.
By comparing the accounts given in old pigeon treatises of carriers and tumblers with these breeds as now existing in Britain, India, and Persia, we can, I think, clearly trace the stages through which they have insensibly passed, and come to differ so
Youatt gives an excellent illustration of the effects of a course of selection, which may be considered as unconsciously followed, in so far that the breeders could never have expected or even have wished to have produced the result which ensued--namely,
The two flocks of Leicester sheep kept by Mr. Buckley and Mr. Burgess, as Mr. Youatt remarks, "have been purely bred from the original stock of Mr. Bakewell for upwards of fifty years.
There is not a suspicion existing in the mind of any one at all acquainted with the subject that the owner of either of them has deviated in any one instance from the pure blood of Mr. Bakewell's flock, and yet the difference between the sheep possessed by
If there exist savages so barbarous as never to think of the inherited character of the offspring of their domestic animals, yet any one animal particularly useful to them, for any special purpose, would be carefully preserved during famines and other
We see the value set on animals even by the barbarians of Tierra del Fuego, by their killing and devouring their old women, in times of dearth, as of less value than their dogs.
In plants the same gradual process of improvement, through the occasional preservation of the best individuals, whether or not sufficiently distinct to be ranked at their first appearance as distinct varieties, and whether or not two or more species or
No one would ever expect to get a first-rate heartsease or dahlia from the seed of a wild plant.
No one would expect to raise a first-rate melting pear from the seed of a wild pear, though he might succeed from a poor seedling growing wild, if it had come from a garden-stock.
The pear, though cultivated in classical times, appears, from Pliny's description, to have been a fruit of very inferior quality.
I have seen great surprise expressed in horticultural works at the wonderful skill of gardeners, in having produced such splendid results from such poor materials; but the art, I cannot doubt, has been simple, and, as far as the final result is concerned,
It has consisted in always cultivating the best known variety, sowing its seeds, and, when a slightly better variety has chanced to appear, selecting it, and so onwards.
But the gardeners of the classical period, who cultivated the best pear they could procure, never thought what splendid fruit we should eat; though we owe our excellent fruit, in some small degree, to their having naturally chosen and preserved the best
A large amount of change in our cultivated plants, thus slowly and unconsciously accumulated, explains, as I believe, the well-known fact, that in a vast number of cases we cannot recognise, and therefore do not know, the wild parent-stocks of the plants
If it has taken centuries or thousands of years to improve or modify most of our plants up to their present standard of usefulness to man, we can understand how it is that neither Australia, the Cape of Good Hope, nor any other region inhabited by quite
It is not that these countries, so rich in species, do not by a strange chance possess the aboriginal stocks of any useful plants, but that the native plants have not been improved by continued selection up to a standard of perfection comparable with that
In regard to the domestic animals kept by uncivilised man, it should not be overlooked that they almost always have to struggle for their own food, at least during certain seasons.
And in two countries very differently circumstanced, individuals of the same species, having slightly different constitutions or structure, would often succeed better in the one country than in the other, and thus by a process of "natural selection," as
This, perhaps, partly explains what has been remarked by some authors, namely, that the varieties kept by savages have more of the character of species than the varieties kept in civilised countries.
On the view here given of the all-important part which selection by man has played, it becomes at once obvious, how it is that our domestic races show adaptation in their structure or in their habits to man's wants or fancies.
We can, I think, further understand the frequently abnormal character of our domestic races, and likewise their differences being so great in external characters and relatively so slight in internal parts or organs.
Man can hardly select, or only with much difficulty, any deviation of structure excepting such as is externally visible; and indeed he rarely cares for what is internal.
He can never act by selection, excepting on variations which are first given to him in some slight degree by nature.
No man would ever try to make a fantail, till he saw a pigeon with a tail developed in some slight degree in an unusual manner, or a pouter till he saw a pigeon with a crop of somewhat unusual size; and the more abnormal or unusual any character was when
But to use such an expression as trying to make a fantail, is, I have no doubt, in most cases, utterly incorrect.
The man who first selected a pigeon with a slightly larger tail, never dreamed what the descendants of that pigeon would become through long-continued, partly unconscious and partly methodical selection.
Perhaps the parent bird of all fantails had only fourteen tail-feathers somewhat expanded, like the present Java fantail, or like individuals of other and distinct breeds, in which as many as seventeen tail-feathers have been counted.
Perhaps the first pouter-pigeon did not inflate its crop much more than the turbit now does the upper part of its oesophagus,--a habit which is disregarded by all fanciers, as it is not one of the points of the breed.
Nor let it be thought that some great deviation of structure would be necessary to catch the fancier's eye: he perceives extremely small differences, and it is in human nature to value any novelty, however slight, in one's own possession.
Nor must the value which would formerly be set on any slight differences in the individuals of the same species, be judged of by the value which would now be set on them, after several breeds have once fairly been established.
Many slight differences might, and indeed do now, arise amongst pigeons, which are rejected as faults or deviations from the standard of perfection of each breed.
The common goose has not given rise to any marked varieties; hence the Thoulouse and the common breed, which differ only in colour, that most fleeting of characters, have lately been exhibited as distinct at our poultry-shows.
I think these views further explain what has sometimes been noticed--namely that we know nothing about the origin or history of any of our domestic breeds.
But, in fact, a breed, like a dialect of a language, can hardly be said to have had a definite origin.
A man preserves and breeds from an individual with some slight deviation of structure, or takes more care than usual in matching his best animals and thus improves them, and the improved individuals slowly spread in the immediate neighbourhood.
But as yet they will hardly have a distinct name, and from being only slightly valued, their history will be disregarded.
When further improved by the same slow and gradual process, they will spread more widely, and will get recognised as something distinct and valuable, and will then probably first receive a provincial name.
In semi-civilised countries, with little free communication, the spreading and knowledge of any new sub-breed will be a slow process.
As soon as the points of value of the new sub-breed are once fully acknowledged, the principle, as I have called it, of unconscious selection will always tend,--perhaps more at one period than at another, as the breed rises or falls in fashion,--perhaps
But the chance will be infinitely small of any record having been preserved of such slow, varying, and insensible changes.
I must now say a few words on the circumstances, favourable, or the reverse, to man's power of selection.
A high degree of variability is obviously favourable, as freely giving the materials for selection to work on; not that mere individual differences are not amply sufficient, with extreme care, to allow of the accumulation of a large amount of modification
But as variations manifestly useful or pleasing to man appear only occasionally, the chance of their appearance will be much increased by a large number of individuals being kept; and hence this comes to be of the highest importance to success.
On this principle Marshall has remarked, with respect to the sheep of parts of Yorkshire, that "as they generally belong to poor people, and are mostly IN SMALL LOTS, they never can be improved".
On the other hand, nurserymen, from raising large stocks of the same plants, are generally far more successful than amateurs in getting new and valuable varieties.
The keeping of a large number of individuals of a species in any country requires that the species should be placed under favourable conditions of life, so as to breed freely in that country.
When the individuals of any species are scanty, all the individuals, whatever their quality may be, will generally be allowed to breed, and this will effectually prevent selection.
But probably the most important point of all, is, that the animal or plant should be so highly useful to man, or so much valued by him, that the closest attention should be paid to even the slightest deviation in the qualities or structure of each
Unless such attention be paid nothing can be effected.
I have seen it gravely remarked, that it was most fortunate that the strawberry began to vary just when gardeners began to attend closely to this plant.
No doubt the strawberry had always varied since it was cultivated, but the slight varieties had been neglected.
As soon, however, as gardeners picked out individual plants with slightly larger, earlier, or better fruit, and raised seedlings from them, and again picked out the best seedlings and bred from them, then, there appeared (aided by some crossing with
In the case of animals with separate sexes, facility in preventing crosses is an important element of success in the formation of new races,--at least, in a country which is already stocked with other races.
In this respect enclosure of the land plays a part.
Wandering savages or the inhabitants of open plains rarely possess more than one breed of the same species.
Pigeons can be mated for life, and this is a great convenience to the fancier, for thus many races may be kept true, though mingled in the same aviary; and this circumstance must have largely favoured the improvement and formation of new breeds.
Pigeons, I may add, can be propagated in great numbers and at a very quick rate, and inferior birds may be freely rejected, as when killed they serve for food.
On the other hand, cats, from their nocturnal rambling habits, cannot be matched, and, although so much valued by women and children, we hardly ever see a distinct breed kept up; such breeds as we do sometimes see are almost always imported from some other
Although I do not doubt that some domestic animals vary less than others, yet the rarity or absence of distinct breeds of the cat, the donkey, peacock, goose, etc.
, may be attributed in main part to selection not having been brought into play: in cats, from the difficulty in pairing them; in donkeys, from only a few being kept by poor people, and little attention paid to their breeding; in peacocks, from not being
To sum up on the origin of our Domestic Races of animals and plants.
I believe that the conditions of life, from their action on the reproductive system, are so far of the highest importance as causing variability.
I do not believe that variability is an inherent and necessary contingency, under all circumstances, with all organic beings, as some authors have thought.
The effects of variability are modified by various degrees of inheritance and of reversion.
Variability is governed by many unknown laws, more especially by that of correlation of growth.
Something may be attributed to the direct action of the conditions of life.
Something must be attributed to use and disuse.
The final result is thus rendered infinitely complex.
In some cases, I do not doubt that the intercrossing of species, aboriginally distinct, has played an important part in the origin of our domestic productions.
When in any country several domestic breeds have once been established, their occasional intercrossing, with the aid of selection, has, no doubt, largely aided in the formation of new sub-breeds; but the importance of the crossing of varieties has, I
In plants which are temporarily propagated by cuttings, buds, etc.
, the importance of the crossing both of distinct species and of varieties is immense; for the cultivator here quite disregards the extreme variability both of hybrids and mongrels, and the frequent sterility of hybrids; but the cases of plants not
Over all these causes of Change I am convinced that the accumulative action of Selection, whether applied methodically and more quickly, or unconsciously and more slowly, but more efficiently, is by far the predominant Power.
2.
VARIATION UNDER NATURE.
Variability.
Individual differences.
Doubtful species.
Wide ranging, much diffused, and common species vary most.
Species of the larger genera in any country vary more than the species of the smaller genera.
Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in being very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having restricted ranges.
Before applying the principles arrived at in the last chapter to organic beings in a state of nature, we must briefly discuss whether these latter are subject to any variation.
To treat this subject at all properly, a long catalogue of dry facts should be given; but these I shall reserve for my future work.
Nor shall I here discuss the various definitions which have been given of the term species.
No one definition has as yet satisfied all naturalists; yet every naturalist knows vaguely what he means when he speaks of a species.
Generally the term includes the unknown element of a distinct act of creation.
The term "variety" is almost equally difficult to define; but here community of descent is almost universally implied, though it can rarely be proved.
We have also what are called monstrosities; but they graduate into varieties.
By a monstrosity I presume is meant some considerable deviation of structure in one part, either injurious to or not useful to the species, and not generally propagated.
Some authors use the term "variation" in a technical sense, as implying a modification directly due to the physical conditions of life; and "variations" in this sense are supposed not to be inherited: but who can say that the dwarfed condition of shells in
and in this case I presume that the form would be called a variety.
Again, we have many slight differences which may be called individual differences, such as are known frequently to appear in the offspring from the same parents, or which may be presumed to have thus arisen, from being frequently observed in the
No one supposes that all the individuals of the same species are cast in the very same mould.
These individual differences are highly important for us, as they afford materials for natural selection to accumulate, in the same manner as man can accumulate in any given direction individual differences in his domesticated productions.
These individual differences generally affect what naturalists consider unimportant parts; but I could show by a long catalogue of facts, that parts which must be called important, whether viewed under a physiological or classificatory point of view,
I am convinced that the most experienced naturalist would be surprised at the number of the cases of variability, even in important parts of structure, which he could collect on good authority, as I have collected, during a course of years.
It should be remembered that systematists are far from pleased at finding variability in important characters, and that there are not many men who will laboriously examine internal and important organs, and compare them in many specimens of the same
I should never have expected that the branching of the main nerves close to the great central ganglion of an insect would have been variable in the same species; I should have expected that changes of this nature could have been effected only by slow
This philosophical naturalist, I may add, has also quite recently shown that the muscles in the larvae of certain insects are very far from uniform.
Authors sometimes argue in a circle when they state that important organs never vary; for these same authors practically rank that character as important (as some few naturalists have honestly confessed) which does not vary; and, under this point of view,
There is one point connected with individual differences, which seems to me extremely perplexing: I refer to those genera which have sometimes been called "protean" or "polymorphic," in which the species present an inordinate amount of variation; and
We may instance Rubus, Rosa, and Hieracium amongst plants, several genera of insects, and several genera of Brachiopod shells.
In most polymorphic genera some of the species have fixed and definite characters.
Genera which are polymorphic in one country seem to be, with some few exceptions, polymorphic in other countries, and likewise, judging from Brachiopod shells, at former periods of time.
These facts seem to be very perplexing, for they seem to show that this kind of variability is independent of the conditions of life.
I am inclined to suspect that we see in these polymorphic genera variations in points of structure which are of no service or disservice to the species, and which consequently have not been seized on and rendered definite by natural selection, as hereafter
Those forms which possess in some considerable degree the character of species, but which are so closely similar to some other forms, or are so closely linked to them by intermediate gradations, that naturalists do not like to rank them as distinct
We have every reason to believe that many of these doubtful and closely-allied forms have permanently retained their characters in their own country for a long time; for as long, as far as we know, as have good and true species.
Practically, when a naturalist can unite two forms together by others having intermediate characters, he treats the one as a variety of the other, ranking the most common, but sometimes the one first described, as the species, and the other as the variety.
But cases of great difficulty, which I will not here enumerate, sometimes occur in deciding whether or not to rank one form as a variety of another, even when they are closely connected by intermediate links; nor will the commonly-assumed hybrid nature of
In very many cases, however, one form is ranked as a variety of another, not because the intermediate links have actually been found, but because analogy leads the observer to suppose either that they do now somewhere exist, or may formerly have existed;
Hence, in determining whether a form should be ranked as a species or a variety, the opinion of naturalists having sound judgment and wide experience seems the only guide to follow.
We must, however, in many cases, decide by a majority of naturalists, for few well-marked and well-known varieties can be named which have not been ranked as species by at least some competent judges.
That varieties of this doubtful nature are far from uncommon cannot be disputed.
Compare the several floras of Great Britain, of France or of the United States, drawn up by different botanists, and see what a surprising number of forms have been ranked by one botanist as good species, and by another as mere varieties.
Mr. H. C. Watson, to whom I lie under deep obligation for assistance of all kinds, has marked for me 182 British plants, which are generally considered as varieties, but which have all been ranked by botanists as species; and in making this list he has
Under genera, including the most polymorphic forms, Mr. Babington gives 251 species, whereas Mr. Bentham gives only 112,--a difference of 139 doubtful forms!
Amongst animals which unite for each birth, and which are highly locomotive, doubtful forms, ranked by one zoologist as a species and by another as a variety, can rarely be found within the same country, but are common in separated areas.
How many of those birds and insects in North America and Europe, which differ very slightly from each other, have been ranked by one eminent naturalist as undoubted species, and by another as varieties, or, as they are often called, as geographical races!
Many years ago, when comparing, and seeing others compare, the birds from the separate islands of the Galapagos Archipelago, both one with another, and with those from the American mainland, I was much struck how entirely vague and arbitrary is the
On the islets of the little Madeira group there are many insects which are characterized as varieties in Mr. Wollaston's admirable work, but which it cannot be doubted would be ranked as distinct species by many entomologists.
Even Ireland has a few animals, now generally regarded as varieties, but which have been ranked as species by some zoologists.
Several most experienced ornithologists consider our British red grouse as only a strongly-marked race of a Norwegian species, whereas the greater number rank it as an undoubted species peculiar to Great Britain.
A wide distance between the homes of two doubtful forms leads many naturalists to rank both as distinct species; but what distance, it has been well asked, will suffice?
if that between America and Europe is ample, will that between the Continent and the Azores, or Madeira, or the Canaries, or Ireland, be sufficient?
It must be admitted that many forms, considered by highly-competent judges as varieties, have so perfectly the character of species that they are ranked by other highly-competent judges as good and true species.
But to discuss whether they are rightly called species or varieties, before any definition of these terms has been generally accepted, is vainly to beat the air.
Many of the cases of strongly-marked varieties or doubtful species well deserve consideration; for several interesting lines of argument, from geographical distribution, analogical variation, hybridism, etc.
, have been brought to bear on the attempt to determine their rank.
I will here give only a single instance,--the well-known one of the primrose and cowslip, or Primula veris and elatior.
These plants differ considerably in appearance; they have a different flavour and emit a different odour; they flower at slightly different periods; they grow in somewhat different stations; they ascend mountains to different heights; they have different
We could hardly wish for better evidence of the two forms being specifically distinct.
On the other hand, they are united by many intermediate links, and it is very doubtful whether these links are hybrids; and there is, as it seems to me, an overwhelming amount of experimental evidence, showing that they descend from common parents, and
Close investigation, in most cases, will bring naturalists to an agreement how to rank doubtful forms.
Yet it must be confessed, that it is in the best-known countries that we find the greatest number of forms of doubtful value.
I have been struck with the fact, that if any animal or plant in a state of nature be highly useful to man, or from any cause closely attract his attention, varieties of it will almost universally be found recorded.
These varieties, moreover, will be often ranked by some authors as species.
Look at the common oak, how closely it has been studied; yet a German author makes more than a dozen species out of forms, which are very generally considered as varieties; and in this country the highest botanical authorities and practical men can be
When a young naturalist commences the study of a group of organisms quite unknown to him, he is at first much perplexed to determine what differences to consider as specific, and what as varieties; for he knows nothing of the amount and kind of variation
But if he confine his attention to one class within one country, he will soon make up his mind how to rank most of the doubtful forms.
His general tendency will be to make many species, for he will become impressed, just like the pigeon or poultry-fancier before alluded to, with the amount of difference in the forms which he is continually studying; and he has little general knowledge of
As he extends the range of his observations, he will meet with more cases of difficulty; for he will encounter a greater number of closely-allied forms.
But if his observations be widely extended, he will in the end generally be enabled to make up his own mind which to call varieties and which species; but he will succeed in this at the expense of admitting much variation,--and the truth of this admission
When, moreover, he comes to study allied forms brought from countries not now continuous, in which case he can hardly hope to find the intermediate links between his doubtful forms, he will have to trust almost entirely to analogy, and his difficulties
Certainly no clear line of demarcation has as yet been drawn between species and sub-species--that is, the forms which in the opinion of some naturalists come very near to, but do not quite arrive at the rank of species; or, again, between sub-species and
These differences blend into each other in an insensible series; and a series impresses the mind with the idea of an actual passage.
Hence I look at individual differences, though of small interest to the systematist, as of high importance for us, as being the first step towards such slight varieties as are barely thought worth recording in works on natural history.
And I look at varieties which are in any degree more distinct and permanent, as steps leading to more strongly marked and more permanent varieties; and at these latter, as leading to sub-species, and to species.
The passage from one stage of difference to another and higher stage may be, in some cases, due merely to the long-continued action of different physical conditions in two different regions; but I have not much faith in this view; and I attribute the
Hence I believe a well-marked variety may be justly called an incipient species; but whether this belief be justifiable must be judged of by the general weight of the several facts and views given throughout this work.
It need not be supposed that all varieties or incipient species necessarily attain the rank of species.
They may whilst in this incipient state become extinct, or they may endure as varieties for very long periods, as has been shown to be the case by Mr. Wollaston with the varieties of certain fossil land-shells in Madeira.
If a variety were to flourish so as to exceed in numbers the parent species, it would then rank as the species, and the species as the variety; or it might come to supplant and exterminate the parent species; or both might co-exist, and both rank as
But we shall hereafter have to return to this subject.
From these remarks it will be seen that I look at the term species, as one arbitrarily given for the sake of convenience to a set of individuals closely resembling each other, and that it does not essentially differ from the term variety, which is given to
The term variety, again, in comparison with mere individual differences, is also applied arbitrarily, and for mere convenience sake.
Guided by theoretical considerations, I thought that some interesting results might be obtained in regard to the nature and relations of the species which vary most, by tabulating all the varieties in several well-worked floras.
At first this seemed a simple task; but Mr. H. C. Watson, to whom I am much indebted for valuable advice and assistance on this subject, soon convinced me that there were many difficulties, as did subsequently Dr. Hooker, even in stronger terms.
I shall reserve for my future work the discussion of these difficulties, and the tables themselves of the proportional numbers of the varying species.
Dr. Hooker permits me to add, that after having carefully read my manuscript, and examined the tables, he thinks that the following statements are fairly well established.
The whole subject, however, treated as it necessarily here is with much brevity, is rather perplexing, and allusions cannot be avoided to the "struggle for existence," "divergence of character," and other questions, hereafter to be discussed.
Alph.
De Candolle and others have shown that plants which have very wide ranges generally present varieties; and this might have been expected, as they become exposed to diverse physical conditions, and as they come into competition (which, as we shall hereafter
But my tables further show that, in any limited country, the species which are most common, that is abound most in individuals, and the species which are most widely diffused within their own country (and this is a different consideration from wide range,
Hence it is the most flourishing, or, as they may be called, the dominant species,--those which range widely over the world, are the most diffused in their own country, and are the most numerous in individuals,--which oftenest produce well-marked
And this, perhaps, might have been anticipated; for, as varieties, in order to become in any degree permanent, necessarily have to struggle with the other inhabitants of the country, the species which are already dominant will be the most likely to yield
If the plants inhabiting a country and described in any Flora be divided into two equal masses, all those in the larger genera being placed on one side, and all those in the smaller genera on the other side, a somewhat larger number of the very common and
This, again, might have been anticipated; for the mere fact of many species of the same genus inhabiting any country, shows that there is something in the organic or inorganic conditions of that country favourable to the genus; and, consequently, we might
But so many causes tend to obscure this result, that I am surprised that my tables show even a small majority on the side of the larger genera.
I will here allude to only two causes of obscurity.
Fresh-water and salt-loving plants have generally very wide ranges and are much diffused, but this seems to be connected with the nature of the stations inhabited by them, and has little or no relation to the size of the genera to which the species belong.
Again, plants low in the scale of organisation are generally much more widely diffused than plants higher in the scale; and here again there is no close relation to the size of the genera.
The cause of lowly-organised plants ranging widely will be discussed in our chapter on geographical distribution.
From looking at species as only strongly-marked and well-defined varieties, I was led to anticipate that the species of the larger genera in each country would oftener present varieties, than the species of the smaller genera; for wherever many closely
e.
species of the same genus) have been formed, many varieties or incipient species ought, as a general rule, to be now forming.
Where many large trees grow, we expect to find saplings.
Where many species of a genus have been formed through variation, circumstances have been favourable for variation; and hence we might expect that the circumstances would generally be still favourable to variation.
On the other hand, if we look at each species as a special act of creation, there is no apparent reason why more varieties should occur in a group having many species, than in one having few.
To test the truth of this anticipation I have arranged the plants of twelve countries, and the coleopterous insects of two districts, into two nearly equal masses, the species of the larger genera on one side, and those of the smaller genera on the other
Moreover, the species of the large genera which present any varieties, invariably present a larger average number of varieties than do the species of the small genera.
Both these results follow when another division is made, and when all the smallest genera, with from only one to four species, are absolutely excluded from the tables.
These facts are of plain signification on the view that species are only strongly marked and permanent varieties; for wherever many species of the same genus have been formed, or where, if we may use the expression, the manufactory of species has been
And this certainly is the case, if varieties be looked at as incipient species; for my tables clearly show as a general rule that, wherever many species of a genus have been formed, the species of that genus present a number of varieties, that is of
It is not that all large genera are now varying much, and are thus increasing in the number of their species, or that no small genera are now varying and increasing; for if this had been so, it would have been fatal to my theory; inasmuch as geology
All that we want to show is, that where many species of a genus have been formed, on an average many are still forming; and this holds good.
There are other relations between the species of large genera and their recorded varieties which deserve notice.
We have seen that there is no infallible criterion by which to distinguish species and well-marked varieties; and in those cases in which intermediate links have not been found between doubtful forms, naturalists are compelled to come to a determination by
Hence the amount of difference is one very important criterion in settling whether two forms should be ranked as species or varieties.
Now Fries has remarked in regard to plants, and Westwood in regard to insects, that in large genera the amount of difference between the species is often exceedingly small.
I have endeavoured to test this numerically by averages, and, as far as my imperfect results go, they always confirm the view.
I have also consulted some sagacious and most experienced observers, and, after deliberation, they concur in this view.
In this respect, therefore, the species of the larger genera resemble varieties, more than do the species of the smaller genera.
Or the case may be put in another way, and it may be said, that in the larger genera, in which a number of varieties or incipient species greater than the average are now manufacturing, many of the species already manufactured still to a certain extent
Moreover, the species of the large genera are related to each other, in the same manner as the varieties of any one species are related to each other.
No naturalist pretends that all the species of a genus are equally distinct from each other; they may generally be divided into sub-genera, or sections, or lesser groups.
As Fries has well remarked, little groups of species are generally clustered like satellites around certain other species.
And what are varieties but groups of forms, unequally related to each other, and clustered round certain forms--that is, round their parent-species?
Undoubtedly there is one most important point of difference between varieties and species; namely, that the amount of difference between varieties, when compared with each other or with their parent-species, is much less than that between the species of
But when we come to discuss the principle, as I call it, of Divergence of Character, we shall see how this may be explained, and how the lesser differences between varieties will tend to increase into the greater differences between species.
There is one other point which seems to me worth notice.
Varieties generally have much restricted ranges: this statement is indeed scarcely more than a truism, for if a variety were found to have a wider range than that of its supposed parent-species, their denominations ought to be reversed.
But there is also reason to believe, that those species which are very closely allied to other species, and in so far resemble varieties, often have much restricted ranges.
For instance, Mr. H. C. Watson has marked for me in the well-sifted London Catalogue of plants (4th edition) 63 plants which are therein ranked as species, but which he considers as so closely allied to other species as to be of doubtful value: these 63
9 of the provinces into which Mr. Watson has divided Great Britain.
Now, in this same catalogue, 53 acknowledged varieties are recorded, and these range over 7.
7 provinces; whereas, the species to which these varieties belong range over 14.
3 provinces.
So that the acknowledged varieties have very nearly the same restricted average range, as have those very closely allied forms, marked for me by Mr. Watson as doubtful species, but which are almost universally ranked by British botanists as good and true
Finally, then, varieties have the same general characters as species, for they cannot be distinguished from species,--except, firstly, by the discovery of intermediate linking forms, and the occurrence of such links cannot affect the actual characters of
In genera having more than the average number of species in any country, the species of these genera have more than the average number of varieties.
In large genera the species are apt to be closely, but unequally, allied together, forming little clusters round certain species.
Species very closely allied to other species apparently have restricted ranges.
In all these several respects the species of large genera present a strong analogy with varieties.
And we can clearly understand these analogies, if species have once existed as varieties, and have thus originated: whereas, these analogies are utterly inexplicable if each species has been independently created.
We have, also, seen that it is the most flourishing and dominant species of the larger genera which on an average vary most; and varieties, as we shall hereafter see, tend to become converted into new and distinct species.
The larger genera thus tend to become larger; and throughout nature the forms of life which are now dominant tend to become still more dominant by leaving many modified and dominant descendants.
But by steps hereafter to be explained, the larger genera also tend to break up into smaller genera.
And thus, the forms of life throughout the universe become divided into groups subordinate to groups.
3.
STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.
Bears on natural selection.
The term used in a wide sense.
Geometrical powers of increase.
Rapid increase of naturalised animals and plants.
Nature of the checks to increase.
Competition universal.
Effects of climate.
Protection from the number of individuals.
Complex relations of all animals and plants throughout nature.
Struggle for life most severe between individuals and varieties of the same species; often severe between species of the same genus.
The relation of organism to organism the most important of all relations.
Before entering on the subject of this chapter, I must make a few preliminary remarks, to show how the struggle for existence bears on Natural Selection.
It has been seen in the last chapter that amongst organic beings in a state of nature there is some individual variability; indeed I am not aware that this has ever been disputed.
It is immaterial for us whether a multitude of doubtful forms be called species or sub-species or varieties; what rank, for instance, the two or three hundred doubtful forms of British plants are entitled to hold, if the existence of any well-marked
But the mere existence of individual variability and of some few well-marked varieties, though necessary as the foundation for the work, helps us but little in understanding how species arise in nature.
How have all those exquisite adaptations of one part of the organisation to another part, and to the conditions of life, and of one distinct organic being to another being, been perfected?
We see these beautiful co-adaptations most plainly in the woodpecker and missletoe; and only a little less plainly in the humblest parasite which clings to the hairs of a quadruped or feathers of a bird; in the structure of the beetle which dives through
Again, it may be asked, how is it that varieties, which I have called incipient species, become ultimately converted into good and distinct species, which in most cases obviously differ from each other far more than do the varieties of the same species?
How do those groups of species, which constitute what are called distinct genera, and which differ from each other more than do the species of the same genus, arise?
All these results, as we shall more fully see in the next chapter, follow inevitably from the struggle for life.
Owing to this struggle for life, any variation, however slight and from whatever cause proceeding, if it be in any degree profitable to an individual of any species, in its infinitely complex relations to other organic beings and to external nature, will
The offspring, also, will thus have a better chance of surviving, for, of the many individuals of any species which are periodically born, but a small number can survive.
I have called this principle, by which each slight variation, if useful, is preserved, by the term of Natural Selection, in order to mark its relation to man's power of selection.
We have seen that man by selection can certainly produce great results, and can adapt organic beings to his own uses, through the accumulation of slight but useful variations, given to him by the hand of Nature.
But Natural Selection, as we shall hereafter see, is a power incessantly ready for action, and is as immeasurably superior to man's feeble efforts, as the works of Nature are to those of Art.
We will now discuss in a little more detail the struggle for existence.
In my future work this subject shall be treated, as it well deserves, at much greater length.
The elder De Candolle and Lyell have largely and philosophically shown that all organic beings are exposed to severe competition.
In regard to plants, no one has treated this subject with more spirit and ability than W. Herbert, Dean of Manchester, evidently the result of his great horticultural knowledge.
Nothing is easier than to admit in words the truth of the universal struggle for life, or more difficult--at least I have found it so--than constantly to bear this conclusion in mind.
Yet unless it be thoroughly engrained in the mind, I am convinced that the whole economy of nature, with every fact on distribution, rarity, abundance, extinction, and variation, will be dimly seen or quite misunderstood.
We behold the face of nature bright with gladness, we often see superabundance of food; we do not see, or we forget, that the birds which are idly singing round us mostly live on insects or seeds, and are thus constantly destroying life; or we forget how
I should premise that I use the term Struggle for Existence in a large and metaphorical sense, including dependence of one being on another, and including (which is more important) not only the life of the individual, but success in leaving progeny.
Two canine animals in a time of dearth, may be truly said to struggle with each other which shall get food and live.
But a plant on the edge of a desert is said to struggle for life against the drought, though more properly it should be said to be dependent on the moisture.
A plant which annually produces a thousand seeds, of which on an average only one comes to maturity, may be more truly said to struggle with the plants of the same and other kinds which already clothe the ground.
The missletoe is dependent on the apple and a few other trees, but can only in a far-fetched sense be said to struggle with these trees, for if too many of these parasites grow on the same tree, it will languish and die.
But several seedling missletoes, growing close together on the same branch, may more truly be said to struggle with each other.
As the missletoe is disseminated by birds, its existence depends on birds; and it may metaphorically be said to struggle with other fruit-bearing plants, in order to tempt birds to devour and thus disseminate its seeds rather than those of other plants.
In these several senses, which pass into each other, I use for convenience sake the general term of struggle for existence.
A struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high rate at which all organic beings tend to increase.
Every being, which during its natural lifetime produces several eggs or seeds, must suffer destruction during some period of its life, and during some season or occasional year, otherwise, on the principle of geometrical increase, its numbers would quickly
Hence, as more individuals are produced than can possibly survive, there must in every case be a struggle for existence, either one individual with another of the same species, or with the individuals of distinct species, or with the physical conditions of
It is the doctrine of Malthus applied with manifold force to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms; for in this case there can be no artificial increase of food, and no prudential restraint from marriage.
Although some species may be now increasing, more or less rapidly, in numbers, all cannot do so, for the world would not hold them.
There is no exception to the rule that every organic being naturally increases at so high a rate, that if not destroyed, the earth would soon be covered by the progeny of a single pair.
Even slow-breeding man has doubled in twenty-five years, and at this rate, in a few thousand years, there would literally not be standing room for his progeny.
Linnaeus has calculated that if an annual plant produced only two seeds--and there is no plant so unproductive as this--and their seedlings next year produced two, and so on, then in twenty years there would be a million plants.
The elephant is reckoned to be the slowest breeder of all known animals, and I have taken some pains to estimate its probable minimum rate of natural increase: it will be under the mark to assume that it breeds when thirty years old, and goes on breeding
But we have better evidence on this subject than mere theoretical calculations, namely, the numerous recorded cases of the astonishingly rapid increase of various animals in a state of nature, when circumstances have been favourable to them during two or
Still more striking is the evidence from our domestic animals of many kinds which have run wild in several parts of the world: if the statements of the rate of increase of slow-breeding cattle and horses in South America, and latterly in Australia, had not
So it is with plants: cases could be given of introduced plants which have become common throughout whole islands in a period of less than ten years.
Several of the plants now most numerous over the wide plains of La Plata, clothing square leagues of surface almost to the exclusion of all other plants, have been introduced from Europe; and there are plants which now range in India, as I hear from Dr.
In such cases, and endless instances could be given, no one supposes that the fertility of these animals or plants has been suddenly and temporarily increased in any sensible degree.
The obvious explanation is that the conditions of life have been very favourable, and that there has consequently been less destruction of the old and young, and that nearly all the young have been enabled to breed.
In such cases the geometrical ratio of increase, the result of which never fails to be surprising, simply explains the extraordinarily rapid increase and wide diffusion of naturalised productions in their new homes.
In a state of nature almost every plant produces seed, and amongst animals there are very few which do not annually pair.
Hence we may confidently assert, that all plants and animals are tending to increase at a geometrical ratio, that all would most rapidly stock every station in which they could any how exist, and that the geometrical tendency to increase must be checked by
Our familiarity with the larger domestic animals tends, I think, to mislead us: we see no great destruction falling on them, and we forget that thousands are annually slaughtered for food, and that in a state of nature an equal number would have somehow to
The only difference between organisms which annually produce eggs or seeds by the thousand, and those which produce extremely few, is, that the slow-breeders would require a few more years to people, under favourable conditions, a whole district, let it be
The condor lays a couple of eggs and the ostrich a score, and yet in the same country the condor may be the more numerous of the two: the Fulmar petrel lays but one egg, yet it is believed to be the most numerous bird in the world.
One fly deposits hundreds of eggs, and another, like the hippobosca, a single one; but this difference does not determine how many individuals of the two species can be supported in a district.
A large number of eggs is of some importance to those species, which depend on a rapidly fluctuating amount of food, for it allows them rapidly to increase in number.
But the real importance of a large number of eggs or seeds is to make up for much destruction at some period of life; and this period in the great majority of cases is an early one.
If an animal can in any way protect its own eggs or young, a small number may be produced, and yet the average stock be fully kept up; but if many eggs or young are destroyed, many must be produced, or the species will become extinct.
It would suffice to keep up the full number of a tree, which lived on an average for a thousand years, if a single seed were produced once in a thousand years, supposing that this seed were never destroyed, and could be ensured to germinate in a fitting
So that in all cases, the average number of any animal or plant depends only indirectly on the number of its eggs or seeds.
In looking at Nature, it is most necessary to keep the foregoing considerations always in mind--never to forget that every single organic being around us may be said to be striving to the utmost to increase in numbers; that each lives by a struggle at some
Lighten any check, mitigate the destruction ever so little, and the number of the species will almost instantaneously increase to any amount.
The face of Nature may be compared to a yielding surface, with ten thousand sharp wedges packed close together and driven inwards by incessant blows, sometimes one wedge being struck, and then another with greater force.
What checks the natural tendency of each species to increase in number is most obscure.
Look at the most vigorous species; by as much as it swarms in numbers, by so much will its tendency to increase be still further increased.
We know not exactly what the checks are in even one single instance.
Nor will this surprise any one who reflects how ignorant we are on this head, even in regard to mankind, so incomparably better known than any other animal.
This subject has been ably treated by several authors, and I shall, in my future work, discuss some of the checks at considerable length, more especially in regard to the feral animals of South America.
Here I will make only a few remarks, just to recall to the reader's mind some of the chief points.
Eggs or very young animals seem generally to suffer most, but this is not invariably the case.
With plants there is a vast destruction of seeds, but, from some observations which I have made, I believe that it is the seedlings which suffer most from germinating in ground already thickly stocked with other plants.
Seedlings, also, are destroyed in vast numbers by various enemies; for instance, on a piece of ground three feet long and two wide, dug and cleared, and where there could be no choking from other plants, I marked all the seedlings of our native weeds as
If turf which has long been mown, and the case would be the same with turf closely browsed by quadrupeds, be let to grow, the more vigorous plants gradually kill the less vigorous, though fully grown, plants: thus out of twenty species growing on a little
The amount of food for each species of course gives the extreme limit to which each can increase; but very frequently it is not the obtaining food, but the serving as prey to other animals, which determines the average numbers of a species.
Thus, there seems to be little doubt that the stock of partridges, grouse, and hares on any large estate depends chiefly on the destruction of vermin.
If not one head of game were shot during the next twenty years in England, and, at the same time, if no vermin were destroyed, there would, in all probability, be less game than at present, although hundreds of thousands of game animals are now annually
On the other hand, in some cases, as with the elephant and rhinoceros, none are destroyed by beasts of prey: even the tiger in India most rarely dares to attack a young elephant protected by its dam.
Climate plays an important part in determining the average numbers of a species, and periodical seasons of extreme cold or drought, I believe to be the most effective of all checks.
I estimated that the winter of 1854-55 destroyed four-fifths of the birds in my own grounds; and this is a tremendous destruction, when we remember that ten per cent.
is an extraordinarily severe mortality from epidemics with man.
The action of climate seems at first sight to be quite independent of the struggle for existence; but in so far as climate chiefly acts in reducing food, it brings on the most severe struggle between the individuals, whether of the same or of distinct
Even when climate, for instance extreme cold, acts directly, it will be the least vigorous, or those which have got least food through the advancing winter, which will suffer most.
When we travel from south to north, or from a damp region to a dry, we invariably see some species gradually getting rarer and rarer, and finally disappearing; and the change of climate being conspicuous, we are tempted to attribute the whole effect to its
But this is a very false view: we forget that each species, even where it most abounds, is constantly suffering enormous destruction at some period of its life, from enemies or from competitors for the same place and food; and if these enemies or
When we travel southward and see a species decreasing in numbers, we may feel sure that the cause lies quite as much in other species being favoured, as in this one being hurt.
So it is when we travel northward, but in a somewhat lesser degree, for the number of species of all kinds, and therefore of competitors, decreases northwards; hence in going northward, or in ascending a mountain, we far oftener meet with stunted forms,
When we reach the Arctic regions, or snow-capped summits, or absolute deserts, the struggle for life is almost exclusively with the elements.
That climate acts in main part indirectly by favouring other species, we may clearly see in the prodigious number of plants in our gardens which can perfectly well endure our climate, but which never become naturalised, for they cannot compete with our
When a species, owing to highly favourable circumstances, increases inordinately in numbers in a small tract, epidemics--at least, this seems generally to occur with our game animals--often ensue: and here we have a limiting check independent of the
But even some of these so-called epidemics appear to be due to parasitic worms, which have from some cause, possibly in part through facility of diffusion amongst the crowded animals, been disproportionably favoured: and here comes in a sort of struggle
On the other hand, in many cases, a large stock of individuals of the same species, relatively to the numbers of its enemies, is absolutely necessary for its preservation.
Thus we can easily raise plenty of corn and rape-seed, etc.
, in our fields, because the seeds are in great excess compared with the number of birds which feed on them; nor can the birds, though having a superabundance of food at this one season, increase in number proportionally to the supply of seed, as their
This view of the necessity of a large stock of the same species for its preservation, explains, I believe, some singular facts in nature, such as that of very rare plants being sometimes extremely abundant in the few spots where they do occur; and that of
For in such cases, we may believe, that a plant could exist only where the conditions of its life were so favourable that many could exist together, and thus save each other from utter destruction.
I should add that the good effects of frequent intercrossing, and the ill effects of close interbreeding, probably come into play in some of these cases; but on this intricate subject I will not here enlarge.
Many cases are on record showing how complex and unexpected are the checks and relations between organic beings, which have to struggle together in the same country.
I will give only a single instance, which, though a simple one, has interested me.
In Staffordshire, on the estate of a relation where I had ample means of investigation, there was a large and extremely barren heath, which had never been touched by the hand of man; but several hundred acres of exactly the same nature had been enclosed
The change in the native vegetation of the planted part of the heath was most remarkable, more than is generally seen in passing from one quite different soil to another: not only the proportional numbers of the heath-plants were wholly changed, but twelve
The effect on the insects must have been still greater, for six insectivorous birds were very common in the plantations, which were not to be seen on the heath; and the heath was frequented by two or three distinct insectivorous birds.
Here we see how potent has been the effect of the introduction of a single tree, nothing whatever else having been done, with the exception that the land had been enclosed, so that cattle could not enter.
But how important an element enclosure is, I plainly saw near Farnham, in Surrey.
Here there are extensive heaths, with a few clumps of old Scotch firs on the distant hill-tops: within the last ten years large spaces have been enclosed, and self-sown firs are now springing up in multitudes, so close together that all cannot live.
When I ascertained that these young trees had not been sown or planted, I was so much surprised at their numbers that I went to several points of view, whence I could examine hundreds of acres of the unenclosed heath, and literally I could not see a single
But on looking closely between the stems of the heath, I found a multitude of seedlings and little trees, which had been perpetually browsed down by the cattle.
In one square yard, at a point some hundred yards distant from one of the old clumps, I counted thirty-two little trees; and one of them, judging from the rings of growth, had during twenty-six years tried to raise its head above the stems of the heath,
No wonder that, as soon as the land was enclosed, it became thickly clothed with vigorously growing young firs.
Yet the heath was so extremely barren and so extensive that no one would ever have imagined that cattle would have so closely and effectually searched it for food.
Here we see that cattle absolutely determine the existence of the Scotch fir; but in several parts of the world insects determine the existence of cattle.
Perhaps Paraguay offers the most curious instance of this; for here neither cattle nor horses nor dogs have ever run wild, though they swarm southward and northward in a feral state; and Azara and Rengger have shown that this is caused by the greater
The increase of these flies, numerous as they are, must be habitually checked by some means, probably by birds.
Hence, if certain insectivorous birds (whose numbers are probably regulated by hawks or beasts of prey) were to increase in Paraguay, the flies would decrease--then cattle and horses would become feral, and this would certainly greatly alter (as indeed I
We began this series by insectivorous birds, and we have ended with them.
Not that in nature the relations can ever be as simple as this.
Battle within battle must ever be recurring with varying success; and yet in the long-run the forces are so nicely balanced, that the face of nature remains uniform for long periods of time, though assuredly the merest trifle would often give the victory
Nevertheless so profound is our ignorance, and so high our presumption, that we marvel when we hear of the extinction of an organic being; and as we do not see the cause, we invoke cataclysms to desolate the world, or invent laws on the duration of the
I am tempted to give one more instance showing how plants and animals, most remote in the scale of nature, are bound together by a web of complex relations.
I shall hereafter have occasion to show that the exotic Lobelia fulgens, in this part of England, is never visited by insects, and consequently, from its peculiar structure, never can set a seed.
Many of our orchidaceous plants absolutely require the visits of moths to remove their pollen-masses and thus to fertilise them.
I have, also, reason to believe that humble-bees are indispensable to the fertilisation of the heartsease (Viola tricolor), for other bees do not visit this flower.
From experiments which I have tried, I have found that the visits of bees, if not indispensable, are at least highly beneficial to the fertilisation of our clovers; but humble-bees alone visit the common red clover (Trifolium pratense), as other bees
Hence I have very little doubt, that if the whole genus of humble-bees became extinct or very rare in England, the heartsease and red clover would become very rare, or wholly disappear.
The number of humble-bees in any district depends in a great degree on the number of field-mice, which destroy their combs and nests; and Mr. H. Newman, who has long attended to the habits of humble-bees, believes that "more than two thirds of them are
Now the number of mice is largely dependent, as every one knows, on the number of cats; and Mr. Newman says, "Near villages and small towns I have found the nests of humble-bees more numerous than elsewhere, which I attribute to the number of cats that
Hence it is quite credible that the presence of a feline animal in large numbers in a district might determine, through the intervention first of mice and then of bees, the frequency of certain flowers in that district!
In the case of every species, many different checks, acting at different periods of life, and during different seasons or years, probably come into play; some one check or some few being generally the most potent, but all concurring in determining the
In some cases it can be shown that widely-different checks act on the same species in different districts.
When we look at the plants and bushes clothing an entangled bank, we are tempted to attribute their proportional numbers and kinds to what we call chance.
But how false a view is this!
Every one has heard that when an American forest is cut down, a very different vegetation springs up; but it has been observed that the trees now growing on the ancient Indian mounds, in the Southern United States, display the same beautiful diversity and
What a struggle between the several kinds of trees must here have gone on during long centuries, each annually scattering its seeds by the thousand; what war between insect and insect--between insects, snails, and other animals with birds and beasts of
Throw up a handful of feathers, and all must fall to the ground according to definite laws; but how simple is this problem compared to the action and reaction of the innumerable plants and animals which have determined, in the course of centuries, the
The dependency of one organic being on another, as of a parasite on its prey, lies generally between beings remote in the scale of nature.
This is often the case with those which may strictly be said to struggle with each other for existence, as in the case of locusts and grass-feeding quadrupeds.
But the struggle almost invariably will be most severe between the individuals of the same species, for they frequent the same districts, require the same food, and are exposed to the same dangers.
In the case of varieties of the same species, the struggle will generally be almost equally severe, and we sometimes see the contest soon decided: for instance, if several varieties of wheat be sown together, and the mixed seed be resown, some of the
To keep up a mixed stock of even such extremely close varieties as the variously coloured sweet-peas, they must be each year harvested separately, and the seed then mixed in due proportion, otherwise the weaker kinds will steadily decrease in numbers and
So again with the varieties of sheep: it has been asserted that certain mountain-varieties will starve out other mountain-varieties, so that they cannot be kept together.
The same result has followed from keeping together different varieties of the medicinal leech.
It may even be doubted whether the varieties of any one of our domestic plants or animals have so exactly the same strength, habits, and constitution, that the original proportions of a mixed stock could be kept up for half a dozen generations, if they
As species of the same genus have usually, though by no means invariably, some similarity in habits and constitution, and always in structure, the struggle will generally be more severe between species of the same genus, when they come into competition
We see this in the recent extension over parts of the United States of one species of swallow having caused the decrease of another species.
The recent increase of the missel-thrush in parts of Scotland has caused the decrease of the song-thrush.
How frequently we hear of one species of rat taking the place of another species under the most different climates!
In Russia the small Asiatic cockroach has everywhere driven before it its great congener.
One species of charlock will supplant another, and so in other cases.
We can dimly see why the competition should be most severe between allied forms, which fill nearly the same place in the economy of nature; but probably in no one case could we precisely say why one species has been victorious over another in the great
A corollary of the highest importance may be deduced from the foregoing remarks, namely, that the structure of every organic being is related, in the most essential yet often hidden manner, to that of all other organic beings, with which it comes into
This is obvious in the structure of the teeth and talons of the tiger; and in that of the legs and claws of the parasite which clings to the hair on the tiger's body.
But in the beautifully plumed seed of the dandelion, and in the flattened and fringed legs of the water-beetle, the relation seems at first confined to the elements of air and water.
Yet the advantage of plumed seeds no doubt stands in the closest relation to the land being already thickly clothed by other plants; so that the seeds may be widely distributed and fall on unoccupied ground.
In the water-beetle, the structure of its legs, so well adapted for diving, allows it to compete with other aquatic insects, to hunt for its own prey, and to escape serving as prey to other animals.
The store of nutriment laid up within the seeds of many plants seems at first sight to have no sort of relation to other plants.
But from the strong growth of young plants produced from such seeds (as peas and beans), when sown in the midst of long grass, I suspect that the chief use of the nutriment in the seed is to favour the growth of the young seedling, whilst struggling with
Look at a plant in the midst of its range, why does it not double or quadruple its numbers?
We know that it can perfectly well withstand a little more heat or cold, dampness or dryness, for elsewhere it ranges into slightly hotter or colder, damper or drier districts.
In this case we can clearly see that if we wished in imagination to give the plant the power of increasing in number, we should have to give it some advantage over its competitors, or over the animals which preyed on it.
On the confines of its geographical range, a change of constitution with respect to climate would clearly be an advantage to our plant; but we have reason to believe that only a few plants or animals range so far, that they are destroyed by the rigour of
Not until we reach the extreme confines of life, in the arctic regions or on the borders of an utter desert, will competition cease.
The land may be extremely cold or dry, yet there will be competition between some few species, or between the individuals of the same species, for the warmest or dampest spots.
Hence, also, we can see that when a plant or animal is placed in a new country amongst new competitors, though the climate may be exactly the same as in its former home, yet the conditions of its life will generally be changed in an essential manner.
If we wished to increase its average numbers in its new home, we should have to modify it in a different way to what we should have done in its native country; for we should have to give it some advantage over a different set of competitors or enemies.
It is good thus to try in our imagination to give any form some advantage over another.
Probably in no single instance should we know what to do, so as to succeed.
It will convince us of our ignorance on the mutual relations of all organic beings; a conviction as necessary, as it seems to be difficult to acquire.
All that we can do, is to keep steadily in mind that each organic being is striving to increase at a geometrical ratio; that each at some period of its life, during some season of the year, during each generation or at intervals, has to struggle for life,
When we reflect on this struggle, we may console ourselves with the full belief, that the war of nature is not incessant, that no fear is felt, that death is generally prompt, and that the vigorous, the healthy, and the happy survive and multiply.
4.
NATURAL SELECTION.
Natural Selection: its power compared with man's selection, its power on characters of trifling importance, its power at all ages and on both sexes.
Sexual Selection.
On the generality of intercrosses between individuals of the same species.
Circumstances favourable and unfavourable to Natural Selection, namely, intercrossing, isolation, number of individuals.
Slow action.
Extinction caused by Natural Selection.
Divergence of Character, related to the diversity of inhabitants of any small area, and to naturalisation.
Action of Natural Selection, through Divergence of Character and Extinction, on the descendants from a common parent.
Explains the Grouping of all organic beings.
How will the struggle for existence, discussed too briefly in the last chapter, act in regard to variation?
Can the principle of selection, which we have seen is so potent in the hands of man, apply in nature?
I think we shall see that it can act most effectually.
Let it be borne in mind in what an endless number of strange peculiarities our domestic productions, and, in a lesser degree, those under nature, vary; and how strong the hereditary tendency is.
Under domestication, it may be truly said that the whole organisation becomes in some degree plastic.
Let it be borne in mind how infinitely complex and close-fitting are the mutual relations of all organic beings to each other and to their physical conditions of life.
Can it, then, be thought improbable, seeing that variations useful to man have undoubtedly occurred, that other variations useful in some way to each being in the great and complex battle of life, should sometimes occur in the course of thousands of
If such do occur, can we doubt (remembering that many more individuals are born than can possibly survive) that individuals having any advantage, however slight, over others, would have the best chance of surviving and of procreating their kind?
On the other hand, we may feel sure that any variation in the least degree injurious would be rigidly destroyed.
This preservation of favourable variations and the rejection of injurious variations, I call Natural Selection.
Variations neither useful nor injurious would not be affected by natural selection, and would be left a fluctuating element, as perhaps we see in the species called polymorphic.
We shall best understand the probable course of natural selection by taking the case of a country undergoing some physical change, for instance, of climate.
The proportional numbers of its inhabitants would almost immediately undergo a change, and some species might become extinct.
We may conclude, from what we have seen of the intimate and complex manner in which the inhabitants of each country are bound together, that any change in the numerical proportions of some of the inhabitants, independently of the change of climate itself,
If the country were open on its borders, new forms would certainly immigrate, and this also would seriously disturb the relations of some of the former inhabitants.
Let it be remembered how powerful the influence of a single introduced tree or mammal has been shown to be.
But in the case of an island, or of a country partly surrounded by barriers, into which new and better adapted forms could not freely enter, we should then have places in the economy of nature which would assuredly be better filled up, if some of the
In such case, every slight modification, which in the course of ages chanced to arise, and which in any way favoured the individuals of any of the species, by better adapting them to their altered conditions, would tend to be preserved; and natural
We have reason to believe, as stated in the first chapter, that a change in the conditions of life, by specially acting on the reproductive system, causes or increases variability; and in the foregoing case the conditions of life are supposed to have
Not that, as I believe, any extreme amount of variability is necessary; as man can certainly produce great results by adding up in any given direction mere individual differences, so could Nature, but far more easily, from having incomparably longer time
Nor do I believe that any great physical change, as of climate, or any unusual degree of isolation to check immigration, is actually necessary to produce new and unoccupied places for natural selection to fill up by modifying and improving some of the
For as all the inhabitants of each country are struggling together with nicely balanced forces, extremely slight modifications in the structure or habits of one inhabitant would often give it an advantage over others; and still further modifications of the
No country can be named in which all the native inhabitants are now so perfectly adapted to each other and to the physical conditions under which they live, that none of them could anyhow be improved; for in all countries, the natives have been so far
And as foreigners have thus everywhere beaten some of the natives, we may safely conclude that the natives might have been modified with advantage, so as to have better resisted such intruders.
As man can produce and certainly has produced a great result by his methodical and unconscious means of selection, what may not nature effect?
Man can act only on external and visible characters: nature cares nothing for appearances, except in so far as they may be useful to any being.
She can act on every internal organ, on every shade of constitutional difference, on the whole machinery of life.
Man selects only for his own good; Nature only for that of the being which she tends.
Every selected character is fully exercised by her; and the being is placed under well-suited conditions of life.
Man keeps the natives of many climates in the same country; he seldom exercises each selected character in some peculiar and fitting manner; he feeds a long and a short beaked pigeon on the same food; he does not exercise a long-backed or long-legged
He does not allow the most vigorous males to struggle for the females.
He does not rigidly destroy all inferior animals, but protects during each varying season, as far as lies in his power, all his productions.
He often begins his selection by some half-monstrous form; or at least by some modification prominent enough to catch his eye, or to be plainly useful to him.
Under nature, the slightest difference of structure or constitution may well turn the nicely-balanced scale in the struggle for life, and so be preserved.
How fleeting are the wishes and efforts of man!
how short his time!
and consequently how poor will his products be, compared with those accumulated by nature during whole geological periods.
Can we wonder, then, that nature's productions should be far "truer" in character than man's productions; that they should be infinitely better adapted to the most complex conditions of life, and should plainly bear the stamp of far higher workmanship?
It may be said that natural selection is daily and hourly scrutinising, throughout the world, every variation, even the slightest; rejecting that which is bad, preserving and adding up all that is good; silently and insensibly working, whenever and
We see nothing of these slow changes in progress, until the hand of time has marked the long lapse of ages, and then so imperfect is our view into long past geological ages, that we only see that the forms of life are now different from what they formerly
Although natural selection can act only through and for the good of each being, yet characters and structures, which we are apt to consider as of very trifling importance, may thus be acted on.
When we see leaf-eating insects green, and bark-feeders mottled-grey; the alpine ptarmigan white in winter, the red-grouse the colour of heather, and the black-grouse that of peaty earth, we must believe that these tints are of service to these birds and
Grouse, if not destroyed at some period of their lives, would increase in countless numbers; they are known to suffer largely from birds of prey; and hawks are guided by eyesight to their prey,--so much so, that on parts of the Continent persons are warned
Hence I can see no reason to doubt that natural selection might be most effective in giving the proper colour to each kind of grouse, and in keeping that colour, when once acquired, true and constant.
Nor ought we to think that the occasional destruction of an animal of any particular colour would produce little effect: we should remember how essential it is in a flock of white sheep to destroy every lamb with the faintest trace of black.
In plants the down on the fruit and the colour of the flesh are considered by botanists as characters of the most trifling importance: yet we hear from an excellent horticulturist, Downing, that in the United States smooth-skinned fruits suffer far more
If, with all the aids of art, these slight differences make a great difference in cultivating the several varieties, assuredly, in a state of nature, where the trees would have to struggle with other trees and with a host of enemies, such differences would
In looking at many small points of difference between species, which, as far as our ignorance permits us to judge, seem to be quite unimportant, we must not forget that climate, food, etc.
, probably produce some slight and direct effect.
It is, however, far more necessary to bear in mind that there are many unknown laws of correlation of growth, which, when one part of the organisation is modified through variation, and the modifications are accumulated by natural selection for the good of
As we see that those variations which under domestication appear at any particular period of life, tend to reappear in the offspring at the same period;--for instance, in the seeds of the many varieties of our culinary and agricultural plants; in the
If it profit a plant to have its seeds more and more widely disseminated by the wind, I can see no greater difficulty in this being effected through natural selection, than in the cotton-planter increasing and improving by selection the down in the pods on
Natural selection may modify and adapt the larva of an insect to a score of contingencies, wholly different from those which concern the mature insect.
These modifications will no doubt affect, through the laws of correlation, the structure of the adult; and probably in the case of those insects which live only for a few hours, and which never feed, a large part of their structure is merely the correlated
So, conversely, modifications in the adult will probably often affect the structure of the larva; but in all cases natural selection will ensure that modifications consequent on other modifications at a different period of life, shall not be in the least
Natural selection will modify the structure of the young in relation to the parent, and of the parent in relation to the young.
In social animals it will adapt the structure of each individual for the benefit of the community; if each in consequence profits by the selected change.
What natural selection cannot do, is to modify the structure of one species, without giving it any advantage, for the good of another species; and though statements to this effect may be found in works of natural history, I cannot find one case which will
A structure used only once in an animal's whole life, if of high importance to it, might be modified to any extent by natural selection; for instance, the great jaws possessed by certain insects, and used exclusively for opening the cocoon--or the hard tip
It has been asserted, that of the best short-beaked tumbler-pigeons more perish in the egg than are able to get out of it; so that fanciers assist in the act of hatching.
Now, if nature had to make the beak of a full-grown pigeon very short for the bird's own advantage, the process of modification would be very slow, and there would be simultaneously the most rigorous selection of the young birds within the egg, which had
SEXUAL SELECTION.
Inasmuch as peculiarities often appear under domestication in one sex and become hereditarily attached to that sex, the same fact probably occurs under nature, and if so, natural selection will be able to modify one sex in its functional relations to the
And this leads me to say a few words on what I call Sexual Selection.
This depends, not on a struggle for existence, but on a struggle between the males for possession of the females; the result is not death to the unsuccessful competitor, but few or no offspring.
Sexual selection is, therefore, less rigorous than natural selection.
Generally, the most vigorous males, those which are best fitted for their places in nature, will leave most progeny.
But in many cases, victory will depend not on general vigour, but on having special weapons, confined to the male sex.
A hornless stag or spurless cock would have a poor chance of leaving offspring.
Sexual selection by always allowing the victor to breed might surely give indomitable courage, length to the spur, and strength to the wing to strike in the spurred leg, as well as the brutal cock-fighter, who knows well that he can improve his breed by
How low in the scale of nature this law of battle descends, I know not; male alligators have been described as fighting, bellowing, and whirling round, like Indians in a war-dance, for the possession of the females; male salmons have been seen fighting all
The war is, perhaps, severest between the males of polygamous animals, and these seem oftenest provided with special weapons.
The males of carnivorous animals are already well armed; though to them and to others, special means of defence may be given through means of sexual selection, as the mane to the lion, the shoulder-pad to the boar, and the hooked jaw to the male salmon;
Amongst birds, the contest is often of a more peaceful character.
All those who have attended to the subject, believe that there is the severest rivalry between the males of many species to attract by singing the females.
The rock-thrush of Guiana, birds of Paradise, and some others, congregate; and successive males display their gorgeous plumage and perform strange antics before the females, which standing by as spectators, at last choose the most attractive partner.
Those who have closely attended to birds in confinement well know that they often take individual preferences and dislikes: thus Sir R. Heron has described how one pied peacock was eminently attractive to all his hen birds.
It may appear childish to attribute any effect to such apparently weak means: I cannot here enter on the details necessary to support this view; but if man can in a short time give elegant carriage and beauty to his bantams, according to his standard of
I strongly suspect that some well-known laws with respect to the plumage of male and female birds, in comparison with the plumage of the young, can be explained on the view of plumage having been chiefly modified by sexual selection, acting when the birds
Thus it is, as I believe, that when the males and females of any animal have the same general habits of life, but differ in structure, colour, or ornament, such differences have been mainly caused by sexual selection; that is, individual males have had, in
Yet, I would not wish to attribute all such sexual differences to this agency: for we see peculiarities arising and becoming attached to the male sex in our domestic animals (as the wattle in male carriers, horn-like protuberances in the cocks of certain
), which we cannot believe to be either useful to the males in battle, or attractive to the females.
We see analogous cases under nature, for instance, the tuft of hair on the breast of the turkey-cock, which can hardly be either useful or ornamental to this bird;--indeed, had the tuft appeared under domestication, it would have been called a monstrosity.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE ACTION OF NATURAL SELECTION.
In order to make it clear how, as I believe, natural selection acts, I must beg permission to give one or two imaginary illustrations.
Let us take the case of a wolf, which preys on various animals, securing some by craft, some by strength, and some by fleetness; and let us suppose that the fleetest prey, a deer for instance, had from any change in the country increased in numbers, or
I can under such circumstances see no reason to doubt that the swiftest and slimmest wolves would have the best chance of surviving, and so be preserved or selected,--provided always that they retained strength to master their prey at this or at some other
I can see no more reason to doubt this, than that man can improve the fleetness of his greyhounds by careful and methodical selection, or by that unconscious selection which results from each man trying to keep the best dogs without any thought of
Even without any change in the proportional numbers of the animals on which our wolf preyed, a cub might be born with an innate tendency to pursue certain kinds of prey.
Nor can this be thought very improbable; for we often observe great differences in the natural tendencies of our domestic animals; one cat, for instance, taking to catch rats, another mice; one cat, according to Mr. St. John, bringing home winged game,
The tendency to catch rats rather than mice is known to be inherited.
Now, if any slight innate change of habit or of structure benefited an individual wolf, it would have the best chance of surviving and of leaving offspring.
Some of its young would probably inherit the same habits or structure, and by the repetition of this process, a new variety might be formed which would either supplant or coexist with the parent-form of wolf.
Or, again, the wolves inhabiting a mountainous district, and those frequenting the lowlands, would naturally be forced to hunt different prey; and from the continued preservation of the individuals best fitted for the two sites, two varieties might slowly
These varieties would cross and blend where they met; but to this subject of intercrossing we shall soon have to return.
I may add, that, according to Mr. Pierce, there are two varieties of the wolf inhabiting the Catskill Mountains in the United States, one with a light greyhound-like form, which pursues deer, and the other more bulky, with shorter legs, which more
Let us now take a more complex case.
Certain plants excrete a sweet juice, apparently for the sake of eliminating something injurious from their sap: this is effected by glands at the base of the stipules in some Leguminosae, and at the back of the leaf of the common laurel.
This juice, though small in quantity, is greedily sought by insects.
Let us now suppose a little sweet juice or nectar to be excreted by the inner bases of the petals of a flower.
In this case insects in seeking the nectar would get dusted with pollen, and would certainly often transport the pollen from one flower to the stigma of another flower.
The flowers of two distinct individuals of the same species would thus get crossed; and the act of crossing, we have good reason to believe (as will hereafter be more fully alluded to), would produce very vigorous seedlings, which consequently would have
Some of these seedlings would probably inherit the nectar-excreting power.
Those individual flowers which had the largest glands or nectaries, and which excreted most nectar, would be oftenest visited by insects, and would be oftenest crossed; and so in the long-run would gain the upper hand.
Those flowers, also, which had their stamens and pistils placed, in relation to the size and habits of the particular insects which visited them, so as to favour in any degree the transportal of their pollen from flower to flower, would likewise be
We might have taken the case of insects visiting flowers for the sake of collecting pollen instead of nectar; and as pollen is formed for the sole object of fertilisation, its destruction appears a simple loss to the plant; yet if a little pollen were
When our plant, by this process of the continued preservation or natural selection of more and more attractive flowers, had been rendered highly attractive to insects, they would, unintentionally on their part, regularly carry pollen from flower to flower;
I will give only one--not as a very striking case, but as likewise illustrating one step in the separation of the sexes of plants, presently to be alluded to.
Some holly-trees bear only male flowers, which have four stamens producing rather a small quantity of pollen, and a rudimentary pistil; other holly-trees bear only female flowers; these have a full-sized pistil, and four stamens with shrivelled anthers, in
Having found a female tree exactly sixty yards from a male tree, I put the stigmas of twenty flowers, taken from different branches, under the microscope, and on all, without exception, there were pollen-grains, and on some a profusion of pollen.
As the wind had set for several days from the female to the male tree, the pollen could not thus have been carried.
The weather had been cold and boisterous, and therefore not favourable to bees, nevertheless every female flower which I examined had been effectually fertilised by the bees, accidentally dusted with pollen, having flown from tree to tree in search of
But to return to our imaginary case: as soon as the plant had been rendered so highly attractive to insects that pollen was regularly carried from flower to flower, another process might commence.
No naturalist doubts the advantage of what has been called the "physiological division of labour;" hence we may believe that it would be advantageous to a plant to produce stamens alone in one flower or on one whole plant, and pistils alone in another
In plants under culture and placed under new conditions of life, sometimes the male organs and sometimes the female organs become more or less impotent; now if we suppose this to occur in ever so slight a degree under nature, then as pollen is already
Let us now turn to the nectar-feeding insects in our imaginary case: we may suppose the plant of which we have been slowly increasing the nectar by continued selection, to be a common plant; and that certain insects depended in main part on its nectar for
I could give many facts, showing how anxious bees are to save time; for instance, their habit of cutting holes and sucking the nectar at the bases of certain flowers, which they can, with a very little more trouble, enter by the mouth.
Bearing such facts in mind, I can see no reason to doubt that an accidental deviation in the size and form of the body, or in the curvature and length of the proboscis, etc.
, far too slight to be appreciated by us, might profit a bee or other insect, so that an individual so characterised would be able to obtain its food more quickly, and so have a better chance of living and leaving descendants.
Its descendants would probably inherit a tendency to a similar slight deviation of structure.
The tubes of the corollas of the common red and incarnate clovers (Trifolium pratense and incarnatum) do not on a hasty glance appear to differ in length; yet the hive-bee can easily suck the nectar out of the incarnate clover, but not out of the common
Thus it might be a great advantage to the hive-bee to have a slightly longer or differently constructed proboscis.
On the other hand, I have found by experiment that the fertility of clover greatly depends on bees visiting and moving parts of the corolla, so as to push the pollen on to the stigmatic surface.
Hence, again, if humble-bees were to become rare in any country, it might be a great advantage to the red clover to have a shorter or more deeply divided tube to its corolla, so that the hive-bee could visit its flowers.
Thus I can understand how a flower and a bee might slowly become, either simultaneously or one after the other, modified and adapted in the most perfect manner to each other, by the continued preservation of individuals presenting mutual and slightly
I am well aware that this doctrine of natural selection, exemplified in the above imaginary instances, is open to the same objections which were at first urged against Sir Charles Lyell's noble views on "the modern changes of the earth, as illustrative of
Natural selection can act only by the preservation and accumulation of infinitesimally small inherited modifications, each profitable to the preserved being; and as modern geology has almost banished such views as the excavation of a great valley by a
ON THE INTERCROSSING OF INDIVIDUALS.
I must here introduce a short digression.
In the case of animals and plants with separated sexes, it is of course obvious that two individuals must always unite for each birth; but in the case of hermaphrodites this is far from obvious.
Nevertheless I am strongly inclined to believe that with all hermaphrodites two individuals, either occasionally or habitually, concur for the reproduction of their kind.
This view, I may add, was first suggested by Andrew Knight.
We shall presently see its importance; but I must here treat the subject with extreme brevity, though I have the materials prepared for an ample discussion.
All vertebrate animals, all insects, and some other large groups of animals, pair for each birth.
Modern research has much diminished the number of supposed hermaphrodites, and of real hermaphrodites a large number pair; that is, two individuals regularly unite for reproduction, which is all that concerns us.
But still there are many hermaphrodite animals which certainly do not habitually pair, and a vast majority of plants are hermaphrodites.
What reason, it may be asked, is there for supposing in these cases that two individuals ever concur in reproduction?
As it is impossible here to enter on details, I must trust to some general considerations alone.
In the first place, I have collected so large a body of facts, showing, in accordance with the almost universal belief of breeders, that with animals and plants a cross between different varieties, or between individuals of the same variety but of another
On the belief that this is a law of nature, we can, I think, understand several large classes of facts, such as the following, which on any other view are inexplicable.
Every hybridizer knows how unfavourable exposure to wet is to the fertilisation of a flower, yet what a multitude of flowers have their anthers and stigmas fully exposed to the weather!
but if an occasional cross be indispensable, the fullest freedom for the entrance of pollen from another individual will explain this state of exposure, more especially as the plant's own anthers and pistil generally stand so close together that
Many flowers, on the other hand, have their organs of fructification closely enclosed, as in the great papilionaceous or pea-family; but in several, perhaps in all, such flowers, there is a very curious adaptation between the structure of the flower and
So necessary are the visits of bees to papilionaceous flowers, that I have found, by experiments published elsewhere, that their fertility is greatly diminished if these visits be prevented.
Now, it is scarcely possible that bees should fly from flower to flower, and not carry pollen from one to the other, to the great good, as I believe, of the plant.
Bees will act like a camel-hair pencil, and it is quite sufficient just to touch the anthers of one flower and then the stigma of another with the same brush to ensure fertilisation; but it must not be supposed that bees would thus produce a multitude of
When the stamens of a flower suddenly spring towards the pistil, or slowly move one after the other towards it, the contrivance seems adapted solely to ensure self-fertilisation; and no doubt it is useful for this end: but, the agency of insects is often
In many other cases, far from there being any aids for self-fertilisation, there are special contrivances, as I could show from the writings of C. C. Sprengel and from my own observations, which effectually prevent the stigma receiving pollen from its own
In very many other cases, though there be no special mechanical contrivance to prevent the stigma of a flower receiving its own pollen, yet, as C. C. Sprengel has shown, and as I can confirm, either the anthers burst before the stigma is ready for
How strange are these facts!
How strange that the pollen and stigmatic surface of the same flower, though placed so close together, as if for the very purpose of self-fertilisation, should in so many cases be mutually useless to each other!
How simply are these facts explained on the view of an occasional cross with a distinct individual being advantageous or indispensable!
If several varieties of the cabbage, radish, onion, and of some other plants, be allowed to seed near each other, a large majority, as I have found, of the seedlings thus raised will turn out mongrels: for instance, I raised 233 seedling cabbages from some
Yet the pistil of each cabbage-flower is surrounded not only by its own six stamens, but by those of the many other flowers on the same plant.
How, then, comes it that such a vast number of the seedlings are mongrelized?
I suspect that it must arise from the pollen of a distinct VARIETY having a prepotent effect over a flower's own pollen; and that this is part of the general law of good being derived from the intercrossing of distinct individuals of the same species.
When distinct SPECIES are crossed the case is directly the reverse, for a plant's own pollen is always prepotent over foreign pollen; but to this subject we shall return in a future chapter.
In the case of a gigantic tree covered with innumerable flowers, it may be objected that pollen could seldom be carried from tree to tree, and at most only from flower to flower on the same tree, and that flowers on the same tree can be considered as
I believe this objection to be valid, but that nature has largely provided against it by giving to trees a strong tendency to bear flowers with separated sexes.
When the sexes are separated, although the male and female flowers may be produced on the same tree, we can see that pollen must be regularly carried from flower to flower; and this will give a better chance of pollen being occasionally carried from tree
That trees belonging to all Orders have their sexes more often separated than other plants, I find to be the case in this country; and at my request Dr. Hooker tabulated the trees of New Zealand, and Dr. Asa Gray those of the United States, and the result
On the other hand, Dr. Hooker has recently informed me that he finds that the rule does not hold in Australia; and I have made these few remarks on the sexes of trees simply to call attention to the subject.
Turning for a very brief space to animals: on the land there are some hermaphrodites, as land-mollusca and earth-worms; but these all pair.
As yet I have not found a single case of a terrestrial animal which fertilises itself.
We can understand this remarkable fact, which offers so strong a contrast with terrestrial plants, on the view of an occasional cross being indispensable, by considering the medium in which terrestrial animals live, and the nature of the fertilising
Of aquatic animals, there are many self-fertilising hermaphrodites; but here currents in the water offer an obvious means for an occasional cross.
And, as in the case of flowers, I have as yet failed, after consultation with one of the highest authorities, namely, Professor Huxley, to discover a single case of an hermaphrodite animal with the organs of reproduction so perfectly enclosed within the
Cirripedes long appeared to me to present a case of very great difficulty under this point of view; but I have been enabled, by a fortunate chance, elsewhere to prove that two individuals, though both are self-fertilising hermaphrodites, do sometimes
It must have struck most naturalists as a strange anomaly that, in the case of both animals and plants, species of the same family and even of the same genus, though agreeing closely with each other in almost their whole organisation, yet are not rarely,
But if, in fact, all hermaphrodites do occasionally intercross with other individuals, the difference between hermaphrodites and unisexual species, as far as function is concerned, becomes very small.
From these several considerations and from the many special facts which I have collected, but which I am not here able to give, I am strongly inclined to suspect that, both in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, an occasional intercross with a distinct
I am well aware that there are, on this view, many cases of difficulty, some of which I am trying to investigate.
Finally then, we may conclude that in many organic beings, a cross between two individuals is an obvious necessity for each birth; in many others it occurs perhaps only at long intervals; but in none, as I suspect, can self-fertilisation go on for
CIRCUMSTANCES FAVOURABLE TO NATURAL SELECTION.
This is an extremely intricate subject.
A large amount of inheritable and diversified variability is favourable, but I believe mere individual differences suffice for the work.
A large number of individuals, by giving a better chance for the appearance within any given period of profitable variations, will compensate for a lesser amount of variability in each individual, and is, I believe, an extremely important element of
Though nature grants vast periods of time for the work of natural selection, she does not grant an indefinite period; for as all organic beings are striving, it may be said, to seize on each place in the economy of nature, if any one species does not
In man's methodical selection, a breeder selects for some definite object, and free intercrossing will wholly stop his work.
But when many men, without intending to alter the breed, have a nearly common standard of perfection, and all try to get and breed from the best animals, much improvement and modification surely but slowly follow from this unconscious process of selection,
Thus it will be in nature; for within a confined area, with some place in its polity not so perfectly occupied as might be, natural selection will always tend to preserve all the individuals varying in the right direction, though in different degrees, so
But if the area be large, its several districts will almost certainly present different conditions of life; and then if natural selection be modifying and improving a species in the several districts, there will be intercrossing with the other individuals
And in this case the effects of intercrossing can hardly be counterbalanced by natural selection always tending to modify all the individuals in each district in exactly the same manner to the conditions of each; for in a continuous area, the conditions
The intercrossing will most affect those animals which unite for each birth, which wander much, and which do not breed at a very quick rate.
Hence in animals of this nature, for instance in birds, varieties will generally be confined to separated countries; and this I believe to be the case.
In hermaphrodite organisms which cross only occasionally, and likewise in animals which unite for each birth, but which wander little and which can increase at a very rapid rate, a new and improved variety might be quickly formed on any one spot, and might
A local variety when once thus formed might subsequently slowly spread to other districts.
On the above principle, nurserymen always prefer getting seed from a large body of plants of the same variety, as the chance of intercrossing with other varieties is thus lessened.
Even in the case of slow-breeding animals, which unite for each birth, we must not overrate the effects of intercrosses in retarding natural selection; for I can bring a considerable catalogue of facts, showing that within the same area, varieties of the
Intercrossing plays a very important part in nature in keeping the individuals of the same species, or of the same variety, true and uniform in character.
It will obviously thus act far more efficiently with those animals which unite for each birth; but I have already attempted to show that we have reason to believe that occasional intercrosses take place with all animals and with all plants.
Even if these take place only at long intervals, I am convinced that the young thus produced will gain so much in vigour and fertility over the offspring from long-continued self-fertilisation, that they will have a better chance of surviving and
If there exist organic beings which never intercross, uniformity of character can be retained amongst them, as long as their conditions of life remain the same, only through the principle of inheritance, and through natural selection destroying any which
Isolation, also, is an important element in the process of natural selection.
In a confined or isolated area, if not very large, the organic and inorganic conditions of life will generally be in a great degree uniform; so that natural selection will tend to modify all the individuals of a varying species throughout the area in the
Intercrosses, also, with the individuals of the same species, which otherwise would have inhabited the surrounding and differently circumstanced districts, will be prevented.
But isolation probably acts more efficiently in checking the immigration of better adapted organisms, after any physical change, such as of climate or elevation of the land, etc.
; and thus new places in the natural economy of the country are left open for the old inhabitants to struggle for, and become adapted to, through modifications in their structure and constitution.
Lastly, isolation, by checking immigration and consequently competition, will give time for any new variety to be slowly improved; and this may sometimes be of importance in the production of new species.
If, however, an isolated area be very small, either from being surrounded by barriers, or from having very peculiar physical conditions, the total number of the individuals supported on it will necessarily be very small; and fewness of individuals will
If we turn to nature to test the truth of these remarks, and look at any small isolated area, such as an oceanic island, although the total number of the species inhabiting it, will be found to be small, as we shall see in our chapter on geographical
Hence an oceanic island at first sight seems to have been highly favourable for the production of new species.
But we may thus greatly deceive ourselves, for to ascertain whether a small isolated area, or a large open area like a continent, has been most favourable for the production of new organic forms, we ought to make the comparison within equal times; and this
Although I do not doubt that isolation is of considerable importance in the production of new species, on the whole I am inclined to believe that largeness of area is of more importance, more especially in the production of species, which will prove
Throughout a great and open area, not only will there be a better chance of favourable variations arising from the large number of individuals of the same species there supported, but the conditions of life are infinitely complex from the large number of
Each new form, also, as soon as it has been much improved, will be able to spread over the open and continuous area, and will thus come into competition with many others.
Hence more new places will be formed, and the competition to fill them will be more severe, on a large than on a small and isolated area.
Moreover, great areas, though now continuous, owing to oscillations of level, will often have recently existed in a broken condition, so that the good effects of isolation will generally, to a certain extent, have concurred.
Finally, I conclude that, although small isolated areas probably have been in some respects highly favourable for the production of new species, yet that the course of modification will generally have been more rapid on large areas; and what is more
We can, perhaps, on these views, understand some facts which will be again alluded to in our chapter on geographical distribution; for instance, that the productions of the smaller continent of Australia have formerly yielded, and apparently are now
Thus, also, it is that continental productions have everywhere become so largely naturalised on islands.
On a small island, the race for life will have been less severe, and there will have been less modification and less extermination.
Hence, perhaps, it comes that the flora of Madeira, according to Oswald Heer, resembles the extinct tertiary flora of Europe.
All fresh-water basins, taken together, make a small area compared with that of the sea or of the land; and, consequently, the competition between fresh-water productions will have been less severe than elsewhere; new forms will have been more slowly
And it is in fresh water that we find seven genera of Ganoid fishes, remnants of a once preponderant order: and in fresh water we find some of the most anomalous forms now known in the world, as the Ornithorhynchus and Lepidosiren, which, like fossils,
These anomalous forms may almost be called living fossils; they have endured to the present day, from having inhabited a confined area, and from having thus been exposed to less severe competition.
To sum up the circumstances favourable and unfavourable to natural selection, as far as the extreme intricacy of the subject permits.
I conclude, looking to the future, that for terrestrial productions a large continental area, which will probably undergo many oscillations of level, and which consequently will exist for long periods in a broken condition, will be the most favourable for
For the area will first have existed as a continent, and the inhabitants, at this period numerous in individuals and kinds, will have been subjected to very severe competition.
When converted by subsidence into large separate islands, there will still exist many individuals of the same species on each island: intercrossing on the confines of the range of each species will thus be checked: after physical changes of any kind,
When, by renewed elevation, the islands shall be re-converted into a continental area, there will again be severe competition: the most favoured or improved varieties will be enabled to spread: there will be much extinction of the less improved forms, and
That natural selection will always act with extreme slowness, I fully admit.
Its action depends on there being places in the polity of nature, which can be better occupied by some of the inhabitants of the country undergoing modification of some kind.
The existence of such places will often depend on physical changes, which are generally very slow, and on the immigration of better adapted forms having been checked.
But the action of natural selection will probably still oftener depend on some of the inhabitants becoming slowly modified; the mutual relations of many of the other inhabitants being thus disturbed.
Nothing can be effected, unless favourable variations occur, and variation itself is apparently always a very slow process.
The process will often be greatly retarded by free intercrossing.
Many will exclaim that these several causes are amply sufficient wholly to stop the action of natural selection.
I do not believe so.
On the other hand, I do believe that natural selection will always act very slowly, often only at long intervals of time, and generally on only a very few of the inhabitants of the same region at the same time.
I further believe, that this very slow, intermittent action of natural selection accords perfectly well with what geology tells us of the rate and manner at which the inhabitants of this world have changed.
Slow though the process of selection may be, if feeble man can do much by his powers of artificial selection, I can see no limit to the amount of change, to the beauty and infinite complexity of the coadaptations between all organic beings, one with
EXTINCTION.
This subject will be more fully discussed in our chapter on Geology; but it must be here alluded to from being intimately connected with natural selection.
Natural selection acts solely through the preservation of variations in some way advantageous, which consequently endure.
But as from the high geometrical powers of increase of all organic beings, each area is already fully stocked with inhabitants, it follows that as each selected and favoured form increases in number, so will the less favoured forms decrease and become
Rarity, as geology tells us, is the precursor to extinction.
We can, also, see that any form represented by few individuals will, during fluctuations in the seasons or in the number of its enemies, run a good chance of utter extinction.
But we may go further than this; for as new forms are continually and slowly being produced, unless we believe that the number of specific forms goes on perpetually and almost indefinitely increasing, numbers inevitably must become extinct.
That the number of specific forms has not indefinitely increased, geology shows us plainly; and indeed we can see reason why they should not have thus increased, for the number of places in the polity of nature is not indefinitely great,--not that we have
Probably no region is as yet fully stocked, for at the Cape of Good Hope, where more species of plants are crowded together than in any other quarter of the world, some foreign plants have become naturalised, without causing, as far as we know, the
Furthermore, the species which are most numerous in individuals will have the best chance of producing within any given period favourable variations.
We have evidence of this, in the facts given in the second chapter, showing that it is the common species which afford the greatest number of recorded varieties, or incipient species.
Hence, rare species will be less quickly modified or improved within any given period, and they will consequently be beaten in the race for life by the modified descendants of the commoner species.
From these several considerations I think it inevitably follows, that as new species in the course of time are formed through natural selection, others will become rarer and rarer, and finally extinct.
The forms which stand in closest competition with those undergoing modification and improvement, will naturally suffer most.
And we have seen in the chapter on the Struggle for Existence that it is the most closely-allied forms,--varieties of the same species, and species of the same genus or of related genera,--which, from having nearly the same structure, constitution, and
Consequently, each new variety or species, during the progress of its formation, will generally press hardest on its nearest kindred, and tend to exterminate them.
We see the same process of extermination amongst our domesticated productions, through the selection of improved forms by man.
Many curious instances could be given showing how quickly new breeds of cattle, sheep, and other animals, and varieties of flowers, take the place of older and inferior kinds.
In Yorkshire, it is historically known that the ancient black cattle were displaced by the long-horns, and that these "were swept away by the short-horns" (I quote the words of an agricultural writer) "as if by some murderous pestilence".
DIVERGENCE OF CHARACTER.
The principle, which I have designated by this term, is of high importance on my theory, and explains, as I believe, several important facts.
In the first place, varieties, even strongly-marked ones, though having somewhat of the character of species--as is shown by the hopeless doubts in many cases how to rank them--yet certainly differ from each other far less than do good and distinct
Nevertheless, according to my view, varieties are species in the process of formation, or are, as I have called them, incipient species.
How, then, does the lesser difference between varieties become augmented into the greater difference between species?
That this does habitually happen, we must infer from most of the innumerable species throughout nature presenting well-marked differences; whereas varieties, the supposed prototypes and parents of future well-marked species, present slight and ill-defined
Mere chance, as we may call it, might cause one variety to differ in some character from its parents, and the offspring of this variety again to differ from its parent in the very same character and in a greater degree; but this alone would never account
As has always been my practice, let us seek light on this head from our domestic productions.
We shall here find something analogous.
A fancier is struck by a pigeon having a slightly shorter beak; another fancier is struck by a pigeon having a rather longer beak; and on the acknowledged principle that "fanciers do not and will not admire a medium standard, but like extremes," they both
Again, we may suppose that at an early period one man preferred swifter horses; another stronger and more bulky horses.
The early differences would be very slight; in the course of time, from the continued selection of swifter horses by some breeders, and of stronger ones by others, the differences would become greater, and would be noted as forming two sub-breeds; finally,
As the differences slowly become greater, the inferior animals with intermediate characters, being neither very swift nor very strong, will have been neglected, and will have tended to disappear.
Here, then, we see in man's productions the action of what may be called the principle of divergence, causing differences, at first barely appreciable, steadily to increase, and the breeds to diverge in character both from each other and from their common
But how, it may be asked, can any analogous principle apply in nature?
I believe it can and does apply most efficiently, from the simple circumstance that the more diversified the descendants from any one species become in structure, constitution, and habits, by so much will they be better enabled to seize on many and widely
We can clearly see this in the case of animals with simple habits.
Take the case of a carnivorous quadruped, of which the number that can be supported in any country has long ago arrived at its full average.
If its natural powers of increase be allowed to act, it can succeed in increasing (the country not undergoing any change in its conditions) only by its varying descendants seizing on places at present occupied by other animals: some of them, for instance,
The more diversified in habits and structure the descendants of our carnivorous animal became, the more places they would be enabled to occupy.
What applies to one animal will apply throughout all time to all animals--that is, if they vary--for otherwise natural selection can do nothing.
So it will be with plants.
It has been experimentally proved, that if a plot of ground be sown with one species of grass, and a similar plot be sown with several distinct genera of grasses, a greater number of plants and a greater weight of dry herbage can thus be raised.
The same has been found to hold good when first one variety and then several mixed varieties of wheat have been sown on equal spaces of ground.
Hence, if any one species of grass were to go on varying, and those varieties were continually selected which differed from each other in at all the same manner as distinct species and genera of grasses differ from each other, a greater number of
And we well know that each species and each variety of grass is annually sowing almost countless seeds; and thus, as it may be said, is striving its utmost to increase its numbers.
Consequently, I cannot doubt that in the course of many thousands of generations, the most distinct varieties of any one species of grass would always have the best chance of succeeding and of increasing in numbers, and thus of supplanting the less
The truth of the principle, that the greatest amount of life can be supported by great diversification of structure, is seen under many natural circumstances.
In an extremely small area, especially if freely open to immigration, and where the contest between individual and individual must be severe, we always find great diversity in its inhabitants.
For instance, I found that a piece of turf, three feet by four in size, which had been exposed for many years to exactly the same conditions, supported twenty species of plants, and these belonged to eighteen genera and to eight orders, which shows how
So it is with the plants and insects on small and uniform islets; and so in small ponds of fresh water.
Farmers find that they can raise most food by a rotation of plants belonging to the most different orders: nature follows what may be called a simultaneous rotation.
Most of the animals and plants which live close round any small piece of ground, could live on it (supposing it not to be in any way peculiar in its nature), and may be said to be striving to the utmost to live there; but, it is seen, that where they come
The same principle is seen in the naturalisation of plants through man's agency in foreign lands.
It might have been expected that the plants which have succeeded in becoming naturalised in any land would generally have been closely allied to the indigenes; for these are commonly looked at as specially created and adapted for their own country.
It might, also, perhaps have been expected that naturalised plants would have belonged to a few groups more especially adapted to certain stations in their new homes.
But the case is very different; and Alph.
De Candolle has well remarked in his great and admirable work, that floras gain by naturalisation, proportionally with the number of the native genera and species, far more in new genera than in new species.
To give a single instance: in the last edition of Dr. Asa Gray's 'Manual of the Flora of the Northern United States,' 260 naturalised plants are enumerated, and these belong to 162 genera.
We thus see that these naturalised plants are of a highly diversified nature.
They differ, moreover, to a large extent from the indigenes, for out of the 162 genera, no less than 100 genera are not there indigenous, and thus a large proportional addition is made to the genera of these States.
By considering the nature of the plants or animals which have struggled successfully with the indigenes of any country, and have there become naturalised, we can gain some crude idea in what manner some of the natives would have had to be modified, in
The advantage of diversification in the inhabitants of the same region is, in fact, the same as that of the physiological division of labour in the organs of the same individual body--a subject so well elucidated by Milne Edwards.
No physiologist doubts that a stomach by being adapted to digest vegetable matter alone, or flesh alone, draws most nutriment from these substances.
So in the general economy of any land, the more widely and perfectly the animals and plants are diversified for different habits of life, so will a greater number of individuals be capable of there supporting themselves.
A set of animals, with their organisation but little diversified, could hardly compete with a set more perfectly diversified in structure.
It may be doubted, for instance, whether the Australian marsupials, which are divided into groups differing but little from each other, and feebly representing, as Mr. Waterhouse and others have remarked, our carnivorous, ruminant, and rodent mammals,
In the Australian mammals, we see the process of diversification in an early and incomplete stage of development.
After the foregoing discussion, which ought to have been much amplified, we may, I think, assume that the modified descendants of any one species will succeed by so much the better as they become more diversified in structure, and are thus enabled to
Now let us see how this principle of great benefit being derived from divergence of character, combined with the principles of natural selection and of extinction, will tend to act.
The accompanying diagram will aid us in understanding this rather perplexing subject.
Let A to L represent the species of a genus large in its own country; these species are supposed to resemble each other in unequal degrees, as is so generally the case in nature, and as is represented in the diagram by the letters standing at unequal
I have said a large genus, because we have seen in the second chapter, that on an average more of the species of large genera vary than of small genera; and the varying species of the large genera present a greater number of varieties.
We have, also, seen that the species, which are the commonest and the most widely-diffused, vary more than rare species with restricted ranges.
Let (A) be a common, widely-diffused, and varying species, belonging to a genus large in its own country.
The little fan of diverging dotted lines of unequal lengths proceeding from (A), may represent its varying offspring.
The variations are supposed to be extremely slight, but of the most diversified nature; they are not supposed all to appear simultaneously, but often after long intervals of time; nor are they all supposed to endure for equal periods.
Only those variations which are in some way profitable will be preserved or naturally selected.
And here the importance of the principle of benefit being derived from divergence of character comes in; for this will generally lead to the most different or divergent variations (represented by the outer dotted lines) being preserved and accumulated by
When a dotted line reaches one of the horizontal lines, and is there marked by a small numbered letter, a sufficient amount of variation is supposed to have been accumulated to have formed a fairly well-marked variety, such as would be thought worthy of
The intervals between the horizontal lines in the diagram, may represent each a thousand generations; but it would have been better if each had represented ten thousand generations.
After a thousand generations, species (A) is supposed to have produced two fairly well-marked varieties, namely a1 and m1.
These two varieties will generally continue to be exposed to the same conditions which made their parents variable, and the tendency to variability is in itself hereditary, consequently they will tend to vary, and generally to vary in nearly the same
Moreover, these two varieties, being only slightly modified forms, will tend to inherit those advantages which made their common parent (A) more numerous than most of the other inhabitants of the same country; they will likewise partake of those more
And these circumstances we know to be favourable to the production of new varieties.
If, then, these two varieties be variable, the most divergent of their variations will generally be preserved during the next thousand generations.
And after this interval, variety a1 is supposed in the diagram to have produced variety a2, which will, owing to the principle of divergence, differ more from (A) than did variety a1.
Variety m1 is supposed to have produced two varieties, namely m2 and s2, differing from each other, and more considerably from their common parent (A).
We may continue the process by similar steps for any length of time; some of the varieties, after each thousand generations, producing only a single variety, but in a more and more modified condition, some producing two or three varieties, and some failing
Thus the varieties or modified descendants, proceeding from the common parent (A), will generally go on increasing in number and diverging in character.
In the diagram the process is represented up to the ten-thousandth generation, and under a condensed and simplified form up to the fourteen-thousandth generation.
But I must here remark that I do not suppose that the process ever goes on so regularly as is represented in the diagram, though in itself made somewhat irregular.
I am far from thinking that the most divergent varieties will invariably prevail and multiply: a medium form may often long endure, and may or may not produce more than one modified descendant; for natural selection will always act according to the nature
But as a general rule, the more diversified in structure the descendants from any one species can be rendered, the more places they will be enabled to seize on, and the more their modified progeny will be increased.
In our diagram the line of succession is broken at regular intervals by small numbered letters marking the successive forms which have become sufficiently distinct to be recorded as varieties.
But these breaks are imaginary, and might have been inserted anywhere, after intervals long enough to have allowed the accumulation of a considerable amount of divergent variation.
As all the modified descendants from a common and widely-diffused species, belonging to a large genus, will tend to partake of the same advantages which made their parent successful in life, they will generally go on multiplying in number as well as
The modified offspring from the later and more highly improved branches in the lines of descent, will, it is probable, often take the place of, and so destroy, the earlier and less improved branches: this is represented in the diagram by some of the lower
In some cases I do not doubt that the process of modification will be confined to a single line of descent, and the number of the descendants will not be increased; although the amount of divergent modification may have been increased in the successive
This case would be represented in the diagram, if all the lines proceeding from (A) were removed, excepting that from a1 to a10.
In the same way, for instance, the English race-horse and English pointer have apparently both gone on slowly diverging in character from their original stocks, without either having given off any fresh branches or races.
After ten thousand generations, species (A) is supposed to have produced three forms, a10, f10, and m10, which, from having diverged in character during the successive generations, will have come to differ largely, but perhaps unequally, from each other
If we suppose the amount of change between each horizontal line in our diagram to be excessively small, these three forms may still be only well-marked varieties; or they may have arrived at the doubtful category of sub-species; but we have only to suppose
By continuing the same process for a greater number of generations (as shown in the diagram in a condensed and simplified manner), we get eight species, marked by the letters between a14 and m14, all descended from (A).
Thus, as I believe, species are multiplied and genera are formed.
In a large genus it is probable that more than one species would vary.
In the diagram I have assumed that a second species (I) has produced, by analogous steps, after ten thousand generations, either two well-marked varieties (w10 and z10) or two species, according to the amount of change supposed to be represented between
After fourteen thousand generations, six new species, marked by the letters n14 to z14, are supposed to have been produced.
In each genus, the species, which are already extremely different in character, will generally tend to produce the greatest number of modified descendants; for these will have the best chance of filling new and widely different places in the polity of
The other nine species (marked by capital letters) of our original genus, may for a long period continue transmitting unaltered descendants; and this is shown in the diagram by the dotted lines not prolonged far upwards from want of space.
But during the process of modification, represented in the diagram, another of our principles, namely that of extinction, will have played an important part.
As in each fully stocked country natural selection necessarily acts by the selected form having some advantage in the struggle for life over other forms, there will be a constant tendency in the improved descendants of any one species to supplant and
For it should be remembered that the competition will generally be most severe between those forms which are most nearly related to each other in habits, constitution, and structure.
Hence all the intermediate forms between the earlier and later states, that is between the less and more improved state of a species, as well as the original parent-species itself, will generally tend to become extinct.
So it probably will be with many whole collateral lines of descent, which will be conquered by later and improved lines of descent.
If, however, the modified offspring of a species get into some distinct country, or become quickly adapted to some quite new station, in which child and parent do not come into competition, both may continue to exist.
If then our diagram be assumed to represent a considerable amount of modification, species (A) and all the earlier varieties will have become extinct, having been replaced by eight new species (a14 to m14); and (I) will have been replaced by six (n14 to
But we may go further than this.
The original species of our genus were supposed to resemble each other in unequal degrees, as is so generally the case in nature; species (A) being more nearly related to B, C, and D, than to the other species; and species (I) more to G, H, K, L, than to
These two species (A) and (I), were also supposed to be very common and widely diffused species, so that they must originally have had some advantage over most of the other species of the genus.
Their modified descendants, fourteen in number at the fourteen-thousandth generation, will probably have inherited some of the same advantages: they have also been modified and improved in a diversified manner at each stage of descent, so as to have become
It seems, therefore, to me extremely probable that they will have taken the places of, and thus exterminated, not only their parents (A) and (I), but likewise some of the original species which were most nearly related to their parents.
Hence very few of the original species will have transmitted offspring to the fourteen-thousandth generation.
We may suppose that only one (F), of the two species which were least closely related to the other nine original species, has transmitted descendants to this late stage of descent.
The new species in our diagram descended from the original eleven species, will now be fifteen in number.
Owing to the divergent tendency of natural selection, the extreme amount of difference in character between species a14 and z14 will be much greater than that between the most different of the original eleven species.
The new species, moreover, will be allied to each other in a widely different manner.
Of the eight descendants from (A) the three marked a14, q14, p14, will be nearly related from having recently branched off from a10; b14 and f14, from having diverged at an earlier period from a5, will be in some degree distinct from the three first-named
The six descendants from (I) will form two sub-genera or even genera.
But as the original species (I) differed largely from (A), standing nearly at the extreme points of the original genus, the six descendants from (I) will, owing to inheritance, differ considerably from the eight descendants from (A); the two groups,
The intermediate species, also (and this is a very important consideration), which connected the original species (A) and (I), have all become, excepting (F), extinct, and have left no descendants.
Hence the six new species descended from (I), and the eight descended from (A), will have to be ranked as very distinct genera, or even as distinct sub-families.
Thus it is, as I believe, that two or more genera are produced by descent, with modification, from two or more species of the same genus.
And the two or more parent-species are supposed to have descended from some one species of an earlier genus.
In our diagram, this is indicated by the broken lines, beneath the capital letters, converging in sub-branches downwards towards a single point; this point representing a single species, the supposed single parent of our several new sub-genera and genera.
It is worth while to reflect for a moment on the character of the new species F14, which is supposed not to have diverged much in character, but to have retained the form of (F), either unaltered or altered only in a slight degree.
In this case, its affinities to the other fourteen new species will be of a curious and circuitous nature.
Having descended from a form which stood between the two parent-species (A) and (I), now supposed to be extinct and unknown, it will be in some degree intermediate in character between the two groups descended from these species.
But as these two groups have gone on diverging in character from the type of their parents, the new species (F14) will not be directly intermediate between them, but rather between types of the two groups; and every naturalist will be able to bring some
In the diagram, each horizontal line has hitherto been supposed to represent a thousand generations, but each may represent a million or hundred million generations, and likewise a section of the successive strata of the earth's crust including extinct
We shall, when we come to our chapter on Geology, have to refer again to this subject, and I think we shall then see that the diagram throws light on the affinities of extinct beings, which, though generally belonging to the same orders, or families, or
I see no reason to limit the process of modification, as now explained, to the formation of genera alone.
If, in our diagram, we suppose the amount of change represented by each successive group of diverging dotted lines to be very great, the forms marked a14 to p14, those marked b14 and f14, and those marked o14 to m14, will form three very distinct genera.
We shall also have two very distinct genera descended from (I) and as these latter two genera, both from continued divergence of character and from inheritance from a different parent, will differ widely from the three genera descended from (A), the two
And the two new families, or orders, will have descended from two species of the original genus; and these two species are supposed to have descended from one species of a still more ancient and unknown genus.
We have seen that in each country it is the species of the larger genera which oftenest present varieties or incipient species.
This, indeed, might have been expected; for as natural selection acts through one form having some advantage over other forms in the struggle for existence, it will chiefly act on those which already have some advantage; and the largeness of any group
Hence, the struggle for the production of new and modified descendants, will mainly lie between the larger groups, which are all trying to increase in number.
One large group will slowly conquer another large group, reduce its numbers, and thus lessen its chance of further variation and improvement.
Within the same large group, the later and more highly perfected sub-groups, from branching out and seizing on many new places in the polity of Nature, will constantly tend to supplant and destroy the earlier and less improved sub-groups.
Small and broken groups and sub-groups will finally tend to disappear.
Looking to the future, we can predict that the groups of organic beings which are now large and triumphant, and which are least broken up, that is, which as yet have suffered least extinction, will for a long period continue to increase.
But which groups will ultimately prevail, no man can predict; for we well know that many groups, formerly most extensively developed, have now become extinct.
Looking still more remotely to the future, we may predict that, owing to the continued and steady increase of the larger groups, a multitude of smaller groups will become utterly extinct, and leave no modified descendants; and consequently that of the
I shall have to return to this subject in the chapter on Classification, but I may add that on this view of extremely few of the more ancient species having transmitted descendants, and on the view of all the descendants of the same species making a class,
Although extremely few of the most ancient species may now have living and modified descendants, yet at the most remote geological period, the earth may have been as well peopled with many species of many genera, families, orders, and classes, as at the
SUMMARY OF CHAPTER.
If during the long course of ages and under varying conditions of life, organic beings vary at all in the several parts of their organisation, and I think this cannot be disputed; if there be, owing to the high geometrical powers of increase of each
But if variations useful to any organic being do occur, assuredly individuals thus characterised will have the best chance of being preserved in the struggle for life; and from the strong principle of inheritance they will tend to produce offspring
This principle of preservation, I have called, for the sake of brevity, Natural Selection.
Natural selection, on the principle of qualities being inherited at corresponding ages, can modify the egg, seed, or young, as easily as the adult.
Amongst many animals, sexual selection will give its aid to ordinary selection, by assuring to the most vigorous and best adapted males the greatest number of offspring.
Sexual selection will also give characters useful to the males alone, in their struggles with other males.
Whether natural selection has really thus acted in nature, in modifying and adapting the various forms of life to their several conditions and stations, must be judged of by the general tenour and balance of evidence given in the following chapters.
But we already see how it entails extinction; and how largely extinction has acted in the world's history, geology plainly declares.
Natural selection, also, leads to divergence of character; for more living beings can be supported on the same area the more they diverge in structure, habits, and constitution, of which we see proof by looking at the inhabitants of any small spot or at
Therefore during the modification of the descendants of any one species, and during the incessant struggle of all species to increase in numbers, the more diversified these descendants become, the better will be their chance of succeeding in the battle of
Thus the small differences distinguishing varieties of the same species, will steadily tend to increase till they come to equal the greater differences between species of the same genus, or even of distinct genera.
We have seen that it is the common, the widely-diffused, and widely-ranging species, belonging to the larger genera, which vary most; and these will tend to transmit to their modified offspring that superiority which now makes them dominant in their own
Natural selection, as has just been remarked, leads to divergence of character and to much extinction of the less improved and intermediate forms of life.
On these principles, I believe, the nature of the affinities of all organic beings may be explained.
It is a truly wonderful fact--the wonder of which we are apt to overlook from familiarity--that all animals and all plants throughout all time and space should be related to each other in group subordinate to group, in the manner which we everywhere
The several subordinate groups in any class cannot be ranked in a single file, but seem rather to be clustered round points, and these round other points, and so on in almost endless cycles.
On the view that each species has been independently created, I can see no explanation of this great fact in the classification of all organic beings; but, to the best of my judgment, it is explained through inheritance and the complex action of natural
The affinities of all the beings of the same class have sometimes been represented by a great tree.
I believe this simile largely speaks the truth.
The green and budding twigs may represent existing species; and those produced during each former year may represent the long succession of extinct species.
At each period of growth all the growing twigs have tried to branch out on all sides, and to overtop and kill the surrounding twigs and branches, in the same manner as species and groups of species have tried to overmaster other species in the great battle
The limbs divided into great branches, and these into lesser and lesser branches, were themselves once, when the tree was small, budding twigs; and this connexion of the former and present buds by ramifying branches may well represent the classification of
Of the many twigs which flourished when the tree was a mere bush, only two or three, now grown into great branches, yet survive and bear all the other branches; so with the species which lived during long-past geological periods, very few now have living
From the first growth of the tree, many a limb and branch has decayed and dropped off; and these lost branches of various sizes may represent those whole orders, families, and genera which have now no living representatives, and which are known to us only
As we here and there see a thin straggling branch springing from a fork low down in a tree, and which by some chance has been favoured and is still alive on its summit, so we occasionally see an animal like the Ornithorhynchus or Lepidosiren, which in some
As buds give rise by growth to fresh buds, and these, if vigorous, branch out and overtop on all sides many a feebler branch, so by generation I believe it has been with the great Tree of Life, which fills with its dead and broken branches the crust of the
5.
LAWS OF VARIATION.
Effects of external conditions.
Use and disuse, combined with natural selection; organs of flight and of vision.
Acclimatisation.
Correlation of growth.
Compensation and economy of growth.
False correlations.
Multiple, rudimentary, and lowly organised structures variable.
Parts developed in an unusual manner are highly variable: specific characters more variable than generic: secondary sexual characters variable.
Species of the same genus vary in an analogous manner.
Reversions to long lost characters.
Summary.
I have hitherto sometimes spoken as if the variations--so common and multiform in organic beings under domestication, and in a lesser degree in those in a state of nature--had been due to chance.
This, of course, is a wholly incorrect expression, but it serves to acknowledge plainly our ignorance of the cause of each particular variation.
Some authors believe it to be as much the function of the reproductive system to produce individual differences, or very slight deviations of structure, as to make the child like its parents.
But the much greater variability, as well as the greater frequency of monstrosities, under domestication or cultivation, than under nature, leads me to believe that deviations of structure are in some way due to the nature of the conditions of life, to
I have remarked in the first chapter--but a long catalogue of facts which cannot be here given would be necessary to show the truth of the remark--that the reproductive system is eminently susceptible to changes in the conditions of life; and to this
The male and female sexual elements seem to be affected before that union takes place which is to form a new being.
In the case of "sporting" plants, the bud, which in its earliest condition does not apparently differ essentially from an ovule, is alone affected.
But why, because the reproductive system is disturbed, this or that part should vary more or less, we are profoundly ignorant.
Nevertheless, we can here and there dimly catch a faint ray of light, and we may feel sure that there must be some cause for each deviation of structure, however slight.
How much direct effect difference of climate, food, etc.
, produces on any being is extremely doubtful.
My impression is, that the effect is extremely small in the case of animals, but perhaps rather more in that of plants.
We may, at least, safely conclude that such influences cannot have produced the many striking and complex co-adaptations of structure between one organic being and another, which we see everywhere throughout nature.
Some little influence may be attributed to climate, food, etc.
: thus, E. Forbes speaks confidently that shells at their southern limit, and when living in shallow water, are more brightly coloured than those of the same species further north or from greater depths.
Gould believes that birds of the same species are more brightly coloured under a clear atmosphere, than when living on islands or near the coast.
So with insects, Wollaston is convinced that residence near the sea affects their colours.
Moquin-Tandon gives a list of plants which when growing near the sea-shore have their leaves in some degree fleshy, though not elsewhere fleshy.
Several other such cases could be given.
The fact of varieties of one species, when they range into the zone of habitation of other species, often acquiring in a very slight degree some of the characters of such species, accords with our view that species of all kinds are only well-marked and
Thus the species of shells which are confined to tropical and shallow seas are generally brighter-coloured than those confined to cold and deeper seas.
The birds which are confined to continents are, according to Mr. Gould, brighter-coloured than those of islands.
The insect-species confined to sea-coasts, as every collector knows, are often brassy or lurid.
Plants which live exclusively on the sea-side are very apt to have fleshy leaves.
He who believes in the creation of each species, will have to say that this shell, for instance, was created with bright colours for a warm sea; but that this other shell became bright-coloured by variation when it ranged into warmer or shallower waters.
When a variation is of the slightest use to a being, we cannot tell how much of it to attribute to the accumulative action of natural selection, and how much to the conditions of life.
Thus, it is well known to furriers that animals of the same species have thicker and better fur the more severe the climate is under which they have lived; but who can tell how much of this difference may be due to the warmest-clad individuals having been
for it would appear that climate has some direct action on the hair of our domestic quadrupeds.
Instances could be given of the same variety being produced under conditions of life as different as can well be conceived; and, on the other hand, of different varieties being produced from the same species under the same conditions.
Such facts show how indirectly the conditions of life must act.
Again, innumerable instances are known to every naturalist of species keeping true, or not varying at all, although living under the most opposite climates.
Such considerations as these incline me to lay very little weight on the direct action of the conditions of life.
Indirectly, as already remarked, they seem to play an important part in affecting the reproductive system, and in thus inducing variability; and natural selection will then accumulate all profitable variations, however slight, until they become plainly
EFFECTS OF USE AND DISUSE.
From the facts alluded to in the first chapter, I think there can be little doubt that use in our domestic animals strengthens and enlarges certain parts, and disuse diminishes them; and that such modifications are inherited.
Under free nature, we can have no standard of comparison, by which to judge of the effects of long-continued use or disuse, for we know not the parent-forms; but many animals have structures which can be explained by the effects of disuse.
As Professor Owen has remarked, there is no greater anomaly in nature than a bird that cannot fly; yet there are several in this state.
The logger-headed duck of South America can only flap along the surface of the water, and has its wings in nearly the same condition as the domestic Aylesbury duck.
As the larger ground-feeding birds seldom take flight except to escape danger, I believe that the nearly wingless condition of several birds, which now inhabit or have lately inhabited several oceanic islands, tenanted by no beast of prey, has been caused
The ostrich indeed inhabits continents and is exposed to danger from which it cannot escape by flight, but by kicking it can defend itself from enemies, as well as any of the smaller quadrupeds.
We may imagine that the early progenitor of the ostrich had habits like those of a bustard, and that as natural selection increased in successive generations the size and weight of its body, its legs were used more, and its wings less, until they became
Kirby has remarked (and I have observed the same fact) that the anterior tarsi, or feet, of many male dung-feeding beetles are very often broken off; he examined seventeen specimens in his own collection, and not one had even a relic left.
In the Onites apelles the tarsi are so habitually lost, that the insect has been described as not having them.
In some other genera they are present, but in a rudimentary condition.
In the Ateuchus or sacred beetle of the Egyptians, they are totally deficient.
There is not sufficient evidence to induce us to believe that mutilations are ever inherited; and I should prefer explaining the entire absence of the anterior tarsi in Ateuchus, and their rudimentary condition in some other genera, by the long-continued
In some cases we might easily put down to disuse modifications of structure which are wholly, or mainly, due to natural selection.
Mr. Wollaston has discovered the remarkable fact that 200 beetles, out of the 550 species inhabiting Madeira, are so far deficient in wings that they cannot fly; and that of the twenty-nine endemic genera, no less than twenty-three genera have all their
Several facts, namely, that beetles in many parts of the world are very frequently blown to sea and perish; that the beetles in Madeira, as observed by Mr. Wollaston, lie much concealed, until the wind lulls and the sun shines; that the proportion of
For during thousands of successive generations each individual beetle which flew least, either from its wings having been ever so little less perfectly developed or from indolent habit, will have had the best chance of surviving from not being blown out to
The insects in Madeira which are not ground-feeders, and which, as the flower-feeding coleoptera and lepidoptera, must habitually use their wings to gain their subsistence, have, as Mr. Wollaston suspects, their wings not at all reduced, but even enlarged.
This is quite compatible with the action of natural selection.
For when a new insect first arrived on the island, the tendency of natural selection to enlarge or to reduce the wings, would depend on whether a greater number of individuals were saved by successfully battling with the winds, or by giving up the attempt
As with mariners shipwrecked near a coast, it would have been better for the good swimmers if they had been able to swim still further, whereas it would have been better for the bad swimmers if they had not been able to swim at all and had stuck to the
The eyes of moles and of some burrowing rodents are rudimentary in size, and in some cases are quite covered up by skin and fur.
This state of the eyes is probably due to gradual reduction from disuse, but aided perhaps by natural selection.
In South America, a burrowing rodent, the tuco-tuco, or Ctenomys, is even more subterranean in its habits than the mole; and I was assured by a Spaniard, who had often caught them, that they were frequently blind; one which I kept alive was certainly in
As frequent inflammation of the eyes must be injurious to any animal, and as eyes are certainly not indispensable to animals with subterranean habits, a reduction in their size with the adhesion of the eyelids and growth of fur over them, might in such
It is well known that several animals, belonging to the most different classes, which inhabit the caves of Styria and of Kentucky, are blind.
In some of the crabs the foot-stalk for the eye remains, though the eye is gone; the stand for the telescope is there, though the telescope with its glasses has been lost.
As it is difficult to imagine that eyes, though useless, could be in any way injurious to animals living in darkness, I attribute their loss wholly to disuse.
In one of the blind animals, namely, the cave-rat, the eyes are of immense size; and Professor Silliman thought that it regained, after living some days in the light, some slight power of vision.
In the same manner as in Madeira the wings of some of the insects have been enlarged, and the wings of others have been reduced by natural selection aided by use and disuse, so in the case of the cave-rat natural selection seems to have struggled with the
It is difficult to imagine conditions of life more similar than deep limestone caverns under a nearly similar climate; so that on the common view of the blind animals having been separately created for the American and European caverns, close similarity in
On my view we must suppose that American animals, having ordinary powers of vision, slowly migrated by successive generations from the outer world into the deeper and deeper recesses of the Kentucky caves, as did European animals into the caves of Europe.
We have some evidence of this gradation of habit; for, as Schiodte remarks, "animals not far remote from ordinary forms, prepare the transition from light to darkness.
Next follow those that are constructed for twilight; and, last of all, those destined for total darkness".
By the time that an animal had reached, after numberless generations, the deepest recesses, disuse will on this view have more or less perfectly obliterated its eyes, and natural selection will often have effected other changes, such as an increase in the
Notwithstanding such modifications, we might expect still to see in the cave-animals of America, affinities to the other inhabitants of that continent, and in those of Europe, to the inhabitants of the European continent.
And this is the case with some of the American cave-animals, as I hear from Professor Dana; and some of the European cave-insects are very closely allied to those of the surrounding country.
It would be most difficult to give any rational explanation of the affinities of the blind cave-animals to the other inhabitants of the two continents on the ordinary view of their independent creation.
That several of the inhabitants of the caves of the Old and New Worlds should be closely related, we might expect from the well-known relationship of most of their other productions.
Far from feeling any surprise that some of the cave-animals should be very anomalous, as Agassiz has remarked in regard to the blind fish, the Amblyopsis, and as is the case with the blind Proteus with reference to the reptiles of Europe, I am only
ACCLIMATISATION.
Habit is hereditary with plants, as in the period of flowering, in the amount of rain requisite for seeds to germinate, in the time of sleep, etc.
, and this leads me to say a few words on acclimatisation.
As it is extremely common for species of the same genus to inhabit very hot and very cold countries, and as I believe that all the species of the same genus have descended from a single parent, if this view be correct, acclimatisation must be readily
It is notorious that each species is adapted to the climate of its own home: species from an arctic or even from a temperate region cannot endure a tropical climate, or conversely.
So again, many succulent plants cannot endure a damp climate.
But the degree of adaptation of species to the climates under which they live is often overrated.
We may infer this from our frequent inability to predict whether or not an imported plant will endure our climate, and from the number of plants and animals brought from warmer countries which here enjoy good health.
We have reason to believe that species in a state of nature are limited in their ranges by the competition of other organic beings quite as much as, or more than, by adaptation to particular climates.
But whether or not the adaptation be generally very close, we have evidence, in the case of some few plants, of their becoming, to a certain extent, naturally habituated to different temperatures, or becoming acclimatised: thus the pines and rhododendrons,
Mr. Thwaites informs me that he has observed similar facts in Ceylon, and analogous observations have been made by Mr. H. C. Watson on European species of plants brought from the Azores to England.
In regard to animals, several authentic cases could be given of species within historical times having largely extended their range from warmer to cooler latitudes, and conversely; but we do not positively know that these animals were strictly adapted to
As I believe that our domestic animals were originally chosen by uncivilised man because they were useful and bred readily under confinement, and not because they were subsequently found capable of far-extended transportation, I think the common and
We must not, however, push the foregoing argument too far, on account of the probable origin of some of our domestic animals from several wild stocks: the blood, for instance, of a tropical and arctic wolf or wild dog may perhaps be mingled in our domestic
The rat and mouse cannot be considered as domestic animals, but they have been transported by man to many parts of the world, and now have a far wider range than any other rodent, living free under the cold climate of Faroe in the north and of the
Hence I am inclined to look at adaptation to any special climate as a quality readily grafted on an innate wide flexibility of constitution, which is common to most animals.
On this view, the capacity of enduring the most different climates by man himself and by his domestic animals, and such facts as that former species of the elephant and rhinoceros were capable of enduring a glacial climate, whereas the living species are
How much of the acclimatisation of species to any peculiar climate is due to mere habit, and how much to the natural selection of varieties having different innate constitutions, and how much to both means combined, is a very obscure question.
That habit or custom has some influence I must believe, both from analogy, and from the incessant advice given in agricultural works, even in the ancient Encyclopaedias of China, to be very cautious in transposing animals from one district to another; for
On the other hand, I can see no reason to doubt that natural selection will continually tend to preserve those individuals which are born with constitutions best adapted to their native countries.
In treatises on many kinds of cultivated plants, certain varieties are said to withstand certain climates better than others: this is very strikingly shown in works on fruit trees published in the United States, in which certain varieties are habitually
The case of the Jerusalem artichoke, which is never propagated by seed, and of which consequently new varieties have not been produced, has even been advanced--for it is now as tender as ever it was--as proving that acclimatisation cannot be effected!
The case, also, of the kidney-bean has been often cited for a similar purpose, and with much greater weight; but until some one will sow, during a score of generations, his kidney-beans so early that a very large proportion are destroyed by frost, and then
Nor let it be supposed that no differences in the constitution of seedling kidney-beans ever appear, for an account has been published how much more hardy some seedlings appeared to be than others.
On the whole, I think we may conclude that habit, use, and disuse, have, in some cases, played a considerable part in the modification of the constitution, and of the structure of various organs; but that the effects of use and disuse have often been
CORRELATION OF GROWTH.
I mean by this expression that the whole organisation is so tied together during its growth and development, that when slight variations in any one part occur, and are accumulated through natural selection, other parts become modified.
This is a very important subject, most imperfectly understood.
The most obvious case is, that modifications accumulated solely for the good of the young or larva, will, it may safely be concluded, affect the structure of the adult; in the same manner as any malconformation affecting the early embryo, seriously affects
The several parts of the body which are homologous, and which, at an early embryonic period, are alike, seem liable to vary in an allied manner: we see this in the right and left sides of the body varying in the same manner; in the front and hind legs, and
These tendencies, I do not doubt, may be mastered more or less completely by natural selection: thus a family of stags once existed with an antler only on one side; and if this had been of any great use to the breed it might probably have been rendered
Homologous parts, as has been remarked by some authors, tend to cohere; this is often seen in monstrous plants; and nothing is more common than the union of homologous parts in normal structures, as the union of the petals of the corolla into a tube.
Hard parts seem to affect the form of adjoining soft parts; it is believed by some authors that the diversity in the shape of the pelvis in birds causes the remarkable diversity in the shape of their kidneys.
Others believe that the shape of the pelvis in the human mother influences by pressure the shape of the head of the child.
In snakes, according to Schlegel, the shape of the body and the manner of swallowing determine the position of several of the most important viscera.
The nature of the bond of correlation is very frequently quite obscure.
M. Is.
Geoffroy St. Hilaire has forcibly remarked, that certain malconformations very frequently, and that others rarely coexist, without our being able to assign any reason.
What can be more singular than the relation between blue eyes and deafness in cats, and the tortoise-shell colour with the female sex; the feathered feet and skin between the outer toes in pigeons, and the presence of more or less down on the young birds
With respect to this latter case of correlation, I think it can hardly be accidental, that if we pick out the two orders of mammalia which are most abnormal in their dermal coverings, viz.
Cetacea (whales) and Edentata (armadilloes, scaly ant-eaters, etc.
), that these are likewise the most abnormal in their teeth.
I know of no case better adapted to show the importance of the laws of correlation in modifying important structures, independently of utility and, therefore, of natural selection, than that of the difference between the outer and inner flowers in some
Every one knows the difference in the ray and central florets of, for instance, the daisy, and this difference is often accompanied with the abortion of parts of the flower.
But, in some Compositous plants, the seeds also differ in shape and sculpture; and even the ovary itself, with its accessory parts, differs, as has been described by Cassini.
These differences have been attributed by some authors to pressure, and the shape of the seeds in the ray-florets in some Compositae countenances this idea; but, in the case of the corolla of the Umbelliferae, it is by no means, as Dr. Hooker informs me,
It might have been thought that the development of the ray-petals by drawing nourishment from certain other parts of the flower had caused their abortion; but in some Compositae there is a difference in the seeds of the outer and inner florets without any
Possibly, these several differences may be connected with some difference in the flow of nutriment towards the central and external flowers: we know, at least, that in irregular flowers, those nearest to the axis are oftenest subject to peloria, and become
I may add, as an instance of this, and of a striking case of correlation, that I have recently observed in some garden pelargoniums, that the central flower of the truss often loses the patches of darker colour in the two upper petals; and that when this
With respect to the difference in the corolla of the central and exterior flowers of a head or umbel, I do not feel at all sure that C. C. Sprengel's idea that the ray-florets serve to attract insects, whose agency is highly advantageous in the
But in regard to the differences both in the internal and external structure of the seeds, which are not always correlated with any differences in the flowers, it seems impossible that they can be in any way advantageous to the plant: yet in the
Hence we see that modifications of structure, viewed by systematists as of high value, may be wholly due to unknown laws of correlated growth, and without being, as far as we can see, of the slightest service to the species.
We may often falsely attribute to correlation of growth, structures which are common to whole groups of species, and which in truth are simply due to inheritance; for an ancient progenitor may have acquired through natural selection some one modification
So, again, I do not doubt that some apparent correlations, occurring throughout whole orders, are entirely due to the manner alone in which natural selection can act.
For instance, Alph.
De Candolle has remarked that winged seeds are never found in fruits which do not open: I should explain the rule by the fact that seeds could not gradually become winged through natural selection, except in fruits which opened; so that the individual
The elder Geoffroy and Goethe propounded, at about the same period, their law of compensation or balancement of growth; or, as Goethe expressed it, "in order to spend on one side, nature is forced to economise on the other side".
I think this holds true to a certain extent with our domestic productions: if nourishment flows to one part or organ in excess, it rarely flows, at least in excess, to another part; thus it is difficult to get a cow to give much milk and to fatten readily.
The same varieties of the cabbage do not yield abundant and nutritious foliage and a copious supply of oil-bearing seeds.
When the seeds in our fruits become atrophied, the fruit itself gains largely in size and quality.
In our poultry, a large tuft of feathers on the head is generally accompanied by a diminished comb, and a large beard by diminished wattles.
With species in a state of nature it can hardly be maintained that the law is of universal application; but many good observers, more especially botanists, believe in its truth.
I will not, however, here give any instances, for I see hardly any way of distinguishing between the effects, on the one hand, of a part being largely developed through natural selection and another and adjoining part being reduced by this same process or
I suspect, also, that some of the cases of compensation which have been advanced, and likewise some other facts, may be merged under a more general principle, namely, that natural selection is continually trying to economise in every part of the
If under changed conditions of life a structure before useful becomes less useful, any diminution, however slight, in its development, will be seized on by natural selection, for it will profit the individual not to have its nutriment wasted in building up
I can thus only understand a fact with which I was much struck when examining cirripedes, and of which many other instances could be given: namely, that when a cirripede is parasitic within another and is thus protected, it loses more or less completely
This is the case with the male Ibla, and in a truly extraordinary manner with the Proteolepas: for the carapace in all other cirripedes consists of the three highly-important anterior segments of the head enormously developed, and furnished with great
Now the saving of a large and complex structure, when rendered superfluous by the parasitic habits of the Proteolepas, though effected by slow steps, would be a decided advantage to each successive individual of the species; for in the struggle for life to
Thus, as I believe, natural selection will always succeed in the long run in reducing and saving every part of the organisation, as soon as it is rendered superfluous, without by any means causing some other part to be largely developed in a corresponding
And, conversely, that natural selection may perfectly well succeed in largely developing any organ, without requiring as a necessary compensation the reduction of some adjoining part.
It seems to be a rule, as remarked by Is.
Geoffroy St. Hilaire, both in varieties and in species, that when any part or organ is repeated many times in the structure of the same individual (as the vertebrae in snakes, and the stamens in polyandrous flowers) the number is variable; whereas the
The same author and some botanists have further remarked that multiple parts are also very liable to variation in structure.
Inasmuch as this "vegetative repetition," to use Professor Owen's expression, seems to be a sign of low organisation; the foregoing remark seems connected with the very general opinion of naturalists, that beings low in the scale of nature are more
I presume that lowness in this case means that the several parts of the organisation have been but little specialised for particular functions; and as long as the same part has to perform diversified work, we can perhaps see why it should remain variable,
In the same way that a knife which has to cut all sorts of things may be of almost any shape; whilst a tool for some particular object had better be of some particular shape.
Natural selection, it should never be forgotten, can act on each part of each being, solely through and for its advantage.
Rudimentary parts, it has been stated by some authors, and I believe with truth, are apt to be highly variable.
We shall have to recur to the general subject of rudimentary and aborted organs; and I will here only add that their variability seems to be owing to their uselessness, and therefore to natural selection having no power to check deviations in their
Thus rudimentary parts are left to the free play of the various laws of growth, to the effects of long-continued disuse, and to the tendency to reversion.
A PART DEVELOPED IN ANY SPECIES IN AN EXTRAORDINARY DEGREE OR MANNER, IN COMPARISON WITH THE SAME PART IN ALLIED SPECIES, TENDS TO BE HIGHLY VARIABLE.
Several years ago I was much struck with a remark, nearly to the above effect, published by Mr. Waterhouse.
I infer also from an observation made by Professor Owen, with respect to the length of the arms of the ourang-outang, that he has come to a nearly similar conclusion.
It is hopeless to attempt to convince any one of the truth of this proposition without giving the long array of facts which I have collected, and which cannot possibly be here introduced.
I can only state my conviction that it is a rule of high generality.
I am aware of several causes of error, but I hope that I have made due allowance for them.
It should be understood that the rule by no means applies to any part, however unusually developed, unless it be unusually developed in comparison with the same part in closely allied species.
Thus, the bat's wing is a most abnormal structure in the class mammalia; but the rule would not here apply, because there is a whole group of bats having wings; it would apply only if some one species of bat had its wings developed in some remarkable
The rule applies very strongly in the case of secondary sexual characters, when displayed in any unusual manner.
The term, secondary sexual characters, used by Hunter, applies to characters which are attached to one sex, but are not directly connected with the act of reproduction.
The rule applies to males and females; but as females more rarely offer remarkable secondary sexual characters, it applies more rarely to them.
The rule being so plainly applicable in the case of secondary sexual characters, may be due to the great variability of these characters, whether or not displayed in any unusual manner--of which fact I think there can be little doubt.
But that our rule is not confined to secondary sexual characters is clearly shown in the case of hermaphrodite cirripedes; and I may here add, that I particularly attended to Mr. Waterhouse's remark, whilst investigating this Order, and I am fully
I shall, in my future work, give a list of the more remarkable cases; I will here only briefly give one, as it illustrates the rule in its largest application.
The opercular valves of sessile cirripedes (rock barnacles) are, in every sense of the word, very important structures, and they differ extremely little even in different genera; but in the several species of one genus, Pyrgoma, these valves present a
As birds within the same country vary in a remarkably small degree, I have particularly attended to them, and the rule seems to me certainly to hold good in this class.
I cannot make out that it applies to plants, and this would seriously have shaken my belief in its truth, had not the great variability in plants made it particularly difficult to compare their relative degrees of variability.
When we see any part or organ developed in a remarkable degree or manner in any species, the fair presumption is that it is of high importance to that species; nevertheless the part in this case is eminently liable to variation.
Why should this be so?
On the view that each species has been independently created, with all its parts as we now see them, I can see no explanation.
But on the view that groups of species have descended from other species, and have been modified through natural selection, I think we can obtain some light.
In our domestic animals, if any part, or the whole animal, be neglected and no selection be applied, that part (for instance, the comb in the Dorking fowl) or the whole breed will cease to have a nearly uniform character.
The breed will then be said to have degenerated.
In rudimentary organs, and in those which have been but little specialised for any particular purpose, and perhaps in polymorphic groups, we see a nearly parallel natural case; for in such cases natural selection either has not or cannot come into full
But what here more especially concerns us is, that in our domestic animals those points, which at the present time are undergoing rapid change by continued selection, are also eminently liable to variation.
Look at the breeds of the pigeon; see what a prodigious amount of difference there is in the beak of the different tumblers, in the beak and wattle of the different carriers, in the carriage and tail of our fantails, etc.
, these being the points now mainly attended to by English fanciers.
Even in the sub-breeds, as in the short-faced tumbler, it is notoriously difficult to breed them nearly to perfection, and frequently individuals are born which depart widely from the standard.
There may be truly said to be a constant struggle going on between, on the one hand, the tendency to reversion to a less modified state, as well as an innate tendency to further variability of all kinds, and, on the other hand, the power of steady
In the long run selection gains the day, and we do not expect to fail so far as to breed a bird as coarse as a common tumbler from a good short-faced strain.
But as long as selection is rapidly going on, there may always be expected to be much variability in the structure undergoing modification.
It further deserves notice that these variable characters, produced by man's selection, sometimes become attached, from causes quite unknown to us, more to one sex than to the other, generally to the male sex, as with the wattle of carriers and the
Now let us turn to nature.
When a part has been developed in an extraordinary manner in any one species, compared with the other species of the same genus, we may conclude that this part has undergone an extraordinary amount of modification, since the period when the species
This period will seldom be remote in any extreme degree, as species very rarely endure for more than one geological period.
An extraordinary amount of modification implies an unusually large and long-continued amount of variability, which has continually been accumulated by natural selection for the benefit of the species.
But as the variability of the extraordinarily-developed part or organ has been so great and long-continued within a period not excessively remote, we might, as a general rule, expect still to find more variability in such parts than in other parts of the
And this, I am convinced, is the case.
That the struggle between natural selection on the one hand, and the tendency to reversion and variability on the other hand, will in the course of time cease; and that the most abnormally developed organs may be made constant, I can see no reason to
Hence when an organ, however abnormal it may be, has been transmitted in approximately the same condition to many modified descendants, as in the case of the wing of the bat, it must have existed, according to my theory, for an immense period in nearly the
It is only in those cases in which the modification has been comparatively recent and extraordinarily great that we ought to find the GENERATIVE VARIABILITY, as it may be called, still present in a high degree.
For in this case the variability will seldom as yet have been fixed by the continued selection of the individuals varying in the required manner and degree, and by the continued rejection of those tending to revert to a former and less modified condition.
The principle included in these remarks may be extended.
It is notorious that specific characters are more variable than generic.
To explain by a simple example what is meant.
If some species in a large genus of plants had blue flowers and some had red, the colour would be only a specific character, and no one would be surprised at one of the blue species varying into red, or conversely; but if all the species had blue flowers,
I have chosen this example because an explanation is not in this case applicable, which most naturalists would advance, namely, that specific characters are more variable than generic, because they are taken from parts of less physiological importance than
I believe this explanation is partly, yet only indirectly, true; I shall, however, have to return to this subject in our chapter on Classification.
It would be almost superfluous to adduce evidence in support of the above statement, that specific characters are more variable than generic; but I have repeatedly noticed in works on natural history, that when an author has remarked with surprise that
And this fact shows that a character, which is generally of generic value, when it sinks in value and becomes only of specific value, often becomes variable, though its physiological importance may remain the same.
Something of the same kind applies to monstrosities: at least Is.
Geoffroy St. Hilaire seems to entertain no doubt, that the more an organ normally differs in the different species of the same group, the more subject it is to individual anomalies.
On the ordinary view of each species having been independently created, why should that part of the structure, which differs from the same part in other independently-created species of the same genus, be more variable than those parts which are closely
I do not see that any explanation can be given.
But on the view of species being only strongly marked and fixed varieties, we might surely expect to find them still often continuing to vary in those parts of their structure which have varied within a moderately recent period, and which have thus come to
Or to state the case in another manner:--the points in which all the species of a genus resemble each other, and in which they differ from the species of some other genus, are called generic characters; and these characters in common I attribute to
On the other hand, the points in which species differ from other species of the same genus, are called specific characters; and as these specific characters have varied and come to differ within the period of the branching off of the species from a common
In connexion with the present subject, I will make only two other remarks.
I think it will be admitted, without my entering on details, that secondary sexual characters are very variable; I think it also will be admitted that species of the same group differ from each other more widely in their secondary sexual characters, than
The cause of the original variability of secondary sexual characters is not manifest; but we can see why these characters should not have been rendered as constant and uniform as other parts of the organisation; for secondary sexual characters have been
Whatever the cause may be of the variability of secondary sexual characters, as they are highly variable, sexual selection will have had a wide scope for action, and may thus readily have succeeded in giving to the species of the same group a greater
It is a remarkable fact, that the secondary sexual differences between the two sexes of the same species are generally displayed in the very same parts of the organisation in which the different species of the same genus differ from each other.
Of this fact I will give in illustration two instances, the first which happen to stand on my list; and as the differences in these cases are of a very unusual nature, the relation can hardly be accidental.
The same number of joints in the tarsi is a character generally common to very large groups of beetles, but in the Engidae, as Westwood has remarked, the number varies greatly; and the number likewise differs in the two sexes of the same species: again in
This relation has a clear meaning on my view of the subject: I look at all the species of the same genus as having as certainly descended from the same progenitor, as have the two sexes of any one of the species.
Consequently, whatever part of the structure of the common progenitor, or of its early descendants, became variable; variations of this part would it is highly probable, be taken advantage of by natural and sexual selection, in order to fit the several
Finally, then, I conclude that the greater variability of specific characters, or those which distinguish species from species, than of generic characters, or those which the species possess in common;--that the frequent extreme variability of any part
All being mainly due to the species of the same group having descended from a common progenitor, from whom they have inherited much in common,--to parts which have recently and largely varied being more likely still to go on varying than parts which have
DISTINCT SPECIES PRESENT ANALOGOUS VARIATIONS; AND A VARIETY OF ONE SPECIES OFTEN ASSUMES SOME OF THE CHARACTERS OF AN ALLIED SPECIES, OR REVERTS TO SOME OF THE CHARACTERS OF AN EARLY PROGENITOR.
These propositions will be most readily understood by looking to our domestic races.
The most distinct breeds of pigeons, in countries most widely apart, present sub-varieties with reversed feathers on the head and feathers on the feet,--characters not possessed by the aboriginal rock-pigeon; these then are analogous variations in two or
The frequent presence of fourteen or even sixteen tail-feathers in the pouter, may be considered as a variation representing the normal structure of another race, the fantail.
I presume that no one will doubt that all such analogous variations are due to the several races of the pigeon having inherited from a common parent the same constitution and tendency to variation, when acted on by similar unknown influences.
In the vegetable kingdom we have a case of analogous variation, in the enlarged stems, or roots as commonly called, of the Swedish turnip and Ruta baga, plants which several botanists rank as varieties produced by cultivation from a common parent: if this
According to the ordinary view of each species having been independently created, we should have to attribute this similarity in the enlarged stems of these three plants, not to the vera causa of community of descent, and a consequent tendency to vary in a
With pigeons, however, we have another case, namely, the occasional appearance in all the breeds, of slaty-blue birds with two black bars on the wings, a white rump, a bar at the end of the tail, with the outer feathers externally edged near their bases
As all these marks are characteristic of the parent rock-pigeon, I presume that no one will doubt that this is a case of reversion, and not of a new yet analogous variation appearing in the several breeds.
We may I think confidently come to this conclusion, because, as we have seen, these coloured marks are eminently liable to appear in the crossed offspring of two distinct and differently coloured breeds; and in this case there is nothing in the external
No doubt it is a very surprising fact that characters should reappear after having been lost for many, perhaps for hundreds of generations.
But when a breed has been crossed only once by some other breed, the offspring occasionally show a tendency to revert in character to the foreign breed for many generations--some say, for a dozen or even a score of generations.
After twelve generations, the proportion of blood, to use a common expression, of any one ancestor, is only 1 in 2048; and yet, as we see, it is generally believed that a tendency to reversion is retained by this very small proportion of foreign blood.
In a breed which has not been crossed, but in which BOTH parents have lost some character which their progenitor possessed, the tendency, whether strong or weak, to reproduce the lost character might be, as was formerly remarked, for all that we can see to
When a character which has been lost in a breed, reappears after a great number of generations, the most probable hypothesis is, not that the offspring suddenly takes after an ancestor some hundred generations distant, but that in each successive
For instance, it is probable that in each generation of the barb-pigeon, which produces most rarely a blue and black-barred bird, there has been a tendency in each generation in the plumage to assume this colour.
This view is hypothetical, but could be supported by some facts; and I can see no more abstract improbability in a tendency to produce any character being inherited for an endless number of generations, than in quite useless or rudimentary organs being, as
Indeed, we may sometimes observe a mere tendency to produce a rudiment inherited: for instance, in the common snapdragon (Antirrhinum) a rudiment of a fifth stamen so often appears, that this plant must have an inherited tendency to produce it.
As all the species of the same genus are supposed, on my theory, to have descended from a common parent, it might be expected that they would occasionally vary in an analogous manner; so that a variety of one species would resemble in some of its
But characters thus gained would probably be of an unimportant nature, for the presence of all important characters will be governed by natural selection, in accordance with the diverse habits of the species, and will not be left to the mutual action of
It might further be expected that the species of the same genus would occasionally exhibit reversions to lost ancestral characters.
As, however, we never know the exact character of the common ancestor of a group, we could not distinguish these two cases: if, for instance, we did not know that the rock-pigeon was not feather-footed or turn-crowned, we could not have told, whether these
More especially we might have inferred this, from the blue colour and marks so often appearing when distinct breeds of diverse colours are crossed.
Hence, though under nature it must generally be left doubtful, what cases are reversions to an anciently existing character, and what are new but analogous variations, yet we ought, on my theory, sometimes to find the varying offspring of a species
And this undoubtedly is the case in nature.
A considerable part of the difficulty in recognising a variable species in our systematic works, is due to its varieties mocking, as it were, some of the other species of the same genus.
A considerable catalogue, also, could be given of forms intermediate between two other forms, which themselves must be doubtfully ranked as either varieties or species; and this shows, unless all these forms be considered as independently created species,
But the best evidence is afforded by parts or organs of an important and uniform nature occasionally varying so as to acquire, in some degree, the character of the same part or organ in an allied species.
I have collected a long list of such cases; but here, as before, I lie under a great disadvantage in not being able to give them.
I can only repeat that such cases certainly do occur, and seem to me very remarkable.
I will, however, give one curious and complex case, not indeed as affecting any important character, but from occurring in several species of the same genus, partly under domestication and partly under nature.
It is a case apparently of reversion.
The ass not rarely has very distinct transverse bars on its legs, like those on the legs of a zebra: it has been asserted that these are plainest in the foal, and from inquiries which I have made, I believe this to be true.
It has also been asserted that the stripe on each shoulder is sometimes double.
The shoulder stripe is certainly very variable in length and outline.
A white ass, but NOT an albino, has been described without either spinal or shoulder-stripe; and these stripes are sometimes very obscure, or actually quite lost, in dark-coloured asses.
The koulan of Pallas is said to have been seen with a double shoulder-stripe.
The hemionus has no shoulder-stripe; but traces of it, as stated by Mr. Blyth and others, occasionally appear: and I have been informed by Colonel Poole that the foals of this species are generally striped on the legs, and faintly on the shoulder.
The quagga, though so plainly barred like a zebra over the body, is without bars on the legs; but Dr. Gray has figured one specimen with very distinct zebra-like bars on the hocks.
With respect to the horse, I have collected cases in England of the spinal stripe in horses of the most distinct breeds, and of ALL colours; transverse bars on the legs are not rare in duns, mouse-duns, and in one instance in a chestnut: a faint
My son made a careful examination and sketch for me of a dun Belgian cart-horse with a double stripe on each shoulder and with leg-stripes; and a man, whom I can implicitly trust, has examined for me a small dun Welch pony with THREE short parallel stripes
In the north-west part of India the Kattywar breed of horses is so generally striped, that, as I hear from Colonel Poole, who examined the breed for the Indian Government, a horse without stripes is not considered as purely-bred.
The spine is always striped; the legs are generally barred; and the shoulder-stripe, which is sometimes double and sometimes treble, is common; the side of the face, moreover, is sometimes striped.
The stripes are plainest in the foal; and sometimes quite disappear in old horses.
Colonel Poole has seen both gray and bay Kattywar horses striped when first foaled.
I have, also, reason to suspect, from information given me by Mr. W. W. Edwards, that with the English race-horse the spinal stripe is much commoner in the foal than in the full-grown animal.
Without here entering on further details, I may state that I have collected cases of leg and shoulder stripes in horses of very different breeds, in various countries from Britain to Eastern China; and from Norway in the north to the Malay Archipelago in
In all parts of the world these stripes occur far oftenest in duns and mouse-duns; by the term dun a large range of colour is included, from one between brown and black to a close approach to cream-colour.
I am aware that Colonel Hamilton Smith, who has written on this subject, believes that the several breeds of the horse have descended from several aboriginal species--one of which, the dun, was striped; and that the above-described appearances are all due
But I am not at all satisfied with this theory, and should be loth to apply it to breeds so distinct as the heavy Belgian cart-horse, Welch ponies, cobs, the lanky Kattywar race, etc.
, inhabiting the most distant parts of the world.
Now let us turn to the effects of crossing the several species of the horse-genus.
Rollin asserts, that the common mule from the ass and horse is particularly apt to have bars on its legs.
I once saw a mule with its legs so much striped that any one at first would have thought that it must have been the product of a zebra; and Mr. W. C. Martin, in his excellent treatise on the horse, has given a figure of a similar mule.
In four coloured drawings, which I have seen, of hybrids between the ass and zebra, the legs were much more plainly barred than the rest of the body; and in one of them there was a double shoulder-stripe.
In Lord Moreton's famous hybrid from a chestnut mare and male quagga, the hybrid, and even the pure offspring subsequently produced from the mare by a black Arabian sire, were much more plainly barred across the legs than is even the pure quagga.
Lastly, and this is another most remarkable case, a hybrid has been figured by Dr. Gray (and he informs me that he knows of a second case) from the ass and the hemionus; and this hybrid, though the ass seldom has stripes on its legs and the hemionus has
With respect to this last fact, I was so convinced that not even a stripe of colour appears from what would commonly be called an accident, that I was led solely from the occurrence of the face-stripes on this hybrid from the ass and hemionus, to ask
What now are we to say to these several facts?
We see several very distinct species of the horse-genus becoming, by simple variation, striped on the legs like a zebra, or striped on the shoulders like an ass.
In the horse we see this tendency strong whenever a dun tint appears--a tint which approaches to that of the general colouring of the other species of the genus.
The appearance of the stripes is not accompanied by any change of form or by any other new character.
We see this tendency to become striped most strongly displayed in hybrids from between several of the most distinct species.
Now observe the case of the several breeds of pigeons: they are descended from a pigeon (including two or three sub-species or geographical races) of a bluish colour, with certain bars and other marks; and when any breed assumes by simple variation a
When the oldest and truest breeds of various colours are crossed, we see a strong tendency for the blue tint and bars and marks to reappear in the mongrels.
I have stated that the most probable hypothesis to account for the reappearance of very ancient characters, is--that there is a TENDENCY in the young of each successive generation to produce the long-lost character, and that this tendency, from unknown
And we have just seen that in several species of the horse-genus the stripes are either plainer or appear more commonly in the young than in the old.
Call the breeds of pigeons, some of which have bred true for centuries, species; and how exactly parallel is the case with that of the species of the horse-genus!
For myself, I venture confidently to look back thousands on thousands of generations, and I see an animal striped like a zebra, but perhaps otherwise very differently constructed, the common parent of our domestic horse, whether or not it be descended from
He who believes that each equine species was independently created, will, I presume, assert that each species has been created with a tendency to vary, both under nature and under domestication, in this particular manner, so as often to become striped like
To admit this view is, as it seems to me, to reject a real for an unreal, or at least for an unknown, cause.
It makes the works of God a mere mockery and deception; I would almost as soon believe with the old and ignorant cosmogonists, that fossil shells had never lived, but had been created in stone so as to mock the shells now living on the sea-shore.
SUMMARY.
Our ignorance of the laws of variation is profound.
Not in one case out of a hundred can we pretend to assign any reason why this or that part differs, more or less, from the same part in the parents.
But whenever we have the means of instituting a comparison, the same laws appear to have acted in producing the lesser differences between varieties of the same species, and the greater differences between species of the same genus.
The external conditions of life, as climate and food, etc.
, seem to have induced some slight modifications.
Habit in producing constitutional differences, and use in strengthening, and disuse in weakening and diminishing organs, seem to have been more potent in their effects.
Homologous parts tend to vary in the same way, and homologous parts tend to cohere.
Modifications in hard parts and in external parts sometimes affect softer and internal parts.
When one part is largely developed, perhaps it tends to draw nourishment from the adjoining parts; and every part of the structure which can be saved without detriment to the individual, will be saved.
Changes of structure at an early age will generally affect parts subsequently developed; and there are very many other correlations of growth, the nature of which we are utterly unable to understand.
Multiple parts are variable in number and in structure, perhaps arising from such parts not having been closely specialised to any particular function, so that their modifications have not been closely checked by natural selection.
It is probably from this same cause that organic beings low in the scale of nature are more variable than those which have their whole organisation more specialised, and are higher in the scale.
Rudimentary organs, from being useless, will be disregarded by natural selection, and hence probably are variable.
Specific characters--that is, the characters which have come to differ since the several species of the same genus branched off from a common parent--are more variable than generic characters, or those which have long been inherited, and have not differed
In these remarks we have referred to special parts or organs being still variable, because they have recently varied and thus come to differ; but we have also seen in the second Chapter that the same principle applies to the whole individual; for in a
Secondary sexual characters are highly variable, and such characters differ much in the species of the same group.
Variability in the same parts of the organisation has generally been taken advantage of in giving secondary sexual differences to the sexes of the same species, and specific differences to the several species of the same genus.
Any part or organ developed to an extraordinary size or in an extraordinary manner, in comparison with the same part or organ in the allied species, must have gone through an extraordinary amount of modification since the genus arose; and thus we can
But when a species with any extraordinarily-developed organ has become the parent of many modified descendants--which on my view must be a very slow process, requiring a long lapse of time--in this case, natural selection may readily have succeeded in
Species inheriting nearly the same constitution from a common parent and exposed to similar influences will naturally tend to present analogous variations, and these same species may occasionally revert to some of the characters of their ancient
Although new and important modifications may not arise from reversion and analogous variation, such modifications will add to the beautiful and harmonious diversity of nature.
Whatever the cause may be of each slight difference in the offspring from their parents--and a cause for each must exist--it is the steady accumulation, through natural selection, of such differences, when beneficial to the individual, that gives rise to
6.
DIFFICULTIES ON THEORY.
Difficulties on the theory of descent with modification.
Transitions.
Absence or rarity of transitional varieties.
Transitions in habits of life.
Diversified habits in the same species.
Species with habits widely different from those of their allies.
Organs of extreme perfection.
Means of transition.
Cases of difficulty.
Natura non facit saltum.
Organs of small importance.
Organs not in all cases absolutely perfect.
The law of Unity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence embraced by the theory of Natural Selection.
Long before having arrived at this part of my work, a crowd of difficulties will have occurred to the reader.
Some of them are so grave that to this day I can never reflect on them without being staggered; but, to the best of my judgment, the greater number are only apparent, and those that are real are not, I think, fatal to my theory.
These difficulties and objections may be classed under the following heads:-- Firstly, why, if species have descended from other species by insensibly fine gradations, do we not everywhere see innumerable transitional forms?
Why is not all nature in confusion instead of the species being, as we see them, well defined?
Secondly, is it possible that an animal having, for instance, the structure and habits of a bat, could have been formed by the modification of some animal with wholly different habits?
Can we believe that natural selection could produce, on the one hand, organs of trifling importance, such as the tail of a giraffe, which serves as a fly-flapper, and, on the other hand, organs of such wonderful structure, as the eye, of which we hardly as
Thirdly, can instincts be acquired and modified through natural selection?
What shall we say to so marvellous an instinct as that which leads the bee to make cells, which have practically anticipated the discoveries of profound mathematicians?
Fourthly, how can we account for species, when crossed, being sterile and producing sterile offspring, whereas, when varieties are crossed, their fertility is unimpaired?
The two first heads shall be here discussed--Instinct and Hybridism in separate chapters.
ON THE ABSENCE OR RARITY OF TRANSITIONAL VARIETIES.
As natural selection acts solely by the preservation of profitable modifications, each new form will tend in a fully-stocked country to take the place of, and finally to exterminate, its own less improved parent or other less-favoured forms with which it
Thus extinction and natural selection will, as we have seen, go hand in hand.
Hence, if we look at each species as descended from some other unknown form, both the parent and all the transitional varieties will generally have been exterminated by the very process of formation and perfection of the new form.
But, as by this theory innumerable transitional forms must have existed, why do we not find them embedded in countless numbers in the crust of the earth?
It will be much more convenient to discuss this question in the chapter on the Imperfection of the geological record; and I will here only state that I believe the answer mainly lies in the record being incomparably less perfect than is generally supposed;
These contingencies will concur only rarely, and after enormously long intervals.
Whilst the bed of the sea is stationary or is rising, or when very little sediment is being deposited, there will be blanks in our geological history.
The crust of the earth is a vast museum; but the natural collections have been made only at intervals of time immensely remote.
But it may be urged that when several closely-allied species inhabit the same territory we surely ought to find at the present time many transitional forms.
Let us take a simple case: in travelling from north to south over a continent, we generally meet at successive intervals with closely allied or representative species, evidently filling nearly the same place in the natural economy of the land.
These representative species often meet and interlock; and as the one becomes rarer and rarer, the other becomes more and more frequent, till the one replaces the other.
But if we compare these species where they intermingle, they are generally as absolutely distinct from each other in every detail of structure as are specimens taken from the metropolis inhabited by each.
By my theory these allied species have descended from a common parent; and during the process of modification, each has become adapted to the conditions of life of its own region, and has supplanted and exterminated its original parent and all the
Hence we ought not to expect at the present time to meet with numerous transitional varieties in each region, though they must have existed there, and may be embedded there in a fossil condition.
But in the intermediate region, having intermediate conditions of life, why do we not now find closely-linking intermediate varieties?
This difficulty for a long time quite confounded me.
But I think it can be in large part explained.
In the first place we should be extremely cautious in inferring, because an area is now continuous, that it has been continuous during a long period.
Geology would lead us to believe that almost every continent has been broken up into islands even during the later tertiary periods; and in such islands distinct species might have been separately formed without the possibility of intermediate varieties
By changes in the form of the land and of climate, marine areas now continuous must often have existed within recent times in a far less continuous and uniform condition than at present.
But I will pass over this way of escaping from the difficulty; for I believe that many perfectly defined species have been formed on strictly continuous areas; though I do not doubt that the formerly broken condition of areas now continuous has played an
In looking at species as they are now distributed over a wide area, we generally find them tolerably numerous over a large territory, then becoming somewhat abruptly rarer and rarer on the confines, and finally disappearing.
Hence the neutral territory between two representative species is generally narrow in comparison with the territory proper to each.
We see the same fact in ascending mountains, and sometimes it is quite remarkable how abruptly, as Alph.
De Candolle has observed, a common alpine species disappears.
The same fact has been noticed by Forbes in sounding the depths of the sea with the dredge.
To those who look at climate and the physical conditions of life as the all-important elements of distribution, these facts ought to cause surprise, as climate and height or depth graduate away insensibly.
But when we bear in mind that almost every species, even in its metropolis, would increase immensely in numbers, were it not for other competing species; that nearly all either prey on or serve as prey for others; in short, that each organic being is
Moreover, each species on the confines of its range, where it exists in lessened numbers, will, during fluctuations in the number of its enemies or of its prey, or in the seasons, be extremely liable to utter extermination; and thus its geographical range
If I am right in believing that allied or representative species, when inhabiting a continuous area, are generally so distributed that each has a wide range, with a comparatively narrow neutral territory between them, in which they become rather suddenly
The intermediate variety, consequently, will exist in lesser numbers from inhabiting a narrow and lesser area; and practically, as far as I can make out, this rule holds good with varieties in a state of nature.
I have met with striking instances of the rule in the case of varieties intermediate between well-marked varieties in the genus Balanus.
And it would appear from information given me by Mr. Watson, Dr. Asa Gray, and Mr. Wollaston, that generally when varieties intermediate between two other forms occur, they are much rarer numerically than the forms which they connect.
Now, if we may trust these facts and inferences, and therefore conclude that varieties linking two other varieties together have generally existed in lesser numbers than the forms which they connect, then, I think, we can understand why intermediate
For any form existing in lesser numbers would, as already remarked, run a greater chance of being exterminated than one existing in large numbers; and in this particular case the intermediate form would be eminently liable to the inroads of closely allied
But a far more important consideration, as I believe, is that, during the process of further modification, by which two varieties are supposed on my theory to be converted and perfected into two distinct species, the two which exist in larger numbers from
For forms existing in larger numbers will always have a better chance, within any given period, of presenting further favourable variations for natural selection to seize on, than will the rarer forms which exist in lesser numbers.
Hence, the more common forms, in the race for life, will tend to beat and supplant the less common forms, for these will be more slowly modified and improved.
It is the same principle which, as I believe, accounts for the common species in each country, as shown in the second chapter, presenting on an average a greater number of well-marked varieties than do the rarer species.
I may illustrate what I mean by supposing three varieties of sheep to be kept, one adapted to an extensive mountainous region; a second to a comparatively narrow, hilly tract; and a third to wide plains at the base; and that the inhabitants are all trying
To sum up, I believe that species come to be tolerably well-defined objects, and do not at any one period present an inextricable chaos of varying and intermediate links: firstly, because new varieties are very slowly formed, for variation is a very slow
And such new places will depend on slow changes of climate, or on the occasional immigration of new inhabitants, and, probably, in a still more important degree, on some of the old inhabitants becoming slowly modified, with the new forms thus produced and
So that, in any one region and at any one time, we ought only to see a few species presenting slight modifications of structure in some degree permanent; and this assuredly we do see.
Secondly, areas now continuous must often have existed within the recent period in isolated portions, in which many forms, more especially amongst the classes which unite for each birth and wander much, may have separately been rendered sufficiently
In this case, intermediate varieties between the several representative species and their common parent, must formerly have existed in each broken portion of the land, but these links will have been supplanted and exterminated during the process of natural
Thirdly, when two or more varieties have been formed in different portions of a strictly continuous area, intermediate varieties will, it is probable, at first have been formed in the intermediate zones, but they will generally have had a short duration.
For these intermediate varieties will, from reasons already assigned (namely from what we know of the actual distribution of closely allied or representative species, and likewise of acknowledged varieties), exist in the intermediate zones in lesser
From this cause alone the intermediate varieties will be liable to accidental extermination; and during the process of further modification through natural selection, they will almost certainly be beaten and supplanted by the forms which they connect; for
Lastly, looking not to any one time, but to all time, if my theory be true, numberless intermediate varieties, linking most closely all the species of the same group together, must assuredly have existed; but the very process of natural selection
Consequently evidence of their former existence could be found only amongst fossil remains, which are preserved, as we shall in a future chapter attempt to show, in an extremely imperfect and intermittent record.
ON THE ORIGIN AND TRANSITIONS OF ORGANIC BEINGS WITH PECULIAR HABITS AND STRUCTURE.
It has been asked by the opponents of such views as I hold, how, for instance, a land carnivorous animal could have been converted into one with aquatic habits; for how could the animal in its transitional state have subsisted?
It would be easy to show that within the same group carnivorous animals exist having every intermediate grade between truly aquatic and strictly terrestrial habits; and as each exists by a struggle for life, it is clear that each is well adapted in its
Look at the Mustela vison of North America, which has webbed feet and which resembles an otter in its fur, short legs, and form of tail; during summer this animal dives for and preys on fish, but during the long winter it leaves the frozen waters, and
If a different case had been taken, and it had been asked how an insectivorous quadruped could possibly have been converted into a flying bat, the question would have been far more difficult, and I could have given no answer.
Yet I think such difficulties have very little weight.
Here, as on other occasions, I lie under a heavy disadvantage, for out of the many striking cases which I have collected, I can give only one or two instances of transitional habits and structures in closely allied species of the same genus; and of
And it seems to me that nothing less than a long list of such cases is sufficient to lessen the difficulty in any particular case like that of the bat.
Look at the family of squirrels; here we have the finest gradation from animals with their tails only slightly flattened, and from others, as Sir J. Richardson has remarked, with the posterior part of their bodies rather wide and with the skin on their
We cannot doubt that each structure is of use to each kind of squirrel in its own country, by enabling it to escape birds or beasts of prey, or to collect food more quickly, or, as there is reason to believe, by lessening the danger from occasional falls.
But it does not follow from this fact that the structure of each squirrel is the best that it is possible to conceive under all natural conditions.
Let the climate and vegetation change, let other competing rodents or new beasts of prey immigrate, or old ones become modified, and all analogy would lead us to believe that some at least of the squirrels would decrease in numbers or become exterminated,
Therefore, I can see no difficulty, more especially under changing conditions of life, in the continued preservation of individuals with fuller and fuller flank-membranes, each modification being useful, each being propagated, until by the accumulated
Now look at the Galeopithecus or flying lemur, which formerly was falsely ranked amongst bats.
It has an extremely wide flank-membrane, stretching from the corners of the jaw to the tail, and including the limbs and the elongated fingers: the flank membrane is, also, furnished with an extensor muscle.
Although no graduated links of structure, fitted for gliding through the air, now connect the Galeopithecus with the other Lemuridae, yet I can see no difficulty in supposing that such links formerly existed, and that each had been formed by the same steps
Nor can I see any insuperable difficulty in further believing it possible that the membrane-connected fingers and fore-arm of the Galeopithecus might be greatly lengthened by natural selection; and this, as far as the organs of flight are concerned, would
In bats which have the wing-membrane extended from the top of the shoulder to the tail, including the hind-legs, we perhaps see traces of an apparatus originally constructed for gliding through the air rather than for flight.
If about a dozen genera of birds had become extinct or were unknown, who would have ventured to have surmised that birds might have existed which used their wings solely as flappers, like the logger-headed duck (Micropterus of Eyton); as fins in the water
Yet the structure of each of these birds is good for it, under the conditions of life to which it is exposed, for each has to live by a struggle; but it is not necessarily the best possible under all possible conditions.
It must not be inferred from these remarks that any of the grades of wing-structure here alluded to, which perhaps may all have resulted from disuse, indicate the natural steps by which birds have acquired their perfect power of flight; but they serve, at
Seeing that a few members of such water-breathing classes as the Crustacea and Mollusca are adapted to live on the land, and seeing that we have flying birds and mammals, flying insects of the most diversified types, and formerly had flying reptiles, it is
If this had been effected, who would have ever imagined that in an early transitional state they had been inhabitants of the open ocean, and had used their incipient organs of flight exclusively, as far as we know, to escape being devoured by other fish?
When we see any structure highly perfected for any particular habit, as the wings of a bird for flight, we should bear in mind that animals displaying early transitional grades of the structure will seldom continue to exist to the present day, for they
Furthermore, we may conclude that transitional grades between structures fitted for very different habits of life will rarely have been developed at an early period in great numbers and under many subordinate forms.
Thus, to return to our imaginary illustration of the flying-fish, it does not seem probable that fishes capable of true flight would have been developed under many subordinate forms, for taking prey of many kinds in many ways, on the land and in the water,
Hence the chance of discovering species with transitional grades of structure in a fossil condition will always be less, from their having existed in lesser numbers, than in the case of species with fully developed structures.
I will now give two or three instances of diversified and of changed habits in the individuals of the same species.
When either case occurs, it would be easy for natural selection to fit the animal, by some modification of its structure, for its changed habits, or exclusively for one of its several different habits.
But it is difficult to tell, and immaterial for us, whether habits generally change first and structure afterwards; or whether slight modifications of structure lead to changed habits; both probably often change almost simultaneously.
Of cases of changed habits it will suffice merely to allude to that of the many British insects which now feed on exotic plants, or exclusively on artificial substances.
Of diversified habits innumerable instances could be given: I have often watched a tyrant flycatcher (Saurophagus sulphuratus) in South America, hovering over one spot and then proceeding to another, like a kestrel, and at other times standing stationary
In our own country the larger titmouse (Parus major) may be seen climbing branches, almost like a creeper; it often, like a shrike, kills small birds by blows on the head; and I have many times seen and heard it hammering the seeds of the yew on a branch,
In North America the black bear was seen by Hearne swimming for hours with widely open mouth, thus catching, like a whale, insects in the water.
Even in so extreme a case as this, if the supply of insects were constant, and if better adapted competitors did not already exist in the country, I can see no difficulty in a race of bears being rendered, by natural selection, more and more aquatic in
As we sometimes see individuals of a species following habits widely different from those both of their own species and of the other species of the same genus, we might expect, on my theory, that such individuals would occasionally have given rise to new
And such instances do occur in nature.
Can a more striking instance of adaptation be given than that of a woodpecker for climbing trees and for seizing insects in the chinks of the bark?
Yet in North America there are woodpeckers which feed largely on fruit, and others with elongated wings which chase insects on the wing; and on the plains of La Plata, where not a tree grows, there is a woodpecker, which in every essential part of its
Petrels are the most aerial and oceanic of birds, yet in the quiet Sounds of Tierra del Fuego, the Puffinuria berardi, in its general habits, in its astonishing power of diving, its manner of swimming, and of flying when unwillingly it takes flight, would
On the other hand, the acutest observer by examining the dead body of the water-ouzel would never have suspected its sub-aquatic habits; yet this anomalous member of the strictly terrestrial thrush family wholly subsists by diving,--grasping the stones
He who believes that each being has been created as we now see it, must occasionally have felt surprise when he has met with an animal having habits and structure not at all in agreement.
What can be plainer than that the webbed feet of ducks and geese are formed for swimming?
yet there are upland geese with webbed feet which rarely or never go near the water; and no one except Audubon has seen the frigate-bird, which has all its four toes webbed, alight on the surface of the sea.
On the other hand, grebes and coots are eminently aquatic, although their toes are only bordered by membrane.
What seems plainer than that the long toes of grallatores are formed for walking over swamps and floating plants, yet the water-hen is nearly as aquatic as the coot; and the landrail nearly as terrestrial as the quail or partridge.
In such cases, and many others could be given, habits have changed without a corresponding change of structure.
The webbed feet of the upland goose may be said to have become rudimentary in function, though not in structure.
In the frigate-bird, the deeply-scooped membrane between the toes shows that structure has begun to change.
He who believes in separate and innumerable acts of creation will say, that in these cases it has pleased the Creator to cause a being of one type to take the place of one of another type; but this seems to me only restating the fact in dignified language.
He who believes in the struggle for existence and in the principle of natural selection, will acknowledge that every organic being is constantly endeavouring to increase in numbers; and that if any one being vary ever so little, either in habits or
Hence it will cause him no surprise that there should be geese and frigate-birds with webbed feet, either living on the dry land or most rarely alighting on the water; that there should be long-toed corncrakes living in meadows instead of in swamps; that
ORGANS OF EXTREME PERFECTION AND COMPLICATION.
To suppose that the eye, with all its inimitable contrivances for adjusting the focus to different distances, for admitting different amounts of light, and for the correction of spherical and chromatic aberration, could have been formed by natural
Yet reason tells me, that if numerous gradations from a perfect and complex eye to one very imperfect and simple, each grade being useful to its possessor, can be shown to exist; if further, the eye does vary ever so slightly, and the variations be
How a nerve comes to be sensitive to light, hardly concerns us more than how life itself first originated; but I may remark that several facts make me suspect that any sensitive nerve may be rendered sensitive to light, and likewise to those coarser
In looking for the gradations by which an organ in any species has been perfected, we ought to look exclusively to its lineal ancestors; but this is scarcely ever possible, and we are forced in each case to look to species of the same group, that is to the
Amongst existing Vertebrata, we find but a small amount of gradation in the structure of the eye, and from fossil species we can learn nothing on this head.
In this great class we should probably have to descend far beneath the lowest known fossiliferous stratum to discover the earlier stages, by which the eye has been perfected.
In the Articulata we can commence a series with an optic nerve merely coated with pigment, and without any other mechanism; and from this low stage, numerous gradations of structure, branching off in two fundamentally different lines, can be shown to
In certain crustaceans, for instance, there is a double cornea, the inner one divided into facets, within each of which there is a lens-shaped swelling.
In other crustaceans the transparent cones which are coated by pigment, and which properly act only by excluding lateral pencils of light, are convex at their upper ends and must act by convergence; and at their lower ends there seems to be an imperfect
With these facts, here far too briefly and imperfectly given, which show that there is much graduated diversity in the eyes of living crustaceans, and bearing in mind how small the number of living animals is in proportion to those which have become
He who will go thus far, if he find on finishing this treatise that large bodies of facts, otherwise inexplicable, can be explained by the theory of descent, ought not to hesitate to go further, and to admit that a structure even as perfect as the eye of
His reason ought to conquer his imagination; though I have felt the difficulty far too keenly to be surprised at any degree of hesitation in extending the principle of natural selection to such startling lengths.
It is scarcely possible to avoid comparing the eye to a telescope.
We know that this instrument has been perfected by the long-continued efforts of the highest human intellects; and we naturally infer that the eye has been formed by a somewhat analogous process.
But may not this inference be presumptuous?
Have we any right to assume that the Creator works by intellectual powers like those of man?
If we must compare the eye to an optical instrument, we ought in imagination to take a thick layer of transparent tissue, with a nerve sensitive to light beneath, and then suppose every part of this layer to be continually changing slowly in density, so as
Further we must suppose that there is a power always intently watching each slight accidental alteration in the transparent layers; and carefully selecting each alteration which, under varied circumstances, may in any way, or in any degree, tend to produce
We must suppose each new state of the instrument to be multiplied by the million; and each to be preserved till a better be produced, and then the old ones to be destroyed.
In living bodies, variation will cause the slight alterations, generation will multiply them almost infinitely, and natural selection will pick out with unerring skill each improvement.
Let this process go on for millions on millions of years; and during each year on millions of individuals of many kinds; and may we not believe that a living optical instrument might thus be formed as superior to one of glass, as the works of the Creator
If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed, which could not possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight modifications, my theory would absolutely break down.
But I can find out no such case.
No doubt many organs exist of which we do not know the transitional grades, more especially if we look to much-isolated species, round which, according to my theory, there has been much extinction.
Or again, if we look to an organ common to all the members of a large class, for in this latter case the organ must have been first formed at an extremely remote period, since which all the many members of the class have been developed; and in order to
We should be extremely cautious in concluding that an organ could not have been formed by transitional gradations of some kind.
Numerous cases could be given amongst the lower animals of the same organ performing at the same time wholly distinct functions; thus the alimentary canal respires, digests, and excretes in the larva of the dragon-fly and in the fish Cobites.
In the Hydra, the animal may be turned inside out, and the exterior surface will then digest and the stomach respire.
In such cases natural selection might easily specialise, if any advantage were thus gained, a part or organ, which had performed two functions, for one function alone, and thus wholly change its nature by insensible steps.
Two distinct organs sometimes perform simultaneously the same function in the same individual; to give one instance, there are fish with gills or branchiae that breathe the air dissolved in the water, at the same time that they breathe free air in their
In these cases, one of the two organs might with ease be modified and perfected so as to perform all the work by itself, being aided during the process of modification by the other organ; and then this other organ might be modified for some other and quite
The illustration of the swimbladder in fishes is a good one, because it shows us clearly the highly important fact that an organ originally constructed for one purpose, namely flotation, may be converted into one for a wholly different purpose, namely
The swimbladder has, also, been worked in as an accessory to the auditory organs of certain fish, or, for I do not know which view is now generally held, a part of the auditory apparatus has been worked in as a complement to the swimbladder.
All physiologists admit that the swimbladder is homologous, or "ideally similar," in position and structure with the lungs of the higher vertebrate animals: hence there seems to me to be no great difficulty in believing that natural selection has actually
I can, indeed, hardly doubt that all vertebrate animals having true lungs have descended by ordinary generation from an ancient prototype, of which we know nothing, furnished with a floating apparatus or swimbladder.
We can thus, as I infer from Professor Owen's interesting description of these parts, understand the strange fact that every particle of food and drink which we swallow has to pass over the orifice of the trachea, with some risk of falling into the lungs,
In the higher Vertebrata the branchiae have wholly disappeared--the slits on the sides of the neck and the loop-like course of the arteries still marking in the embryo their former position.
But it is conceivable that the now utterly lost branchiae might have been gradually worked in by natural selection for some quite distinct purpose: in the same manner as, on the view entertained by some naturalists that the branchiae and dorsal scales of
In considering transitions of organs, it is so important to bear in mind the probability of conversion from one function to another, that I will give one more instance.
Pedunculated cirripedes have two minute folds of skin, called by me the ovigerous frena, which serve, through the means of a sticky secretion, to retain the eggs until they are hatched within the sack.
These cirripedes have no branchiae, the whole surface of the body and sack, including the small frena, serving for respiration.
The Balanidae or sessile cirripedes, on the other hand, have no ovigerous frena, the eggs lying loose at the bottom of the sack, in the well-enclosed shell; but they have large folded branchiae.
Now I think no one will dispute that the ovigerous frena in the one family are strictly homologous with the branchiae of the other family; indeed, they graduate into each other.
Therefore I do not doubt that little folds of skin, which originally served as ovigerous frena, but which, likewise, very slightly aided the act of respiration, have been gradually converted by natural selection into branchiae, simply through an increase
If all pedunculated cirripedes had become extinct, and they have already suffered far more extinction than have sessile cirripedes, who would ever have imagined that the branchiae in this latter family had originally existed as organs for preventing the
Although we must be extremely cautious in concluding that any organ could not possibly have been produced by successive transitional gradations, yet, undoubtedly, grave cases of difficulty occur, some of which will be discussed in my future work.
One of the gravest is that of neuter insects, which are often very differently constructed from either the males or fertile females; but this case will be treated of in the next chapter.
The electric organs of fishes offer another case of special difficulty; it is impossible to conceive by what steps these wondrous organs have been produced; but, as Owen and others have remarked, their intimate structure closely resembles that of common
The electric organs offer another and even more serious difficulty; for they occur in only about a dozen fishes, of which several are widely remote in their affinities.
Generally when the same organ appears in several members of the same class, especially if in members having very different habits of life, we may attribute its presence to inheritance from a common ancestor; and its absence in some of the members to its
But if the electric organs had been inherited from one ancient progenitor thus provided, we might have expected that all electric fishes would have been specially related to each other.
Nor does geology at all lead to the belief that formerly most fishes had electric organs, which most of their modified descendants have lost.
The presence of luminous organs in a few insects, belonging to different families and orders, offers a parallel case of difficulty.
Other cases could be given; for instance in plants, the very curious contrivance of a mass of pollen-grains, borne on a foot-stalk with a sticky gland at the end, is the same in Orchis and Asclepias,--genera almost as remote as possible amongst flowering
In all these cases of two very distinct species furnished with apparently the same anomalous organ, it should be observed that, although the general appearance and function of the organ may be the same, yet some fundamental difference can generally be
I am inclined to believe that in nearly the same way as two men have sometimes independently hit on the very same invention, so natural selection, working for the good of each being and taking advantage of analogous variations, has sometimes modified in
Although in many cases it is most difficult to conjecture by what transitions an organ could have arrived at its present state; yet, considering that the proportion of living and known forms to the extinct and unknown is very small, I have been astonished
The truth of this remark is indeed shown by that old canon in natural history of "Natura non facit saltum".
We meet with this admission in the writings of almost every experienced naturalist; or, as Milne Edwards has well expressed it, nature is prodigal in variety, but niggard in innovation.
Why, on the theory of Creation, should this be so?
Why should all the parts and organs of many independent beings, each supposed to have been separately created for its proper place in nature, be so invariably linked together by graduated steps?
Why should not Nature have taken a leap from structure to structure?
On the theory of natural selection, we can clearly understand why she should not; for natural selection can act only by taking advantage of slight successive variations; she can never take a leap, but must advance by the shortest and slowest steps.
ORGANS OF LITTLE APPARENT IMPORTANCE.
As natural selection acts by life and death,--by the preservation of individuals with any favourable variation, and by the destruction of those with any unfavourable deviation of structure,--I have sometimes felt much difficulty in understanding the origin
I have sometimes felt as much difficulty, though of a very different kind, on this head, as in the case of an organ as perfect and complex as the eye.
In the first place, we are much too ignorant in regard to the whole economy of any one organic being, to say what slight modifications would be of importance or not.
In a former chapter I have given instances of most trifling characters, such as the down on fruit and the colour of the flesh, which, from determining the attacks of insects or from being correlated with constitutional differences, might assuredly be acted
The tail of the giraffe looks like an artificially constructed fly-flapper; and it seems at first incredible that this could have been adapted for its present purpose by successive slight modifications, each better and better, for so trifling an object as
It is not that the larger quadrupeds are actually destroyed (except in some rare cases) by the flies, but they are incessantly harassed and their strength reduced, so that they are more subject to disease, or not so well enabled in a coming dearth to
Organs now of trifling importance have probably in some cases been of high importance to an early progenitor, and, after having been slowly perfected at a former period, have been transmitted in nearly the same state, although now become of very slight
Seeing how important an organ of locomotion the tail is in most aquatic animals, its general presence and use for many purposes in so many land animals, which in their lungs or modified swim-bladders betray their aquatic origin, may perhaps be thus
A well-developed tail having been formed in an aquatic animal, it might subsequently come to be worked in for all sorts of purposes, as a fly-flapper, an organ of prehension, or as an aid in turning, as with the dog, though the aid must be slight, for the
In the second place, we may sometimes attribute importance to characters which are really of very little importance, and which have originated from quite secondary causes, independently of natural selection.
We should remember that climate, food, etc.
, probably have some little direct influence on the organisation; that characters reappear from the law of reversion; that correlation of growth will have had a most important influence in modifying various structures; and finally, that sexual selection
Moreover when a modification of structure has primarily arisen from the above or other unknown causes, it may at first have been of no advantage to the species, but may subsequently have been taken advantage of by the descendants of the species under new
To give a few instances to illustrate these latter remarks.
If green woodpeckers alone had existed, and we did not know that there were many black and pied kinds, I dare say that we should have thought that the green colour was a beautiful adaptation to hide this tree-frequenting bird from its enemies; and
A trailing bamboo in the Malay Archipelago climbs the loftiest trees by the aid of exquisitely constructed hooks clustered around the ends of the branches, and this contrivance, no doubt, is of the highest service to the plant; but as we see nearly similar
The naked skin on the head of a vulture is generally looked at as a direct adaptation for wallowing in putridity; and so it may be, or it may possibly be due to the direct action of putrid matter; but we should be very cautious in drawing any such
The sutures in the skulls of young mammals have been advanced as a beautiful adaptation for aiding parturition, and no doubt they facilitate, or may be indispensable for this act; but as sutures occur in the skulls of young birds and reptiles, which have
We are profoundly ignorant of the causes producing slight and unimportant variations; and we are immediately made conscious of this by reflecting on the differences in the breeds of our domesticated animals in different countries,--more especially in the
Careful observers are convinced that a damp climate affects the growth of the hair, and that with the hair the horns are correlated.
Mountain breeds always differ from lowland breeds; and a mountainous country would probably affect the hind limbs from exercising them more, and possibly even the form of the pelvis; and then by the law of homologous variation, the front limbs and even the
The shape, also, of the pelvis might affect by pressure the shape of the head of the young in the womb.
The laborious breathing necessary in high regions would, we have some reason to believe, increase the size of the chest; and again correlation would come into play.
Animals kept by savages in different countries often have to struggle for their own subsistence, and would be exposed to a certain extent to natural selection, and individuals with slightly different constitutions would succeed best under different
A good observer, also, states that in cattle susceptibility to the attacks of flies is correlated with colour, as is the liability to be poisoned by certain plants; so that colour would be thus subjected to the action of natural selection.
But we are far too ignorant to speculate on the relative importance of the several known and unknown laws of variation; and I have here alluded to them only to show that, if we are unable to account for the characteristic differences of our domestic
I might have adduced for this same purpose the differences between the races of man, which are so strongly marked; I may add that some little light can apparently be thrown on the origin of these differences, chiefly through sexual selection of a
The foregoing remarks lead me to say a few words on the protest lately made by some naturalists, against the utilitarian doctrine that every detail of structure has been produced for the good of its possessor.
They believe that very many structures have been created for beauty in the eyes of man, or for mere variety.
This doctrine, if true, would be absolutely fatal to my theory.
Yet I fully admit that many structures are of no direct use to their possessors.
Physical conditions probably have had some little effect on structure, quite independently of any good thus gained.
Correlation of growth has no doubt played a most important part, and a useful modification of one part will often have entailed on other parts diversified changes of no direct use.
So again characters which formerly were useful, or which formerly had arisen from correlation of growth, or from other unknown cause, may reappear from the law of reversion, though now of no direct use.
The effects of sexual selection, when displayed in beauty to charm the females, can be called useful only in rather a forced sense.
But by far the most important consideration is that the chief part of the organisation of every being is simply due to inheritance; and consequently, though each being assuredly is well fitted for its place in nature, many structures now have no direct
Thus, we can hardly believe that the webbed feet of the upland goose or of the frigate-bird are of special use to these birds; we cannot believe that the same bones in the arm of the monkey, in the fore leg of the horse, in the wing of the bat, and in the
We may safely attribute these structures to inheritance.
But to the progenitor of the upland goose and of the frigate-bird, webbed feet no doubt were as useful as they now are to the most aquatic of existing birds.
So we may believe that the progenitor of the seal had not a flipper, but a foot with five toes fitted for walking or grasping; and we may further venture to believe that the several bones in the limbs of the monkey, horse, and bat, which have been
Therefore we may infer that these several bones might have been acquired through natural selection, subjected formerly, as now, to the several laws of inheritance, reversion, correlation of growth, etc.
Hence every detail of structure in every living creature (making some little allowance for the direct action of physical conditions) may be viewed, either as having been of special use to some ancestral form, or as being now of special use to the
Natural selection cannot possibly produce any modification in any one species exclusively for the good of another species; though throughout nature one species incessantly takes advantage of, and profits by, the structure of another.
But natural selection can and does often produce structures for the direct injury of other species, as we see in the fang of the adder, and in the ovipositor of the ichneumon, by which its eggs are deposited in the living bodies of other insects.
If it could be proved that any part of the structure of any one species had been formed for the exclusive good of another species, it would annihilate my theory, for such could not have been produced through natural selection.
Although many statements may be found in works on natural history to this effect, I cannot find even one which seems to me of any weight.
It is admitted that the rattlesnake has a poison-fang for its own defence and for the destruction of its prey; but some authors suppose that at the same time this snake is furnished with a rattle for its own injury, namely, to warn its prey to escape.
I would almost as soon believe that the cat curls the end of its tail when preparing to spring, in order to warn the doomed mouse.
But I have not space here to enter on this and other such cases.
Natural selection will never produce in a being anything injurious to itself, for natural selection acts solely by and for the good of each.
No organ will be formed, as Paley has remarked, for the purpose of causing pain or for doing an injury to its possessor.
If a fair balance be struck between the good and evil caused by each part, each will be found on the whole advantageous.
After the lapse of time, under changing conditions of life, if any part comes to be injurious, it will be modified; or if it be not so, the being will become extinct, as myriads have become extinct.
Natural selection tends only to make each organic being as perfect as, or slightly more perfect than, the other inhabitants of the same country with which it has to struggle for existence.
And we see that this is the degree of perfection attained under nature.
The endemic productions of New Zealand, for instance, are perfect one compared with another; but they are now rapidly yielding before the advancing legions of plants and animals introduced from Europe.
Natural selection will not produce absolute perfection, nor do we always meet, as far as we can judge, with this high standard under nature.
The correction for the aberration of light is said, on high authority, not to be perfect even in that most perfect organ, the eye.
If our reason leads us to admire with enthusiasm a multitude of inimitable contrivances in nature, this same reason tells us, though we may easily err on both sides, that some other contrivances are less perfect.
Can we consider the sting of the wasp or of the bee as perfect, which, when used against many attacking animals, cannot be withdrawn, owing to the backward serratures, and so inevitably causes the death of the insect by tearing out its viscera?
If we look at the sting of the bee, as having originally existed in a remote progenitor as a boring and serrated instrument, like that in so many members of the same great order, and which has been modified but not perfected for its present purpose, with
If we admire the truly wonderful power of scent by which the males of many insects find their females, can we admire the production for this single purpose of thousands of drones, which are utterly useless to the community for any other end, and which are
It may be difficult, but we ought to admire the savage instinctive hatred of the queen-bee, which urges her instantly to destroy the young queens her daughters as soon as born, or to perish herself in the combat; for undoubtedly this is for the good of the
If we admire the several ingenious contrivances, by which the flowers of the orchis and of many other plants are fertilised through insect agency, can we consider as equally perfect the elaboration by our fir-trees of dense clouds of pollen, in order that
SUMMARY OF CHAPTER.
We have in this chapter discussed some of the difficulties and objections which may be urged against my theory.
Many of them are very grave; but I think that in the discussion light has been thrown on several facts, which on the theory of independent acts of creation are utterly obscure.
We have seen that species at any one period are not indefinitely variable, and are not linked together by a multitude of intermediate gradations, partly because the process of natural selection will always be very slow, and will act, at any one time, only
Closely allied species, now living on a continuous area, must often have been formed when the area was not continuous, and when the conditions of life did not insensibly graduate away from one part to another.
When two varieties are formed in two districts of a continuous area, an intermediate variety will often be formed, fitted for an intermediate zone; but from reasons assigned, the intermediate variety will usually exist in lesser numbers than the two forms
We have seen in this chapter how cautious we should be in concluding that the most different habits of life could not graduate into each other; that a bat, for instance, could not have been formed by natural selection from an animal which at first could
We have seen that a species may under new conditions of life change its habits, or have diversified habits, with some habits very unlike those of its nearest congeners.
Hence we can understand, bearing in mind that each organic being is trying to live wherever it can live, how it has arisen that there are upland geese with webbed feet, ground woodpeckers, diving thrushes, and petrels with the habits of auks.
Although the belief that an organ so perfect as the eye could have been formed by natural selection, is more than enough to stagger any one; yet in the case of any organ, if we know of a long series of gradations in complexity, each good for its possessor,
In the cases in which we know of no intermediate or transitional states, we should be very cautious in concluding that none could have existed, for the homologies of many organs and their intermediate states show that wonderful metamorphoses in function
For instance, a swim-bladder has apparently been converted into an air-breathing lung.
The same organ having performed simultaneously very different functions, and then having been specialised for one function; and two very distinct organs having performed at the same time the same function, the one having been perfected whilst aided by the
We are far too ignorant, in almost every case, to be enabled to assert that any part or organ is so unimportant for the welfare of a species, that modifications in its structure could not have been slowly accumulated by means of natural selection.
But we may confidently believe that many modifications, wholly due to the laws of growth, and at first in no way advantageous to a species, have been subsequently taken advantage of by the still further modified descendants of this species.
We may, also, believe that a part formerly of high importance has often been retained (as the tail of an aquatic animal by its terrestrial descendants), though it has become of such small importance that it could not, in its present state, have been
Natural selection will produce nothing in one species for the exclusive good or injury of another; though it may well produce parts, organs, and excretions highly useful or even indispensable, or highly injurious to another species, but in all cases at the
Natural selection in each well-stocked country, must act chiefly through the competition of the inhabitants one with another, and consequently will produce perfection, or strength in the battle for life, only according to the standard of that country.
Hence the inhabitants of one country, generally the smaller one, will often yield, as we see they do yield, to the inhabitants of another and generally larger country.
For in the larger country there will have existed more individuals, and more diversified forms, and the competition will have been severer, and thus the standard of perfection will have been rendered higher.
Natural selection will not necessarily produce absolute perfection; nor, as far as we can judge by our limited faculties, can absolute perfection be everywhere found.
On the theory of natural selection we can clearly understand the full meaning of that old canon in natural history, "Natura non facit saltum".
This canon, if we look only to the present inhabitants of the world, is not strictly correct, but if we include all those of past times, it must by my theory be strictly true.
It is generally acknowledged that all organic beings have been formed on two great laws--Unity of Type, and the Conditions of Existence.
By unity of type is meant that fundamental agreement in structure, which we see in organic beings of the same class, and which is quite independent of their habits of life.
On my theory, unity of type is explained by unity of descent.
The expression of conditions of existence, so often insisted on by the illustrious Cuvier, is fully embraced by the principle of natural selection.
For natural selection acts by either now adapting the varying parts of each being to its organic and inorganic conditions of life; or by having adapted them during long-past periods of time: the adaptations being aided in some cases by use and disuse,
Hence, in fact, the law of the Conditions of Existence is the higher law; as it includes, through the inheritance of former adaptations, that of Unity of Type.
7.
INSTINCT.
Instincts comparable with habits, but different in their origin.
Instincts graduated.
Aphides and ants.
Instincts variable.
Domestic instincts, their origin.
Natural instincts of the cuckoo, ostrich, and parasitic bees.
Slave-making ants.
Hive-bee, its cell-making instinct.
Difficulties on the theory of the Natural Selection of instincts.
Neuter or sterile insects.
Summary.
The subject of instinct might have been worked into the previous chapters; but I have thought that it would be more convenient to treat the subject separately, especially as so wonderful an instinct as that of the hive-bee making its cells will probably
I must premise, that I have nothing to do with the origin of the primary mental powers, any more than I have with that of life itself.
We are concerned only with the diversities of instinct and of the other mental qualities of animals within the same class.
I will not attempt any definition of instinct.
It would be easy to show that several distinct mental actions are commonly embraced by this term; but every one understands what is meant, when it is said that instinct impels the cuckoo to migrate and to lay her eggs in other birds' nests.
An action, which we ourselves should require experience to enable us to perform, when performed by an animal, more especially by a very young one, without any experience, and when performed by many individuals in the same way, without their knowing for
But I could show that none of these characters of instinct are universal.
A little dose, as Pierre Huber expresses it, of judgment or reason, often comes into play, even in animals very low in the scale of nature.
Frederick Cuvier and several of the older metaphysicians have compared instinct with habit.
This comparison gives, I think, a remarkably accurate notion of the frame of mind under which an instinctive action is performed, but not of its origin.
How unconsciously many habitual actions are performed, indeed not rarely in direct opposition to our conscious will!
yet they may be modified by the will or reason.
Habits easily become associated with other habits, and with certain periods of time and states of the body.
When once acquired, they often remain constant throughout life.
Several other points of resemblance between instincts and habits could be pointed out.
As in repeating a well-known song, so in instincts, one action follows another by a sort of rhythm; if a person be interrupted in a song, or in repeating anything by rote, he is generally forced to go back to recover the habitual train of thought: so P.
If, however, a caterpillar were taken out of a hammock made up, for instance, to the third stage, and were put into one finished up to the sixth stage, so that much of its work was already done for it, far from feeling the benefit of this, it was much
If we suppose any habitual action to become inherited--and I think it can be shown that this does sometimes happen--then the resemblance between what originally was a habit and an instinct becomes so close as not to be distinguished.
If Mozart, instead of playing the pianoforte at three years old with wonderfully little practice, had played a tune with no practice at all, he might truly be said to have done so instinctively.
But it would be the most serious error to suppose that the greater number of instincts have been acquired by habit in one generation, and then transmitted by inheritance to succeeding generations.
It can be clearly shown that the most wonderful instincts with which we are acquainted, namely, those of the hive-bee and of many ants, could not possibly have been thus acquired.
It will be universally admitted that instincts are as important as corporeal structure for the welfare of each species, under its present conditions of life.
Under changed conditions of life, it is at least possible that slight modifications of instinct might be profitable to a species; and if it can be shown that instincts do vary ever so little, then I can see no difficulty in natural selection preserving and
It is thus, as I believe, that all the most complex and wonderful instincts have originated.
As modifications of corporeal structure arise from, and are increased by, use or habit, and are diminished or lost by disuse, so I do not doubt it has been with instincts.
But I believe that the effects of habit are of quite subordinate importance to the effects of the natural selection of what may be called accidental variations of instincts;--that is of variations produced by the same unknown causes which produce slight
No complex instinct can possibly be produced through natural selection, except by the slow and gradual accumulation of numerous, slight, yet profitable, variations.
Hence, as in the case of corporeal structures, we ought to find in nature, not the actual transitional gradations by which each complex instinct has been acquired--for these could be found only in the lineal ancestors of each species--but we ought to find
I have been surprised to find, making allowance for the instincts of animals having been but little observed except in Europe and North America, and for no instinct being known amongst extinct species, how very generally gradations, leading to the most
The canon of "Natura non facit saltum" applies with almost equal force to instincts as to bodily organs.
Changes of instinct may sometimes be facilitated by the same species having different instincts at different periods of life, or at different seasons of the year, or when placed under different circumstances, etc.
; in which case either one or the other instinct might be preserved by natural selection.
And such instances of diversity of instinct in the same species can be shown to occur in nature.
Again as in the case of corporeal structure, and conformably with my theory, the instinct of each species is good for itself, but has never, as far as we can judge, been produced for the exclusive good of others.
One of the strongest instances of an animal apparently performing an action for the sole good of another, with which I am acquainted, is that of aphides voluntarily yielding their sweet excretion to ants: that they do so voluntarily, the following facts
I removed all the ants from a group of about a dozen aphides on a dock-plant, and prevented their attendance during several hours.
After this interval, I felt sure that the aphides would want to excrete.
I watched them for some time through a lens, but not one excreted; I then tickled and stroked them with a hair in the same manner, as well as I could, as the ants do with their antennae; but not one excreted.
Afterwards I allowed an ant to visit them, and it immediately seemed, by its eager way of running about, to be well aware what a rich flock it had discovered; it then began to play with its antennae on the abdomen first of one aphis and then of another;
Even the quite young aphides behaved in this manner, showing that the action was instinctive, and not the result of experience.
But as the excretion is extremely viscid, it is probably a convenience to the aphides to have it removed; and therefore probably the aphides do not instinctively excrete for the sole good of the ants.
Although I do not believe that any animal in the world performs an action for the exclusive good of another of a distinct species, yet each species tries to take advantage of the instincts of others, as each takes advantage of the weaker bodily structure
So again, in some few cases, certain instincts cannot be considered as absolutely perfect; but as details on this and other such points are not indispensable, they may be here passed over.
As some degree of variation in instincts under a state of nature, and the inheritance of such variations, are indispensable for the action of natural selection, as many instances as possible ought to have been here given; but want of space prevents me.
I can only assert, that instincts certainly do vary--for instance, the migratory instinct, both in extent and direction, and in its total loss.
So it is with the nests of birds, which vary partly in dependence on the situations chosen, and on the nature and temperature of the country inhabited, but often from causes wholly unknown to us: Audubon has given several remarkable cases of differences in
Fear of any particular enemy is certainly an instinctive quality, as may be seen in nestling birds, though it is strengthened by experience, and by the sight of fear of the same enemy in other animals.
But fear of man is slowly acquired, as I have elsewhere shown, by various animals inhabiting desert islands; and we may see an instance of this, even in England, in the greater wildness of all our large birds than of our small birds; for the large birds
We may safely attribute the greater wildness of our large birds to this cause; for in uninhabited islands large birds are not more fearful than small; and the magpie, so wary in England, is tame in Norway, as is the hooded crow in Egypt.
That the general disposition of individuals of the same species, born in a state of nature, is extremely diversified, can be shown by a multitude of facts.
Several cases also, could be given, of occasional and strange habits in certain species, which might, if advantageous to the species, give rise, through natural selection, to quite new instincts.
But I am well aware that these general statements, without facts given in detail, can produce but a feeble effect on the reader's mind.
I can only repeat my assurance, that I do not speak without good evidence.
The possibility, or even probability, of inherited variations of instinct in a state of nature will be strengthened by briefly considering a few cases under domestication.
We shall thus also be enabled to see the respective parts which habit and the selection of so-called accidental variations have played in modifying the mental qualities of our domestic animals.
A number of curious and authentic instances could be given of the inheritance of all shades of disposition and tastes, and likewise of the oddest tricks, associated with certain frames of mind or periods of time.
But let us look to the familiar case of the several breeds of dogs: it cannot be doubted that young pointers (I have myself seen a striking instance) will sometimes point and even back other dogs the very first time that they are taken out; retrieving is
I cannot see that these actions, performed without experience by the young, and in nearly the same manner by each individual, performed with eager delight by each breed, and without the end being known,--for the young pointer can no more know that he
If we were to see one kind of wolf, when young and without any training, as soon as it scented its prey, stand motionless like a statue, and then slowly crawl forward with a peculiar gait; and another kind of wolf rushing round, instead of at, a herd of
Domestic instincts, as they may be called, are certainly far less fixed or invariable than natural instincts; but they have been acted on by far less rigorous selection, and have been transmitted for an incomparably shorter period, under less fixed
How strongly these domestic instincts, habits, and dispositions are inherited, and how curiously they become mingled, is well shown when different breeds of dogs are crossed.
Thus it is known that a cross with a bull-dog has affected for many generations the courage and obstinacy of greyhounds; and a cross with a greyhound has given to a whole family of shepherd-dogs a tendency to hunt hares.
These domestic instincts, when thus tested by crossing, resemble natural instincts, which in a like manner become curiously blended together, and for a long period exhibit traces of the instincts of either parent: for example, Le Roy describes a dog, whose
Domestic instincts are sometimes spoken of as actions which have become inherited solely from long-continued and compulsory habit, but this, I think, is not true.
No one would ever have thought of teaching, or probably could have taught, the tumbler-pigeon to tumble,--an action which, as I have witnessed, is performed by young birds, that have never seen a pigeon tumble.
We may believe that some one pigeon showed a slight tendency to this strange habit, and that the long-continued selection of the best individuals in successive generations made tumblers what they now are; and near Glasgow there are house-tumblers, as I
It may be doubted whether any one would have thought of training a dog to point, had not some one dog naturally shown a tendency in this line; and this is known occasionally to happen, as I once saw in a pure terrier.
When the first tendency was once displayed, methodical selection and the inherited effects of compulsory training in each successive generation would soon complete the work; and unconscious selection is still at work, as each man tries to procure, without
On the other hand, habit alone in some cases has sufficed; no animal is more difficult to tame than the young of the wild rabbit; scarcely any animal is tamer than the young of the tame rabbit; but I do not suppose that domestic rabbits have ever been
Natural instincts are lost under domestication: a remarkable instance of this is seen in those breeds of fowls which very rarely or never become "broody," that is, never wish to sit on their eggs.
Familiarity alone prevents our seeing how universally and largely the minds of our domestic animals have been modified by domestication.
It is scarcely possible to doubt that the love of man has become instinctive in the dog.
All wolves, foxes, jackals, and species of the cat genus, when kept tame, are most eager to attack poultry, sheep, and pigs; and this tendency has been found incurable in dogs which have been brought home as puppies from countries, such as Tierra del Fuego
How rarely, on the other hand, do our civilised dogs, even when quite young, require to be taught not to attack poultry, sheep, and pigs!
No doubt they occasionally do make an attack, and are then beaten; and if not cured, they are destroyed; so that habit, with some degree of selection, has probably concurred in civilising by inheritance our dogs.
On the other hand, young chickens have lost, wholly by habit, that fear of the dog and cat which no doubt was originally instinctive in them, in the same way as it is so plainly instinctive in young pheasants, though reared under a hen.
It is not that chickens have lost all fear, but fear only of dogs and cats, for if the hen gives the danger-chuckle, they will run (more especially young turkeys) from under her, and conceal themselves in the surrounding grass or thickets; and this is
But this instinct retained by our chickens has become useless under domestication, for the mother-hen has almost lost by disuse the power of flight.
Hence, we may conclude, that domestic instincts have been acquired and natural instincts have been lost partly by habit, and partly by man selecting and accumulating during successive generations, peculiar mental habits and actions, which at first appeared
In some cases compulsory habit alone has sufficed to produce such inherited mental changes; in other cases compulsory habit has done nothing, and all has been the result of selection, pursued both methodically and unconsciously; but in most cases,
We shall, perhaps, best understand how instincts in a state of nature have become modified by selection, by considering a few cases.
I will select only three, out of the several which I shall have to discuss in my future work,--namely, the instinct which leads the cuckoo to lay her eggs in other birds' nests; the slave-making instinct of certain ants; and the comb-making power of the
It is now commonly admitted that the more immediate and final cause of the cuckoo's instinct is, that she lays her eggs, not daily, but at intervals of two or three days; so that, if she were to make her own nest and sit on her own eggs, those first laid
If this were the case, the process of laying and hatching might be inconveniently long, more especially as she has to migrate at a very early period; and the first hatched young would probably have to be fed by the male alone.
But the American cuckoo is in this predicament; for she makes her own nest and has eggs and young successively hatched, all at the same time.
It has been asserted that the American cuckoo occasionally lays her eggs in other birds' nests; but I hear on the high authority of Dr. Brewer, that this is a mistake.
Nevertheless, I could give several instances of various birds which have been known occasionally to lay their eggs in other birds' nests.
Now let us suppose that the ancient progenitor of our European cuckoo had the habits of the American cuckoo; but that occasionally she laid an egg in another bird's nest.
If the old bird profited by this occasional habit, or if the young were made more vigorous by advantage having been taken of the mistaken maternal instinct of another bird, than by their own mother's care, encumbered as she can hardly fail to be by having
And analogy would lead me to believe, that the young thus reared would be apt to follow by inheritance the occasional and aberrant habit of their mother, and in their turn would be apt to lay their eggs in other birds' nests, and thus be successful in
By a continued process of this nature, I believe that the strange instinct of our cuckoo could be, and has been, generated.
I may add that, according to Dr. Gray and to some other observers, the European cuckoo has not utterly lost all maternal love and care for her own offspring.
The occasional habit of birds laying their eggs in other birds' nests, either of the same or of a distinct species, is not very uncommon with the Gallinaceae; and this perhaps explains the origin of a singular instinct in the allied group of ostriches.
For several hen ostriches, at least in the case of the American species, unite and lay first a few eggs in one nest and then in another; and these are hatched by the males.
This instinct may probably be accounted for by the fact of the hens laying a large number of eggs; but, as in the case of the cuckoo, at intervals of two or three days.
This instinct, however, of the American ostrich has not as yet been perfected; for a surprising number of eggs lie strewed over the plains, so that in one day's hunting I picked up no less than twenty lost and wasted eggs.
Many bees are parasitic, and always lay their eggs in the nests of bees of other kinds.
This case is more remarkable than that of the cuckoo; for these bees have not only their instincts but their structure modified in accordance with their parasitic habits; for they do not possess the pollen-collecting apparatus which would be necessary if
Some species, likewise, of Sphegidae (wasp-like insects) are parasitic on other species; and M. Fabre has lately shown good reason for believing that although the Tachytes nigra generally makes its own burrow and stores it with paralysed prey for its own
In this case, as with the supposed case of the cuckoo, I can see no difficulty in natural selection making an occasional habit permanent, if of advantage to the species, and if the insect whose nest and stored food are thus feloniously appropriated, be not
SLAVE-MAKING INSTINCT.
This remarkable instinct was first discovered in the Formica (Polyerges) rufescens by Pierre Huber, a better observer even than his celebrated father.
This ant is absolutely dependent on its slaves; without their aid, the species would certainly become extinct in a single year.
The males and fertile females do no work.
The workers or sterile females, though most energetic and courageous in capturing slaves, do no other work.
They are incapable of making their own nests, or of feeding their own larvae.
When the old nest is found inconvenient, and they have to migrate, it is the slaves which determine the migration, and actually carry their masters in their jaws.
So utterly helpless are the masters, that when Huber shut up thirty of them without a slave, but with plenty of the food which they like best, and with their larvae and pupae to stimulate them to work, they did nothing; they could not even feed themselves,
Huber then introduced a single slave (F.
fusca), and she instantly set to work, fed and saved the survivors; made some cells and tended the larvae, and put all to rights.
What can be more extraordinary than these well-ascertained facts?
If we had not known of any other slave-making ant, it would have been hopeless to have speculated how so wonderful an instinct could have been perfected.
Formica sanguinea was likewise first discovered by P. Huber to be a slave-making ant.
This species is found in the southern parts of England, and its habits have been attended to by Mr. F. Smith, of the British Museum, to whom I am much indebted for information on this and other subjects.
Although fully trusting to the statements of Huber and Mr. Smith, I tried to approach the subject in a sceptical frame of mind, as any one may well be excused for doubting the truth of so extraordinary and odious an instinct as that of making slaves.
Hence I will give the observations which I have myself made, in some little detail.
I opened fourteen nests of F. sanguinea, and found a few slaves in all.
Males and fertile females of the slave-species are found only in their own proper communities, and have never been observed in the nests of F. sanguinea.
The slaves are black and not above half the size of their red masters, so that the contrast in their appearance is very great.
When the nest is slightly disturbed, the slaves occasionally come out, and like their masters are much agitated and defend the nest: when the nest is much disturbed and the larvae and pupae are exposed, the slaves work energetically with their masters in
Hence, it is clear, that the slaves feel quite at home.
During the months of June and July, on three successive years, I have watched for many hours several nests in Surrey and Sussex, and never saw a slave either leave or enter a nest.
As, during these months, the slaves are very few in number, I thought that they might behave differently when more numerous; but Mr. Smith informs me that he has watched the nests at various hours during May, June and August, both in Surrey and Hampshire,
Hence he considers them as strictly household slaves.
The masters, on the other hand, may be constantly seen bringing in materials for the nest, and food of all kinds.
During the present year, however, in the month of July, I came across a community with an unusually large stock of slaves, and I observed a few slaves mingled with their masters leaving the nest, and marching along the same road to a tall Scotch-fir-tree,
According to Huber, who had ample opportunities for observation, in Switzerland the slaves habitually work with their masters in making the nest, and they alone open and close the doors in the morning and evening; and, as Huber expressly states, their
This difference in the usual habits of the masters and slaves in the two countries, probably depends merely on the slaves being captured in greater numbers in Switzerland than in England.
One day I fortunately chanced to witness a migration from one nest to another, and it was a most interesting spectacle to behold the masters carefully carrying, as Huber has described, their slaves in their jaws.
Another day my attention was struck by about a score of the slave-makers haunting the same spot, and evidently not in search of food; they approached and were vigorously repulsed by an independent community of the slave species (F.
fusca); sometimes as many as three of these ants clinging to the legs of the slave-making F. sanguinea.
The latter ruthlessly killed their small opponents, and carried their dead bodies as food to their nest, twenty-nine yards distant; but they were prevented from getting any pupae to rear as slaves.
I then dug up a small parcel of the pupae of F. fusca from another nest, and put them down on a bare spot near the place of combat; they were eagerly seized, and carried off by the tyrants, who perhaps fancied that, after all, they had been victorious in
At the same time I laid on the same place a small parcel of the pupae of another species, F. flava, with a few of these little yellow ants still clinging to the fragments of the nest.
This species is sometimes, though rarely, made into slaves, as has been described by Mr. Smith.
Although so small a species, it is very courageous, and I have seen it ferociously attack other ants.
In one instance I found to my surprise an independent community of F. flava under a stone beneath a nest of the slave-making F. sanguinea; and when I had accidentally disturbed both nests, the little ants attacked their big neighbours with surprising
Now I was curious to ascertain whether F. sanguinea could distinguish the pupae of F. fusca, which they habitually make into slaves, from those of the little and furious F. flava, which they rarely capture, and it was evident that they did at once
One evening I visited another community of F. sanguinea, and found a number of these ants entering their nest, carrying the dead bodies of F. fusca (showing that it was not a migration) and numerous pupae.
I traced the returning file burthened with booty, for about forty yards, to a very thick clump of heath, whence I saw the last individual of F. sanguinea emerge, carrying a pupa; but I was not able to find the desolated nest in the thick heath.
The nest, however, must have been close at hand, for two or three individuals of F. fusca were rushing about in the greatest agitation, and one was perched motionless with its own pupa in its mouth on the top of a spray of heath over its ravaged home.
Such are the facts, though they did not need confirmation by me, in regard to the wonderful instinct of making slaves.
Let it be observed what a contrast the instinctive habits of F. sanguinea present with those of the F. rufescens.
The latter does not build its own nest, does not determine its own migrations, does not collect food for itself or its young, and cannot even feed itself: it is absolutely dependent on its numerous slaves.
Formica sanguinea, on the other hand, possesses much fewer slaves, and in the early part of the summer extremely few.
The masters determine when and where a new nest shall be formed, and when they migrate, the masters carry the slaves.
Both in Switzerland and England the slaves seem to have the exclusive care of the larvae, and the masters alone go on slave-making expeditions.
In Switzerland the slaves and masters work together, making and bringing materials for the nest: both, but chiefly the slaves, tend, and milk as it may be called, their aphides; and thus both collect food for the community.
In England the masters alone usually leave the nest to collect building materials and food for themselves, their slaves and larvae.
So that the masters in this country receive much less service from their slaves than they do in Switzerland.
By what steps the instinct of F. sanguinea originated I will not pretend to conjecture.
But as ants, which are not slave-makers, will, as I have seen, carry off pupae of other species, if scattered near their nests, it is possible that pupae originally stored as food might become developed; and the ants thus unintentionally reared would then
If their presence proved useful to the species which had seized them--if it were more advantageous to this species to capture workers than to procreate them--the habit of collecting pupae originally for food might by natural selection be strengthened and
When the instinct was once acquired, if carried out to a much less extent even than in our British F. sanguinea, which, as we have seen, is less aided by its slaves than the same species in Switzerland, I can see no difficulty in natural selection
CELL-MAKING INSTINCT OF THE HIVE-BEE.
I will not here enter on minute details on this subject, but will merely give an outline of the conclusions at which I have arrived.
He must be a dull man who can examine the exquisite structure of a comb, so beautifully adapted to its end, without enthusiastic admiration.
We hear from mathematicians that bees have practically solved a recondite problem, and have made their cells of the proper shape to hold the greatest possible amount of honey, with the least possible consumption of precious wax in their construction.
It has been remarked that a skilful workman, with fitting tools and measures, would find it very difficult to make cells of wax of the true form, though this is perfectly effected by a crowd of bees working in a dark hive.
Grant whatever instincts you please, and it seems at first quite inconceivable how they can make all the necessary angles and planes, or even perceive when they are correctly made.
But the difficulty is not nearly so great as it at first appears: all this beautiful work can be shown, I think, to follow from a few very simple instincts.
I was led to investigate this subject by Mr. Waterhouse, who has shown that the form of the cell stands in close relation to the presence of adjoining cells; and the following view may, perhaps, be considered only as a modification of his theory.
Let us look to the great principle of gradation, and see whether Nature does not reveal to us her method of work.
At one end of a short series we have humble-bees, which use their old cocoons to hold honey, sometimes adding to them short tubes of wax, and likewise making separate and very irregular rounded cells of wax.
At the other end of the series we have the cells of the hive-bee, placed in a double layer: each cell, as is well known, is an hexagonal prism, with the basal edges of its six sides bevelled so as to join on to a pyramid, formed of three rhombs.
These rhombs have certain angles, and the three which form the pyramidal base of a single cell on one side of the comb, enter into the composition of the bases of three adjoining cells on the opposite side.
In the series between the extreme perfection of the cells of the hive-bee and the simplicity of those of the humble-bee, we have the cells of the Mexican Melipona domestica, carefully described and figured by Pierre Huber.
The Melipona itself is intermediate in structure between the hive and humble bee, but more nearly related to the latter: it forms a nearly regular waxen comb of cylindrical cells, in which the young are hatched, and, in addition, some large cells of wax
These latter cells are nearly spherical and of nearly equal sizes, and are aggregated into an irregular mass.
But the important point to notice, is that these cells are always made at that degree of nearness to each other, that they would have intersected or broken into each other, if the spheres had been completed; but this is never permitted, the bees building
Hence each cell consists of an outer spherical portion and of two, three, or more perfectly flat surfaces, according as the cell adjoins two, three or more other cells.
When one cell comes into contact with three other cells, which, from the spheres being nearly of the same size, is very frequently and necessarily the case, the three flat surfaces are united into a pyramid; and this pyramid, as Huber has remarked, is
As in the cells of the hive-bee, so here, the three plane surfaces in any one cell necessarily enter into the construction of three adjoining cells.
It is obvious that the Melipona saves wax by this manner of building; for the flat walls between the adjoining cells are not double, but are of the same thickness as the outer spherical portions, and yet each flat portion forms a part of two cells.
Reflecting on this case, it occurred to me that if the Melipona had made its spheres at some given distance from each other, and had made them of equal sizes and had arranged them symmetrically in a double layer, the resulting structure would probably have
Accordingly I wrote to Professor Miller, of Cambridge, and this geometer has kindly read over the following statement, drawn up from his information, and tells me that it is strictly correct:-- If a number of equal spheres be described with their centres
41421 (or at some lesser distance), from the centres of the six surrounding spheres in the same layer; and at the same distance from the centres of the adjoining spheres in the other and parallel layer; then, if planes of intersection between the several
Hence we may safely conclude that if we could slightly modify the instincts already possessed by the Melipona, and in themselves not very wonderful, this bee would make a structure as wonderfully perfect as that of the hive-bee.
We must suppose the Melipona to make her cells truly spherical, and of equal sizes; and this would not be very surprising, seeing that she already does so to a certain extent, and seeing what perfectly cylindrical burrows in wood many insects can make,
We must suppose the Melipona to arrange her cells in level layers, as she already does her cylindrical cells; and we must further suppose, and this is the greatest difficulty, that she can somehow judge accurately at what distance to stand from her
We have further to suppose, but this is no difficulty, that after hexagonal prisms have been formed by the intersection of adjoining spheres in the same layer, she can prolong the hexagon to any length requisite to hold the stock of honey; in the same way
By such modifications of instincts in themselves not very wonderful,--hardly more wonderful than those which guide a bird to make its nest,--I believe that the hive-bee has acquired, through natural selection, her inimitable architectural powers.
But this theory can be tested by experiment.
Following the example of Mr. Tegetmeier, I separated two combs, and put between them a long, thick, square strip of wax: the bees instantly began to excavate minute circular pits in it; and as they deepened these little pits, they made them wider and wider
It was most interesting to me to observe that wherever several bees had begun to excavate these basins near together, they had begun their work at such a distance from each other, that by the time the basins had acquired the above stated width (i.
e.
about the width of an ordinary cell), and were in depth about one sixth of the diameter of the sphere of which they formed a part, the rims of the basins intersected or broke into each other.
As soon as this occurred, the bees ceased to excavate, and began to build up flat walls of wax on the lines of intersection between the basins, so that each hexagonal prism was built upon the festooned edge of a smooth basin, instead of on the straight
I then put into the hive, instead of a thick, square piece of wax, a thin and narrow, knife-edged ridge, coloured with vermilion.
The bees instantly began on both sides to excavate little basins near to each other, in the same way as before; but the ridge of wax was so thin, that the bottoms of the basins, if they had been excavated to the same depth as in the former experiment,
The bees, however, did not suffer this to happen, and they stopped their excavations in due time; so that the basins, as soon as they had been a little deepened, came to have flat bottoms; and these flat bottoms, formed by thin little plates of the
In parts, only little bits, in other parts, large portions of a rhombic plate had been left between the opposed basins, but the work, from the unnatural state of things, had not been neatly performed.
The bees must have worked at very nearly the same rate on the opposite sides of the ridge of vermilion wax, as they circularly gnawed away and deepened the basins on both sides, in order to have succeeded in thus leaving flat plates between the basins, by
Considering how flexible thin wax is, I do not see that there is any difficulty in the bees, whilst at work on the two sides of a strip of wax, perceiving when they have gnawed the wax away to the proper thinness, and then stopping their work.
In ordinary combs it has appeared to me that the bees do not always succeed in working at exactly the same rate from the opposite sides; for I have noticed half-completed rhombs at the base of a just-commenced cell, which were slightly concave on one side,
In one well-marked instance, I put the comb back into the hive, and allowed the bees to go on working for a short time, and again examined the cell, and I found that the rhombic plate had been completed, and had become PERFECTLY FLAT: it was absolutely
From the experiment of the ridge of vermilion wax, we can clearly see that if the bees were to build for themselves a thin wall of wax, they could make their cells of the proper shape, by standing at the proper distance from each other, by excavating at
Now bees, as may be clearly seen by examining the edge of a growing comb, do make a rough, circumferential wall or rim all round the comb; and they gnaw into this from the opposite sides, always working circularly as they deepen each cell.
They do not make the whole three-sided pyramidal base of any one cell at the same time, but only the one rhombic plate which stands on the extreme growing margin, or the two plates, as the case may be; and they never complete the upper edges of the rhombic
Some of these statements differ from those made by the justly celebrated elder Huber, but I am convinced of their accuracy; and if I had space, I could show that they are conformable with my theory.
Huber's statement that the very first cell is excavated out of a little parallel-sided wall of wax, is not, as far as I have seen, strictly correct; the first commencement having always been a little hood of wax; but I will not here enter on these details.
We see how important a part excavation plays in the construction of the cells; but it would be a great error to suppose that the bees cannot build up a rough wall of wax in the proper position--that is, along the plane of intersection between two adjoining
I have several specimens showing clearly that they can do this.
Even in the rude circumferential rim or wall of wax round a growing comb, flexures may sometimes be observed, corresponding in position to the planes of the rhombic basal plates of future cells.
But the rough wall of wax has in every case to be finished off, by being largely gnawed away on both sides.
The manner in which the bees build is curious; they always make the first rough wall from ten to twenty times thicker than the excessively thin finished wall of the cell, which will ultimately be left.
We shall understand how they work, by supposing masons first to pile up a broad ridge of cement, and then to begin cutting it away equally on both sides near the ground, till a smooth, very thin wall is left in the middle; the masons always piling up the
We shall thus have a thin wall steadily growing upward; but always crowned by a gigantic coping.
From all the cells, both those just commenced and those completed, being thus crowned by a strong coping of wax, the bees can cluster and crawl over the comb without injuring the delicate hexagonal walls, which are only about one four-hundredth of an inch
By this singular manner of building, strength is continually given to the comb, with the utmost ultimate economy of wax.
It seems at first to add to the difficulty of understanding how the cells are made, that a multitude of bees all work together; one bee after working a short time at one cell going to another, so that, as Huber has stated, a score of individuals work even
I was able practically to show this fact, by covering the edges of the hexagonal walls of a single cell, or the extreme margin of the circumferential rim of a growing comb, with an extremely thin layer of melted vermilion wax; and I invariably found that
The work of construction seems to be a sort of balance struck between many bees, all instinctively standing at the same relative distance from each other, all trying to sweep equal spheres, and then building up, or leaving ungnawed, the planes of
It was really curious to note in cases of difficulty, as when two pieces of comb met at an angle, how often the bees would entirely pull down and rebuild in different ways the same cell, sometimes recurring to a shape which they had at first rejected.
When bees have a place on which they can stand in their proper positions for working,--for instance, on a slip of wood, placed directly under the middle of a comb growing downwards so that the comb has to be built over one face of the slip--in this case
It suffices that the bees should be enabled to stand at their proper relative distances from each other and from the walls of the last completed cells, and then, by striking imaginary spheres, they can build up a wall intermediate between two adjoining
This capacity in bees of laying down under certain circumstances a rough wall in its proper place between two just-commenced cells, is important, as it bears on a fact, which seems at first quite subversive of the foregoing theory; namely, that the cells
Nor does there seem to me any great difficulty in a single insect (as in the case of a queen-wasp) making hexagonal cells, if she work alternately on the inside and outside of two or three cells commenced at the same time, always standing at the proper
It is even conceivable that an insect might, by fixing on a point at which to commence a cell, and then moving outside, first to one point, and then to five other points, at the proper relative distances from the central point and from each other, strike
As natural selection acts only by the accumulation of slight modifications of structure or instinct, each profitable to the individual under its conditions of life, it may reasonably be asked, how a long and graduated succession of modified architectural
I think the answer is not difficult: it is known that bees are often hard pressed to get sufficient nectar; and I am informed by Mr. Tegetmeier that it has been experimentally found that no less than from twelve to fifteen pounds of dry sugar are consumed
Moreover, many bees have to remain idle for many days during the process of secretion.
A large store of honey is indispensable to support a large stock of bees during the winter; and the security of the hive is known mainly to depend on a large number of bees being supported.
Hence the saving of wax by largely saving honey must be a most important element of success in any family of bees.
Of course the success of any species of bee may be dependent on the number of its parasites or other enemies, or on quite distinct causes, and so be altogether independent of the quantity of honey which the bees could collect.
But let us suppose that this latter circumstance determined, as it probably often does determine, the numbers of a humble-bee which could exist in a country; and let us further suppose that the community lived throughout the winter, and consequently
Hence it would continually be more and more advantageous to our humble-bee, if she were to make her cells more and more regular, nearer together, and aggregated into a mass, like the cells of the Melipona; for in this case a large part of the bounding
Again, from the same cause, it would be advantageous to the Melipona, if she were to make her cells closer together, and more regular in every way than at present; for then, as we have seen, the spherical surfaces would wholly disappear, and would all be
Beyond this stage of perfection in architecture, natural selection could not lead; for the comb of the hive-bee, as far as we can see, is absolutely perfect in economising wax.
Thus, as I believe, the most wonderful of all known instincts, that of the hive-bee, can be explained by natural selection having taken advantage of numerous, successive, slight modifications of simpler instincts; natural selection having by slow degrees,
The bees, of course, no more knowing that they swept their spheres at one particular distance from each other, than they know what are the several angles of the hexagonal prisms and of the basal rhombic plates.
The motive power of the process of natural selection having been economy of wax; that individual swarm which wasted least honey in the secretion of wax, having succeeded best, and having transmitted by inheritance its newly acquired economical instinct to
No doubt many instincts of very difficult explanation could be opposed to the theory of natural selection,--cases, in which we cannot see how an instinct could possibly have originated; cases, in which no intermediate gradations are known to exist; cases
I will not here enter on these several cases, but will confine myself to one special difficulty, which at first appeared to me insuperable, and actually fatal to my whole theory.
I allude to the neuters or sterile females in insect-communities: for these neuters often differ widely in instinct and in structure from both the males and fertile females, and yet, from being sterile, they cannot propagate their kind.
The subject well deserves to be discussed at great length, but I will here take only a single case, that of working or sterile ants.
How the workers have been rendered sterile is a difficulty; but not much greater than that of any other striking modification of structure; for it can be shown that some insects and other articulate animals in a state of nature occasionally become sterile;
But I must pass over this preliminary difficulty.
The great difficulty lies in the working ants differing widely from both the males and the fertile females in structure, as in the shape of the thorax and in being destitute of wings and sometimes of eyes, and in instinct.
As far as instinct alone is concerned, the prodigious difference in this respect between the workers and the perfect females, would have been far better exemplified by the hive-bee.
If a working ant or other neuter insect had been an animal in the ordinary state, I should have unhesitatingly assumed that all its characters had been slowly acquired through natural selection; namely, by an individual having been born with some slight
But with the working ant we have an insect differing greatly from its parents, yet absolutely sterile; so that it could never have transmitted successively acquired modifications of structure or instinct to its progeny.
It may well be asked how is it possible to reconcile this case with the theory of natural selection?
First, let it be remembered that we have innumerable instances, both in our domestic productions and in those in a state of nature, of all sorts of differences of structure which have become correlated to certain ages, and to either sex.
We have differences correlated not only to one sex, but to that short period alone when the reproductive system is active, as in the nuptial plumage of many birds, and in the hooked jaws of the male salmon.
We have even slight differences in the horns of different breeds of cattle in relation to an artificially imperfect state of the male sex; for oxen of certain breeds have longer horns than in other breeds, in comparison with the horns of the bulls or cows
Hence I can see no real difficulty in any character having become correlated with the sterile condition of certain members of insect-communities: the difficulty lies in understanding how such correlated modifications of structure could have been slowly
This difficulty, though appearing insuperable, is lessened, or, as I believe, disappears, when it is remembered that selection may be applied to the family, as well as to the individual, and may thus gain the desired end.
Thus, a well-flavoured vegetable is cooked, and the individual is destroyed; but the horticulturist sows seeds of the same stock, and confidently expects to get nearly the same variety; breeders of cattle wish the flesh and fat to be well marbled together;
I have such faith in the powers of selection, that I do not doubt that a breed of cattle, always yielding oxen with extraordinarily long horns, could be slowly formed by carefully watching which individual bulls and cows, when matched, produced oxen with
Thus I believe it has been with social insects: a slight modification of structure, or instinct, correlated with the sterile condition of certain members of the community, has been advantageous to the community: consequently the fertile males and females
And I believe that this process has been repeated, until that prodigious amount of difference between the fertile and sterile females of the same species has been produced, which we see in many social insects.
But we have not as yet touched on the climax of the difficulty; namely, the fact that the neuters of several ants differ, not only from the fertile females and males, but from each other, sometimes to an almost incredible degree, and are thus divided into
The castes, moreover, do not generally graduate into each other, but are perfectly well defined; being as distinct from each other, as are any two species of the same genus, or rather as any two genera of the same family.
Thus in Eciton, there are working and soldier neuters, with jaws and instincts extraordinarily different: in Cryptocerus, the workers of one caste alone carry a wonderful sort of shield on their heads, the use of which is quite unknown: in the Mexican
It will indeed be thought that I have an overweening confidence in the principle of natural selection, when I do not admit that such wonderful and well-established facts at once annihilate my theory.
In the simpler case of neuter insects all of one caste or of the same kind, which have been rendered by natural selection, as I believe to be quite possible, different from the fertile males and females,--in this case, we may safely conclude from the
On this view we ought occasionally to find neuter-insects of the same species, in the same nest, presenting gradations of structure; and this we do find, even often, considering how few neuter-insects out of Europe have been carefully examined.
Mr. F. Smith has shown how surprisingly the neuters of several British ants differ from each other in size and sometimes in colour; and that the extreme forms can sometimes be perfectly linked together by individuals taken out of the same nest: I have
It often happens that the larger or the smaller sized workers are the most numerous; or that both large and small are numerous, with those of an intermediate size scanty in numbers.
Formica flava has larger and smaller workers, with some of intermediate size; and, in this species, as Mr. F. Smith has observed, the larger workers have simple eyes (ocelli), which though small can be plainly distinguished, whereas the smaller workers
Having carefully dissected several specimens of these workers, I can affirm that the eyes are far more rudimentary in the smaller workers than can be accounted for merely by their proportionally lesser size; and I fully believe, though I dare not assert so
So that we here have two bodies of sterile workers in the same nest, differing not only in size, but in their organs of vision, yet connected by some few members in an intermediate condition.
I may digress by adding, that if the smaller workers had been the most useful to the community, and those males and females had been continually selected, which produced more and more of the smaller workers, until all the workers had come to be in this
For the workers of Myrmica have not even rudiments of ocelli, though the male and female ants of this genus have well-developed ocelli.
I may give one other case: so confidently did I expect to find gradations in important points of structure between the different castes of neuters in the same species, that I gladly availed myself of Mr. F. Smith's offer of numerous specimens from the same
The reader will perhaps best appreciate the amount of difference in these workers, by my giving not the actual measurements, but a strictly accurate illustration: the difference was the same as if we were to see a set of workmen building a house of whom
The jaws, moreover, of the working ants of the several sizes differed wonderfully in shape, and in the form and number of the teeth.
But the important fact for us is, that though the workers can be grouped into castes of different sizes, yet they graduate insensibly into each other, as does the widely-different structure of their jaws.
I speak confidently on this latter point, as Mr. Lubbock made drawings for me with the camera lucida of the jaws which I had dissected from the workers of the several sizes.
With these facts before me, I believe that natural selection, by acting on the fertile parents, could form a species which should regularly produce neuters, either all of large size with one form of jaw, or all of small size with jaws having a widely
Thus, as I believe, the wonderful fact of two distinctly defined castes of sterile workers existing in the same nest, both widely different from each other and from their parents, has originated.
We can see how useful their production may have been to a social community of insects, on the same principle that the division of labour is useful to civilised man.
As ants work by inherited instincts and by inherited tools or weapons, and not by acquired knowledge and manufactured instruments, a perfect division of labour could be effected with them only by the workers being sterile; for had they been fertile, they
And nature has, as I believe, effected this admirable division of labour in the communities of ants, by the means of natural selection.
But I am bound to confess, that, with all my faith in this principle, I should never have anticipated that natural selection could have been efficient in so high a degree, had not the case of these neuter insects convinced me of the fact.
I have, therefore, discussed this case, at some little but wholly insufficient length, in order to show the power of natural selection, and likewise because this is by far the most serious special difficulty, which my theory has encountered.
The case, also, is very interesting, as it proves that with animals, as with plants, any amount of modification in structure can be effected by the accumulation of numerous, slight, and as we must call them accidental, variations, which are in any manner
For no amount of exercise, or habit, or volition, in the utterly sterile members of a community could possibly have affected the structure or instincts of the fertile members, which alone leave descendants.
I am surprised that no one has advanced this demonstrative case of neuter insects, against the well-known doctrine of Lamarck.
SUMMARY.
I have endeavoured briefly in this chapter to show that the mental qualities of our domestic animals vary, and that the variations are inherited.
Still more briefly I have attempted to show that instincts vary slightly in a state of nature.
No one will dispute that instincts are of the highest importance to each animal.
Therefore I can see no difficulty, under changing conditions of life, in natural selection accumulating slight modifications of instinct to any extent, in any useful direction.
In some cases habit or use and disuse have probably come into play.
I do not pretend that the facts given in this chapter strengthen in any great degree my theory; but none of the cases of difficulty, to the best of my judgment, annihilate it.
On the other hand, the fact that instincts are not always absolutely perfect and are liable to mistakes;--that no instinct has been produced for the exclusive good of other animals, but that each animal takes advantage of the instincts of others;--that the
This theory is, also, strengthened by some few other facts in regard to instincts; as by that common case of closely allied, but certainly distinct, species, when inhabiting distant parts of the world and living under considerably different conditions of
For instance, we can understand on the principle of inheritance, how it is that the thrush of South America lines its nest with mud, in the same peculiar manner as does our British thrush: how it is that the male wrens (Troglodytes) of North America, build
Finally, it may not be a logical deduction, but to my imagination it is far more satisfactory to look at such instincts as the young cuckoo ejecting its foster-brothers,--ants making slaves,--the larvae of ichneumonidae feeding within the live bodies of
8.
HYBRIDISM.
Distinction between the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids.
Sterility various in degree, not universal, affected by close interbreeding, removed by domestication.
Laws governing the sterility of hybrids.
Sterility not a special endowment, but incidental on other differences.
Causes of the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids.
Parallelism between the effects of changed conditions of life and crossing.
Fertility of varieties when crossed and of their mongrel offspring not universal.
Hybrids and mongrels compared independently of their fertility.
Summary.
The view generally entertained by naturalists is that species, when intercrossed, have been specially endowed with the quality of sterility, in order to prevent the confusion of all organic forms.
This view certainly seems at first probable, for species within the same country could hardly have kept distinct had they been capable of crossing freely.
The importance of the fact that hybrids are very generally sterile, has, I think, been much underrated by some late writers.
On the theory of natural selection the case is especially important, inasmuch as the sterility of hybrids could not possibly be of any advantage to them, and therefore could not have been acquired by the continued preservation of successive profitable
I hope, however, to be able to show that sterility is not a specially acquired or endowed quality, but is incidental on other acquired differences.
In treating this subject, two classes of facts, to a large extent fundamentally different, have generally been confounded together; namely, the sterility of two species when first crossed, and the sterility of the hybrids produced from them.
Pure species have of course their organs of reproduction in a perfect condition, yet when intercrossed they produce either few or no offspring.
Hybrids, on the other hand, have their reproductive organs functionally impotent, as may be clearly seen in the state of the male element in both plants and animals; though the organs themselves are perfect in structure, as far as the microscope reveals.
In the first case the two sexual elements which go to form the embryo are perfect; in the second case they are either not at all developed, or are imperfectly developed.
This distinction is important, when the cause of the sterility, which is common to the two cases, has to be considered.
The distinction has probably been slurred over, owing to the sterility in both cases being looked on as a special endowment, beyond the province of our reasoning powers.
The fertility of varieties, that is of the forms known or believed to have descended from common parents, when intercrossed, and likewise the fertility of their mongrel offspring, is, on my theory, of equal importance with the sterility of species; for it
First, for the sterility of species when crossed and of their hybrid offspring.
It is impossible to study the several memoirs and works of those two conscientious and admirable observers, Kolreuter and Gartner, who almost devoted their lives to this subject, without being deeply impressed with the high generality of some degree of
Kolreuter makes the rule universal; but then he cuts the knot, for in ten cases in which he found two forms, considered by most authors as distinct species, quite fertile together, he unhesitatingly ranks them as varieties.
Gartner, also, makes the rule equally universal; and he disputes the entire fertility of Kolreuter's ten cases.
But in these and in many other cases, Gartner is obliged carefully to count the seeds, in order to show that there is any degree of sterility.
He always compares the maximum number of seeds produced by two species when crossed and by their hybrid offspring, with the average number produced by both pure parent-species in a state of nature.
But a serious cause of error seems to me to be here introduced: a plant to be hybridised must be castrated, and, what is often more important, must be secluded in order to prevent pollen being brought to it by insects from other plants.
Nearly all the plants experimentised on by Gartner were potted, and apparently were kept in a chamber in his house.
That these processes are often injurious to the fertility of a plant cannot be doubted; for Gartner gives in his table about a score of cases of plants which he castrated, and artificially fertilised with their own pollen, and (excluding all cases such as
Moreover, as Gartner during several years repeatedly crossed the primrose and cowslip, which we have such good reason to believe to be varieties, and only once or twice succeeded in getting fertile seed; as he found the common red and blue pimpernels
It is certain, on the one hand, that the sterility of various species when crossed is so different in degree and graduates away so insensibly, and, on the other hand, that the fertility of pure species is so easily affected by various circumstances, that
I think no better evidence of this can be required than that the two most experienced observers who have ever lived, namely, Kolreuter and Gartner, should have arrived at diametrically opposite conclusions in regard to the very same species.
It is also most instructive to compare--but I have not space here to enter on details--the evidence advanced by our best botanists on the question whether certain doubtful forms should be ranked as species or varieties, with the evidence from fertility
It can thus be shown that neither sterility nor fertility affords any clear distinction between species and varieties; but that the evidence from this source graduates away, and is doubtful in the same degree as is the evidence derived from other
In regard to the sterility of hybrids in successive generations; though Gartner was enabled to rear some hybrids, carefully guarding them from a cross with either pure parent, for six or seven, and in one case for ten generations, yet he asserts positively
I do not doubt that this is usually the case, and that the fertility often suddenly decreases in the first few generations.
Nevertheless I believe that in all these experiments the fertility has been diminished by an independent cause, namely, from close interbreeding.
I have collected so large a body of facts, showing that close interbreeding lessens fertility, and, on the other hand, that an occasional cross with a distinct individual or variety increases fertility, that I cannot doubt the correctness of this almost
Hybrids are seldom raised by experimentalists in great numbers; and as the parent-species, or other allied hybrids, generally grow in the same garden, the visits of insects must be carefully prevented during the flowering season: hence hybrids will
I am strengthened in this conviction by a remarkable statement repeatedly made by Gartner, namely, that if even the less fertile hybrids be artificially fertilised with hybrid pollen of the same kind, their fertility, notwithstanding the frequent ill
Now, in artificial fertilisation pollen is as often taken by chance (as I know from my own experience) from the anthers of another flower, as from the anthers of the flower itself which is to be fertilised; so that a cross between two flowers, though
Moreover, whenever complicated experiments are in progress, so careful an observer as Gartner would have castrated his hybrids, and this would have insured in each generation a cross with the pollen from a distinct flower, either from the same plant or
And thus, the strange fact of the increase of fertility in the successive generations of ARTIFICIALLY FERTILISED hybrids may, I believe, be accounted for by close interbreeding having been avoided.
Now let us turn to the results arrived at by the third most experienced hybridiser, namely, the Honourable and Reverend W. Herbert.
He is as emphatic in his conclusion that some hybrids are perfectly fertile--as fertile as the pure parent-species--as are Kolreuter and Gartner that some degree of sterility between distinct species is a universal law of nature.
He experimentised on some of the very same species as did Gartner.
The difference in their results may, I think, be in part accounted for by Herbert's great horticultural skill, and by his having hothouses at his command.
Of his many important statements I will here give only a single one as an example, namely, that "every ovule in a pod of Crinum capense fertilised by C. revolutum produced a plant, which (he says) I never saw to occur in a case of its natural fecundation".
So that we here have perfect, or even more than commonly perfect, fertility in a first cross between two distinct species.
This case of the Crinum leads me to refer to a most singular fact, namely, that there are individual plants, as with certain species of Lobelia, and with all the species of the genus Hippeastrum, which can be far more easily fertilised by the pollen of
For these plants have been found to yield seed to the pollen of a distinct species, though quite sterile with their own pollen, notwithstanding that their own pollen was found to be perfectly good, for it fertilised distinct species.
So that certain individual plants and all the individuals of certain species can actually be hybridised much more readily than they can be self-fertilised!
For instance, a bulb of Hippeastrum aulicum produced four flowers; three were fertilised by Herbert with their own pollen, and the fourth was subsequently fertilised by the pollen of a compound hybrid descended from three other and distinct species: the
In a letter to me, in 1839, Mr. Herbert told me that he had then tried the experiment during five years, and he continued to try it during several subsequent years, and always with the same result.
This result has, also, been confirmed by other observers in the case of Hippeastrum with its sub-genera, and in the case of some other genera, as Lobelia, Passiflora and Verbascum.
Although the plants in these experiments appeared perfectly healthy, and although both the ovules and pollen of the same flower were perfectly good with respect to other species, yet as they were functionally imperfect in their mutual self-action, we must
Nevertheless these facts show on what slight and mysterious causes the lesser or greater fertility of species when crossed, in comparison with the same species when self-fertilised, sometimes depends.
The practical experiments of horticulturists, though not made with scientific precision, deserve some notice.
It is notorious in how complicated a manner the species of Pelargonium, Fuchsia, Calceolaria, Petunia, Rhododendron, etc.
, have been crossed, yet many of these hybrids seed freely.
For instance, Herbert asserts that a hybrid from Calceolaria integrifolia and plantaginea, species most widely dissimilar in general habit, "reproduced itself as perfectly as if it had been a natural species from the mountains of Chile".
I have taken some pains to ascertain the degree of fertility of some of the complex crosses of Rhododendrons, and I am assured that many of them are perfectly fertile.
Mr. C. Noble, for instance, informs me that he raises stocks for grafting from a hybrid between Rhododendron Ponticum and Catawbiense, and that this hybrid "seeds as freely as it is possible to imagine".
Had hybrids, when fairly treated, gone on decreasing in fertility in each successive generation, as Gartner believes to be the case, the fact would have been notorious to nurserymen.
Horticulturists raise large beds of the same hybrids, and such alone are fairly treated, for by insect agency the several individuals of the same hybrid variety are allowed to freely cross with each other, and the injurious influence of close interbreeding
Any one may readily convince himself of the efficiency of insect-agency by examining the flowers of the more sterile kinds of hybrid rhododendrons, which produce no pollen, for he will find on their stigmas plenty of pollen brought from other flowers.
In regard to animals, much fewer experiments have been carefully tried than with plants.
If our systematic arrangements can be trusted, that is if the genera of animals are as distinct from each other, as are the genera of plants, then we may infer that animals more widely separated in the scale of nature can be more easily crossed than in the
I doubt whether any case of a perfectly fertile hybrid animal can be considered as thoroughly well authenticated.
It should, however, be borne in mind that, owing to few animals breeding freely under confinement, few experiments have been fairly tried: for instance, the canary-bird has been crossed with nine other finches, but as not one of these nine species breeds
Again, with respect to the fertility in successive generations of the more fertile hybrid animals, I hardly know of an instance in which two families of the same hybrid have been raised at the same time from different parents, so as to avoid the ill
On the contrary, brothers and sisters have usually been crossed in each successive generation, in opposition to the constantly repeated admonition of every breeder.
And in this case, it is not at all surprising that the inherent sterility in the hybrids should have gone on increasing.
If we were to act thus, and pair brothers and sisters in the case of any pure animal, which from any cause had the least tendency to sterility, the breed would assuredly be lost in a very few generations.
Although I do not know of any thoroughly well-authenticated cases of perfectly fertile hybrid animals, I have some reason to believe that the hybrids from Cervulus vaginalis and Reevesii, and from Phasianus colchicus with P. torquatus and with P.
The hybrids from the common and Chinese geese (A.
cygnoides), species which are so different that they are generally ranked in distinct genera, have often bred in this country with either pure parent, and in one single instance they have bred inter se.
This was effected by Mr. Eyton, who raised two hybrids from the same parents but from different hatches; and from these two birds he raised no less than eight hybrids (grandchildren of the pure geese) from one nest.
In India, however, these cross-bred geese must be far more fertile; for I am assured by two eminently capable judges, namely Mr. Blyth and Capt.
Hutton, that whole flocks of these crossed geese are kept in various parts of the country; and as they are kept for profit, where neither pure parent-species exists, they must certainly be highly fertile.
A doctrine which originated with Pallas, has been largely accepted by modern naturalists; namely, that most of our domestic animals have descended from two or more aboriginal species, since commingled by intercrossing.
On this view, the aboriginal species must either at first have produced quite fertile hybrids, or the hybrids must have become in subsequent generations quite fertile under domestication.
This latter alternative seems to me the most probable, and I am inclined to believe in its truth, although it rests on no direct evidence.
I believe, for instance, that our dogs have descended from several wild stocks; yet, with perhaps the exception of certain indigenous domestic dogs of South America, all are quite fertile together; and analogy makes me greatly doubt, whether the several
So again there is reason to believe that our European and the humped Indian cattle are quite fertile together; but from facts communicated to me by Mr. Blyth, I think they must be considered as distinct species.
On this view of the origin of many of our domestic animals, we must either give up the belief of the almost universal sterility of distinct species of animals when crossed; or we must look at sterility, not as an indelible characteristic, but as one
Finally, looking to all the ascertained facts on the intercrossing of plants and animals, it may be concluded that some degree of sterility, both in first crosses and in hybrids, is an extremely general result; but that it cannot, under our present state
LAWS GOVERNING THE STERILITY OF FIRST CROSSES AND OF HYBRIDS.
We will now consider a little more in detail the circumstances and rules governing the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids.
Our chief object will be to see whether or not the rules indicate that species have specially been endowed with this quality, in order to prevent their crossing and blending together in utter confusion.
The following rules and conclusions are chiefly drawn up from Gartner's admirable work on the hybridisation of plants.
I have taken much pains to ascertain how far the rules apply to animals, and considering how scanty our knowledge is in regard to hybrid animals, I have been surprised to find how generally the same rules apply to both kingdoms.
It has been already remarked, that the degree of fertility, both of first crosses and of hybrids, graduates from zero to perfect fertility.
It is surprising in how many curious ways this gradation can be shown to exist; but only the barest outline of the facts can here be given.
When pollen from a plant of one family is placed on the stigma of a plant of a distinct family, it exerts no more influence than so much inorganic dust.
From this absolute zero of fertility, the pollen of different species of the same genus applied to the stigma of some one species, yields a perfect gradation in the number of seeds produced, up to nearly complete or even quite complete fertility; and, as
So in hybrids themselves, there are some which never have produced, and probably never would produce, even with the pollen of either pure parent, a single fertile seed: but in some of these cases a first trace of fertility may be detected, by the pollen of
From this extreme degree of sterility we have self-fertilised hybrids producing a greater and greater number of seeds up to perfect fertility.
Hybrids from two species which are very difficult to cross, and which rarely produce any offspring, are generally very sterile; but the parallelism between the difficulty of making a first cross, and the sterility of the hybrids thus produced--two classes
There are many cases, in which two pure species can be united with unusual facility, and produce numerous hybrid-offspring, yet these hybrids are remarkably sterile.
On the other hand, there are species which can be crossed very rarely, or with extreme difficulty, but the hybrids, when at last produced, are very fertile.
Even within the limits of the same genus, for instance in Dianthus, these two opposite cases occur.
The fertility, both of first crosses and of hybrids, is more easily affected by unfavourable conditions, than is the fertility of pure species.
But the degree of fertility is likewise innately variable; for it is not always the same when the same two species are crossed under the same circumstances, but depends in part upon the constitution of the individuals which happen to have been chosen for
So it is with hybrids, for their degree of fertility is often found to differ greatly in the several individuals raised from seed out of the same capsule and exposed to exactly the same conditions.
By the term systematic affinity is meant, the resemblance between species in structure and in constitution, more especially in the structure of parts which are of high physiological importance and which differ little in the allied species.
Now the fertility of first crosses between species, and of the hybrids produced from them, is largely governed by their systematic affinity.
This is clearly shown by hybrids never having been raised between species ranked by systematists in distinct families; and on the other hand, by very closely allied species generally uniting with facility.
But the correspondence between systematic affinity and the facility of crossing is by no means strict.
A multitude of cases could be given of very closely allied species which will not unite, or only with extreme difficulty; and on the other hand of very distinct species which unite with the utmost facility.
In the same family there may be a genus, as Dianthus, in which very many species can most readily be crossed; and another genus, as Silene, in which the most persevering efforts have failed to produce between extremely close species a single hybrid.
Even within the limits of the same genus, we meet with this same difference; for instance, the many species of Nicotiana have been more largely crossed than the species of almost any other genus; but Gartner found that N. acuminata, which is not a
Very many analogous facts could be given.
No one has been able to point out what kind, or what amount, of difference in any recognisable character is sufficient to prevent two species crossing.
It can be shown that plants most widely different in habit and general appearance, and having strongly marked differences in every part of the flower, even in the pollen, in the fruit, and in the cotyledons, can be crossed.
Annual and perennial plants, deciduous and evergreen trees, plants inhabiting different stations and fitted for extremely different climates, can often be crossed with ease.
By a reciprocal cross between two species, I mean the case, for instance, of a stallion-horse being first crossed with a female-ass, and then a male-ass with a mare: these two species may then be said to have been reciprocally crossed.
There is often the widest possible difference in the facility of making reciprocal crosses.
Such cases are highly important, for they prove that the capacity in any two species to cross is often completely independent of their systematic affinity, or of any recognisable difference in their whole organisation.
On the other hand, these cases clearly show that the capacity for crossing is connected with constitutional differences imperceptible by us, and confined to the reproductive system.
This difference in the result of reciprocal crosses between the same two species was long ago observed by Kolreuter.
To give an instance: Mirabilis jalappa can easily be fertilised by the pollen of M. longiflora, and the hybrids thus produced are sufficiently fertile; but Kolreuter tried more than two hundred times, during eight following years, to fertilise reciprocally
Several other equally striking cases could be given.
Thuret has observed the same fact with certain sea-weeds or Fuci.
Gartner, moreover, found that this difference of facility in making reciprocal crosses is extremely common in a lesser degree.
He has observed it even between forms so closely related (as Matthiola annua and glabra) that many botanists rank them only as varieties.
It is also a remarkable fact, that hybrids raised from reciprocal crosses, though of course compounded of the very same two species, the one species having first been used as the father and then as the mother, generally differ in fertility in a small, and
Several other singular rules could be given from Gartner: for instance, some species have a remarkable power of crossing with other species; other species of the same genus have a remarkable power of impressing their likeness on their hybrid offspring; but
There are certain hybrids which instead of having, as is usual, an intermediate character between their two parents, always closely resemble one of them; and such hybrids, though externally so like one of their pure parent-species, are with rare exceptions
So again amongst hybrids which are usually intermediate in structure between their parents, exceptional and abnormal individuals sometimes are born, which closely resemble one of their pure parents; and these hybrids are almost always utterly sterile, even
These facts show how completely fertility in the hybrid is independent of its external resemblance to either pure parent.
Considering the several rules now given, which govern the fertility of first crosses and of hybrids, we see that when forms, which must be considered as good and distinct species, are united, their fertility graduates from zero to perfect fertility, or
That their fertility, besides being eminently susceptible to favourable and unfavourable conditions, is innately variable.
That it is by no means always the same in degree in the first cross and in the hybrids produced from this cross.
That the fertility of hybrids is not related to the degree in which they resemble in external appearance either parent.
And lastly, that the facility of making a first cross between any two species is not always governed by their systematic affinity or degree of resemblance to each other.
This latter statement is clearly proved by reciprocal crosses between the same two species, for according as the one species or the other is used as the father or the mother, there is generally some difference, and occasionally the widest possible
The hybrids, moreover, produced from reciprocal crosses often differ in fertility.
Now do these complex and singular rules indicate that species have been endowed with sterility simply to prevent their becoming confounded in nature?
I think not.
For why should the sterility be so extremely different in degree, when various species are crossed, all of which we must suppose it would be equally important to keep from blending together?
Why should the degree of sterility be innately variable in the individuals of the same species?
Why should some species cross with facility, and yet produce very sterile hybrids; and other species cross with extreme difficulty, and yet produce fairly fertile hybrids?
Why should there often be so great a difference in the result of a reciprocal cross between the same two species?
Why, it may even be asked, has the production of hybrids been permitted?
to grant to species the special power of producing hybrids, and then to stop their further propagation by different degrees of sterility, not strictly related to the facility of the first union between their parents, seems to be a strange arrangement.
The foregoing rules and facts, on the other hand, appear to me clearly to indicate that the sterility both of first crosses and of hybrids is simply incidental or dependent on unknown differences, chiefly in the reproductive systems, of the species which
The differences being of so peculiar and limited a nature, that, in reciprocal crosses between two species the male sexual element of the one will often freely act on the female sexual element of the other, but not in a reversed direction.
It will be advisable to explain a little more fully by an example what I mean by sterility being incidental on other differences, and not a specially endowed quality.
As the capacity of one plant to be grafted or budded on another is so entirely unimportant for its welfare in a state of nature, I presume that no one will suppose that this capacity is a SPECIALLY endowed quality, but will admit that it is incidental on
We can sometimes see the reason why one tree will not take on another, from differences in their rate of growth, in the hardness of their wood, in the period of the flow or nature of their sap, etc.
; but in a multitude of cases we can assign no reason whatever.
Great diversity in the size of two plants, one being woody and the other herbaceous, one being evergreen and the other deciduous, and adaptation to widely different climates, does not always prevent the two grafting together.
As in hybridisation, so with grafting, the capacity is limited by systematic affinity, for no one has been able to graft trees together belonging to quite distinct families; and, on the other hand, closely allied species, and varieties of the same species,
But this capacity, as in hybridisation, is by no means absolutely governed by systematic affinity.
Although many distinct genera within the same family have been grafted together, in other cases species of the same genus will not take on each other.
The pear can be grafted far more readily on the quince, which is ranked as a distinct genus, than on the apple, which is a member of the same genus.
Even different varieties of the pear take with different degrees of facility on the quince; so do different varieties of the apricot and peach on certain varieties of the plum.
As Gartner found that there was sometimes an innate difference in different INDIVIDUALS of the same two species in crossing; so Sagaret believes this to be the case with different individuals of the same two species in being grafted together.
As in reciprocal crosses, the facility of effecting an union is often very far from equal, so it sometimes is in grafting; the common gooseberry, for instance, cannot be grafted on the currant, whereas the currant will take, though with difficulty, on the
We have seen that the sterility of hybrids, which have their reproductive organs in an imperfect condition, is a very different case from the difficulty of uniting two pure species, which have their reproductive organs perfect; yet these two distinct cases
Something analogous occurs in grafting; for Thouin found that three species of Robinia, which seeded freely on their own roots, and which could be grafted with no great difficulty on another species, when thus grafted were rendered barren.
On the other hand, certain species of Sorbus, when grafted on other species, yielded twice as much fruit as when on their own roots.
We are reminded by this latter fact of the extraordinary case of Hippeastrum, Lobelia, etc.
, which seeded much more freely when fertilised with the pollen of distinct species, than when self-fertilised with their own pollen.
We thus see, that although there is a clear and fundamental difference between the mere adhesion of grafted stocks, and the union of the male and female elements in the act of reproduction, yet that there is a rude degree of parallelism in the results of
And as we must look at the curious and complex laws governing the facility with which trees can be grafted on each other as incidental on unknown differences in their vegetative systems, so I believe that the still more complex laws governing the facility
These differences, in both cases, follow to a certain extent, as might have been expected, systematic affinity, by which every kind of resemblance and dissimilarity between organic beings is attempted to be expressed.
The facts by no means seem to me to indicate that the greater or lesser difficulty of either grafting or crossing together various species has been a special endowment; although in the case of crossing, the difficulty is as important for the endurance and
CAUSES OF THE STERILITY OF FIRST CROSSES AND OF HYBRIDS.
We may now look a little closer at the probable causes of the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids.
These two cases are fundamentally different, for, as just remarked, in the union of two pure species the male and female sexual elements are perfect, whereas in hybrids they are imperfect.
Even in first crosses, the greater or lesser difficulty in effecting a union apparently depends on several distinct causes.
There must sometimes be a physical impossibility in the male element reaching the ovule, as would be the case with a plant having a pistil too long for the pollen-tubes to reach the ovarium.
It has also been observed that when pollen of one species is placed on the stigma of a distantly allied species, though the pollen-tubes protrude, they do not penetrate the stigmatic surface.
Again, the male element may reach the female element, but be incapable of causing an embryo to be developed, as seems to have been the case with some of Thuret's experiments on Fuci.
No explanation can be given of these facts, any more than why certain trees cannot be grafted on others.
Lastly, an embryo may be developed, and then perish at an early period.
This latter alternative has not been sufficiently attended to; but I believe, from observations communicated to me by Mr. Hewitt, who has had great experience in hybridising gallinaceous birds, that the early death of the embryo is a very frequent cause of
I was at first very unwilling to believe in this view; as hybrids, when once born, are generally healthy and long-lived, as we see in the case of the common mule.
Hybrids, however, are differently circumstanced before and after birth: when born and living in a country where their two parents can live, they are generally placed under suitable conditions of life.
But a hybrid partakes of only half of the nature and constitution of its mother, and therefore before birth, as long as it is nourished within its mother's womb or within the egg or seed produced by the mother, it may be exposed to conditions in some
In regard to the sterility of hybrids, in which the sexual elements are imperfectly developed, the case is very different.
I have more than once alluded to a large body of facts, which I have collected, showing that when animals and plants are removed from their natural conditions, they are extremely liable to have their reproductive systems seriously affected.
This, in fact, is the great bar to the domestication of animals.
Between the sterility thus superinduced and that of hybrids, there are many points of similarity.
In both cases the sterility is independent of general health, and is often accompanied by excess of size or great luxuriance.
In both cases, the sterility occurs in various degrees; in both, the male element is the most liable to be affected; but sometimes the female more than the male.
In both, the tendency goes to a certain extent with systematic affinity, for whole groups of animals and plants are rendered impotent by the same unnatural conditions; and whole groups of species tend to produce sterile hybrids.
On the other hand, one species in a group will sometimes resist great changes of conditions with unimpaired fertility; and certain species in a group will produce unusually fertile hybrids.
No one can tell, till he tries, whether any particular animal will breed under confinement or any plant seed freely under culture; nor can he tell, till he tries, whether any two species of a genus will produce more or less sterile hybrids.
Lastly, when organic beings are placed during several generations under conditions not natural to them, they are extremely liable to vary, which is due, as I believe, to their reproductive systems having been specially affected, though in a lesser degree
So it is with hybrids, for hybrids in successive generations are eminently liable to vary, as every experimentalist has observed.
Thus we see that when organic beings are placed under new and unnatural conditions, and when hybrids are produced by the unnatural crossing of two species, the reproductive system, independently of the general state of health, is affected by sterility in a
In the one case, the conditions of life have been disturbed, though often in so slight a degree as to be inappreciable by us; in the other case, or that of hybrids, the external conditions have remained the same, but the organisation has been disturbed by
For it is scarcely possible that two organisations should be compounded into one, without some disturbance occurring in the development, or periodical action, or mutual relation of the different parts and organs one to another, or to the conditions of
When hybrids are able to breed inter se, they transmit to their offspring from generation to generation the same compounded organisation, and hence we need not be surprised that their sterility, though in some degree variable, rarely diminishes.
It must, however, be confessed that we cannot understand, excepting on vague hypotheses, several facts with respect to the sterility of hybrids; for instance, the unequal fertility of hybrids produced from reciprocal crosses; or the increased sterility in
Nor do I pretend that the foregoing remarks go to the root of the matter: no explanation is offered why an organism, when placed under unnatural conditions, is rendered sterile.
All that I have attempted to show, is that in two cases, in some respects allied, sterility is the common result,--in the one case from the conditions of life having been disturbed, in the other case from the organisation having been disturbed by two
It may seem fanciful, but I suspect that a similar parallelism extends to an allied yet very different class of facts.
It is an old and almost universal belief, founded, I think, on a considerable body of evidence, that slight changes in the conditions of life are beneficial to all living things.
We see this acted on by farmers and gardeners in their frequent exchanges of seed, tubers, etc.
, from one soil or climate to another, and back again.
During the convalescence of animals, we plainly see that great benefit is derived from almost any change in the habits of life.
Again, both with plants and animals, there is abundant evidence, that a cross between very distinct individuals of the same species, that is between members of different strains or sub-breeds, gives vigour and fertility to the offspring.
I believe, indeed, from the facts alluded to in our fourth chapter, that a certain amount of crossing is indispensable even with hermaphrodites; and that close interbreeding continued during several generations between the nearest relations, especially if
Hence it seems that, on the one hand, slight changes in the conditions of life benefit all organic beings, and on the other hand, that slight crosses, that is crosses between the males and females of the same species which have varied and become slightly
But we have seen that greater changes, or changes of a particular nature, often render organic beings in some degree sterile; and that greater crosses, that is crosses between males and females which have become widely or specifically different, produce
I cannot persuade myself that this parallelism is an accident or an illusion.
Both series of facts seem to be connected together by some common but unknown bond, which is essentially related to the principle of life.
FERTILITY OF VARIETIES WHEN CROSSED, AND OF THEIR MONGREL OFFSPRING.
It may be urged, as a most forcible argument, that there must be some essential distinction between species and varieties, and that there must be some error in all the foregoing remarks, inasmuch as varieties, however much they may differ from each other
I fully admit that this is almost invariably the case.
But if we look to varieties produced under nature, we are immediately involved in hopeless difficulties; for if two hitherto reputed varieties be found in any degree sterile together, they are at once ranked by most naturalists as species.
For instance, the blue and red pimpernel, the primrose and cowslip, which are considered by many of our best botanists as varieties, are said by Gartner not to be quite fertile when crossed, and he consequently ranks them as undoubted species.
If we thus argue in a circle, the fertility of all varieties produced under nature will assuredly have to be granted.
If we turn to varieties, produced, or supposed to have been produced, under domestication, we are still involved in doubt.
For when it is stated, for instance, that the German Spitz dog unites more easily than other dogs with foxes, or that certain South American indigenous domestic dogs do not readily cross with European dogs, the explanation which will occur to everyone, and
Nevertheless the perfect fertility of so many domestic varieties, differing widely from each other in appearance, for instance of the pigeon or of the cabbage, is a remarkable fact; more especially when we reflect how many species there are, which, though
Several considerations, however, render the fertility of domestic varieties less remarkable than at first appears.
It can, in the first place, be clearly shown that mere external dissimilarity between two species does not determine their greater or lesser degree of sterility when crossed; and we may apply the same rule to domestic varieties.
In the second place, some eminent naturalists believe that a long course of domestication tends to eliminate sterility in the successive generations of hybrids, which were at first only slightly sterile; and if this be so, we surely ought not to expect to
Lastly, and this seems to me by far the most important consideration, new races of animals and plants are produced under domestication by man's methodical and unconscious power of selection, for his own use and pleasure: he neither wishes to select, nor
He supplies his several varieties with the same food; treats them in nearly the same manner, and does not wish to alter their general habits of life.
Nature acts uniformly and slowly during vast periods of time on the whole organisation, in any way which may be for each creature's own good; and thus she may, either directly, or more probably indirectly, through correlation, modify the reproductive
Seeing this difference in the process of selection, as carried on by man and nature, we need not be surprised at some difference in the result.
I have as yet spoken as if the varieties of the same species were invariably fertile when intercrossed.
But it seems to me impossible to resist the evidence of the existence of a certain amount of sterility in the few following cases, which I will briefly abstract.
The evidence is at least as good as that from which we believe in the sterility of a multitude of species.
The evidence is, also, derived from hostile witnesses, who in all other cases consider fertility and sterility as safe criterions of specific distinction.
Gartner kept during several years a dwarf kind of maize with yellow seeds, and a tall variety with red seeds, growing near each other in his garden; and although these plants have separated sexes, they never naturally crossed.
He then fertilised thirteen flowers of the one with the pollen of the other; but only a single head produced any seed, and this one head produced only five grains.
Manipulation in this case could not have been injurious, as the plants have separated sexes.
No one, I believe, has suspected that these varieties of maize are distinct species; and it is important to notice that the hybrid plants thus raised were themselves PERFECTLY fertile; so that even Gartner did not venture to consider the two varieties as
Girou de Buzareingues crossed three varieties of gourd, which like the maize has separated sexes, and he asserts that their mutual fertilisation is by so much the less easy as their differences are greater.
How far these experiments may be trusted, I know not; but the forms experimentised on, are ranked by Sagaret, who mainly founds his classification by the test of infertility, as varieties.
The following case is far more remarkable, and seems at first quite incredible; but it is the result of an astonishing number of experiments made during many years on nine species of Verbascum, by so good an observer and so hostile a witness, as Gartner:
Moreover, he asserts that when yellow and white varieties of one species are crossed with yellow and white varieties of a DISTINCT species, more seed is produced by the crosses between the same coloured flowers, than between those which are differently
Yet these varieties of Verbascum present no other difference besides the mere colour of the flower; and one variety can sometimes be raised from the seed of the other.
From observations which I have made on certain varieties of hollyhock, I am inclined to suspect that they present analogous facts.
Kolreuter, whose accuracy has been confirmed by every subsequent observer, has proved the remarkable fact, that one variety of the common tobacco is more fertile, when crossed with a widely distinct species, than are the other varieties.
He experimentised on five forms, which are commonly reputed to be varieties, and which he tested by the severest trial, namely, by reciprocal crosses, and he found their mongrel offspring perfectly fertile.
But one of these five varieties, when used either as father or mother, and crossed with the Nicotiana glutinosa, always yielded hybrids not so sterile as those which were produced from the four other varieties when crossed with N. glutinosa.
Hence the reproductive system of this one variety must have been in some manner and in some degree modified.
From these facts; from the great difficulty of ascertaining the infertility of varieties in a state of nature, for a supposed variety if infertile in any degree would generally be ranked as species; from man selecting only external characters in the
The general fertility of varieties does not seem to me sufficient to overthrow the view which I have taken with respect to the very general, but not invariable, sterility of first crosses and of hybrids, namely, that it is not a special endowment, but is
HYBRIDS AND MONGRELS COMPARED, INDEPENDENTLY OF THEIR FERTILITY.
Independently of the question of fertility, the offspring of species when crossed and of varieties when crossed may be compared in several other respects.
Gartner, whose strong wish was to draw a marked line of distinction between species and varieties, could find very few and, as it seems to me, quite unimportant differences between the so-called hybrid offspring of species, and the so-called mongrel
And, on the other hand, they agree most closely in very many important respects.
I shall here discuss this subject with extreme brevity.
The most important distinction is, that in the first generation mongrels are more variable than hybrids; but Gartner admits that hybrids from species which have long been cultivated are often variable in the first generation; and I have myself seen
Gartner further admits that hybrids between very closely allied species are more variable than those from very distinct species; and this shows that the difference in the degree of variability graduates away.
When mongrels and the more fertile hybrids are propagated for several generations an extreme amount of variability in their offspring is notorious; but some few cases both of hybrids and mongrels long retaining uniformity of character could be given.
The variability, however, in the successive generations of mongrels is, perhaps, greater than in hybrids.
This greater variability of mongrels than of hybrids does not seem to me at all surprising.
For the parents of mongrels are varieties, and mostly domestic varieties (very few experiments having been tried on natural varieties), and this implies in most cases that there has been recent variability; and therefore we might expect that such
The slight degree of variability in hybrids from the first cross or in the first generation, in contrast with their extreme variability in the succeeding generations, is a curious fact and deserves attention.
For it bears on and corroborates the view which I have taken on the cause of ordinary variability; namely, that it is due to the reproductive system being eminently sensitive to any change in the conditions of life, being thus often rendered either
Now hybrids in the first generation are descended from species (excluding those long cultivated) which have not had their reproductive systems in any way affected, and they are not variable; but hybrids themselves have their reproductive systems seriously
But to return to our comparison of mongrels and hybrids: Gartner states that mongrels are more liable than hybrids to revert to either parent-form; but this, if it be true, is certainly only a difference in degree.
Gartner further insists that when any two species, although most closely allied to each other, are crossed with a third species, the hybrids are widely different from each other; whereas if two very distinct varieties of one species are crossed with
But this conclusion, as far as I can make out, is founded on a single experiment; and seems directly opposed to the results of several experiments made by Kolreuter.
These alone are the unimportant differences, which Gartner is able to point out, between hybrid and mongrel plants.
On the other hand, the resemblance in mongrels and in hybrids to their respective parents, more especially in hybrids produced from nearly related species, follows according to Gartner the same laws.
When two species are crossed, one has sometimes a prepotent power of impressing its likeness on the hybrid; and so I believe it to be with varieties of plants.
With animals one variety certainly often has this prepotent power over another variety.
Hybrid plants produced from a reciprocal cross, generally resemble each other closely; and so it is with mongrels from a reciprocal cross.
Both hybrids and mongrels can be reduced to either pure parent-form, by repeated crosses in successive generations with either parent.
These several remarks are apparently applicable to animals; but the subject is here excessively complicated, partly owing to the existence of secondary sexual characters; but more especially owing to prepotency in transmitting likeness running more
For instance, I think those authors are right, who maintain that the ass has a prepotent power over the horse, so that both the mule and the hinny more resemble the ass than the horse; but that the prepotency runs more strongly in the male-ass than in the
Much stress has been laid by some authors on the supposed fact, that mongrel animals alone are born closely like one of their parents; but it can be shown that this does sometimes occur with hybrids; yet I grant much less frequently with hybrids than with
Looking to the cases which I have collected of cross-bred animals closely resembling one parent, the resemblances seem chiefly confined to characters almost monstrous in their nature, and which have suddenly appeared--such as albinism, melanism, deficiency
Consequently, sudden reversions to the perfect character of either parent would be more likely to occur with mongrels, which are descended from varieties often suddenly produced and semi-monstrous in character, than with hybrids, which are descended from
On the whole I entirely agree with Dr. Prosper Lucas, who, after arranging an enormous body of facts with respect to animals, comes to the conclusion, that the laws of resemblance of the child to its parents are the same, whether the two parents differ
Laying aside the question of fertility and sterility, in all other respects there seems to be a general and close similarity in the offspring of crossed species, and of crossed varieties.
If we look at species as having been specially created, and at varieties as having been produced by secondary laws, this similarity would be an astonishing fact.
But it harmonises perfectly with the view that there is no essential distinction between species and varieties.
SUMMARY OF CHAPTER.
First crosses between forms sufficiently distinct to be ranked as species, and their hybrids, are very generally, but not universally, sterile.
The sterility is of all degrees, and is often so slight that the two most careful experimentalists who have ever lived, have come to diametrically opposite conclusions in ranking forms by this test.
The sterility is innately variable in individuals of the same species, and is eminently susceptible of favourable and unfavourable conditions.
The degree of sterility does not strictly follow systematic affinity, but is governed by several curious and complex laws.
It is generally different, and sometimes widely different, in reciprocal crosses between the same two species.
It is not always equal in degree in a first cross and in the hybrid produced from this cross.
In the same manner as in grafting trees, the capacity of one species or variety to take on another, is incidental on generally unknown differences in their vegetative systems, so in crossing, the greater or less facility of one species to unite with
There is no more reason to think that species have been specially endowed with various degrees of sterility to prevent them crossing and blending in nature, than to think that trees have been specially endowed with various and somewhat analogous degrees of
The sterility of first crosses between pure species, which have their reproductive systems perfect, seems to depend on several circumstances; in some cases largely on the early death of the embryo.
The sterility of hybrids, which have their reproductive systems imperfect, and which have had this system and their whole organisation disturbed by being compounded of two distinct species, seems closely allied to that sterility which so frequently affects
This view is supported by a parallelism of another kind;--namely, that the crossing of forms only slightly different is favourable to the vigour and fertility of their offspring; and that slight changes in the conditions of life are apparently favourable
It is not surprising that the degree of difficulty in uniting two species, and the degree of sterility of their hybrid-offspring should generally correspond, though due to distinct causes; for both depend on the amount of difference of some kind between
Nor is it surprising that the facility of effecting a first cross, the fertility of the hybrids produced, and the capacity of being grafted together--though this latter capacity evidently depends on widely different circumstances--should all run, to a
First crosses between forms known to be varieties, or sufficiently alike to be considered as varieties, and their mongrel offspring, are very generally, but not quite universally, fertile.
Nor is this nearly general and perfect fertility surprising, when we remember how liable we are to argue in a circle with respect to varieties in a state of nature; and when we remember that the greater number of varieties have been produced under
In all other respects, excluding fertility, there is a close general resemblance between hybrids and mongrels.
Finally, then, the facts briefly given in this chapter do not seem to me opposed to, but even rather to support the view, that there is no fundamental distinction between species and varieties.
9.
ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD.
On the absence of intermediate varieties at the present day.
On the nature of extinct intermediate varieties; on their number.
On the vast lapse of time, as inferred from the rate of deposition and of denudation.
On the poorness of our palaeontological collections.
On the intermittence of geological formations.
On the absence of intermediate varieties in any one formation.
On the sudden appearance of groups of species.
On their sudden appearance in the lowest known fossiliferous strata.
In the sixth chapter I enumerated the chief objections which might be justly urged against the views maintained in this volume.
Most of them have now been discussed.
One, namely the distinctness of specific forms, and their not being blended together by innumerable transitional links, is a very obvious difficulty.
I assigned reasons why such links do not commonly occur at the present day, under the circumstances apparently most favourable for their presence, namely on an extensive and continuous area with graduated physical conditions.
I endeavoured to show, that the life of each species depends in a more important manner on the presence of other already defined organic forms, than on climate; and, therefore, that the really governing conditions of life do not graduate away quite
I endeavoured, also, to show that intermediate varieties, from existing in lesser numbers than the forms which they connect, will generally be beaten out and exterminated during the course of further modification and improvement.
The main cause, however, of innumerable intermediate links not now occurring everywhere throughout nature depends on the very process of natural selection, through which new varieties continually take the places of and exterminate their parent-forms.
But just in proportion as this process of extermination has acted on an enormous scale, so must the number of intermediate varieties, which have formerly existed on the earth, be truly enormous.
Why then is not every geological formation and every stratum full of such intermediate links?
Geology assuredly does not reveal any such finely graduated organic chain; and this, perhaps, is the most obvious and gravest objection which can be urged against my theory.
The explanation lies, as I believe, in the extreme imperfection of the geological record.
In the first place it should always be borne in mind what sort of intermediate forms must, on my theory, have formerly existed.
I have found it difficult, when looking at any two species, to avoid picturing to myself, forms DIRECTLY intermediate between them.
But this is a wholly false view; we should always look for forms intermediate between each species and a common but unknown progenitor; and the progenitor will generally have differed in some respects from all its modified descendants.
To give a simple illustration: the fantail and pouter pigeons have both descended from the rock-pigeon; if we possessed all the intermediate varieties which have ever existed, we should have an extremely close series between both and the rock-pigeon; but
These two breeds, moreover, have become so much modified, that if we had no historical or indirect evidence regarding their origin, it would not have been possible to have determined from a mere comparison of their structure with that of the rock-pigeon,
So with natural species, if we look to forms very distinct, for instance to the horse and tapir, we have no reason to suppose that links ever existed directly intermediate between them, but between each and an unknown common parent.
The common parent will have had in its whole organisation much general resemblance to the tapir and to the horse; but in some points of structure may have differed considerably from both, even perhaps more than they differ from each other.
Hence in all such cases, we should be unable to recognise the parent-form of any two or more species, even if we closely compared the structure of the parent with that of its modified descendants, unless at the same time we had a nearly perfect chain of
It is just possible by my theory, that one of two living forms might have descended from the other; for instance, a horse from a tapir; and in this case DIRECT intermediate links will have existed between them.
But such a case would imply that one form had remained for a very long period unaltered, whilst its descendants had undergone a vast amount of change; and the principle of competition between organism and organism, between child and parent, will render
By the theory of natural selection all living species have been connected with the parent-species of each genus, by differences not greater than we see between the varieties of the same species at the present day; and these parent-species, now generally
So that the number of intermediate and transitional links, between all living and extinct species, must have been inconceivably great.
But assuredly, if this theory be true, such have lived upon this earth.
ON THE LAPSE OF TIME.
Independently of our not finding fossil remains of such infinitely numerous connecting links, it may be objected, that time will not have sufficed for so great an amount of organic change, all changes having been effected very slowly through natural
It is hardly possible for me even to recall to the reader, who may not be a practical geologist, the facts leading the mind feebly to comprehend the lapse of time.
He who can read Sir Charles Lyell's grand work on the Principles of Geology, which the future historian will recognise as having produced a revolution in natural science, yet does not admit how incomprehensibly vast have been the past periods of time, may
Not that it suffices to study the Principles of Geology, or to read special treatises by different observers on separate formations, and to mark how each author attempts to give an inadequate idea of the duration of each formation or even each stratum.
A man must for years examine for himself great piles of superimposed strata, and watch the sea at work grinding down old rocks and making fresh sediment, before he can hope to comprehend anything of the lapse of time, the monuments of which we see around
It is good to wander along lines of sea-coast, when formed of moderately hard rocks, and mark the process of degradation.
The tides in most cases reach the cliffs only for a short time twice a day, and the waves eat into them only when they are charged with sand or pebbles; for there is reason to believe that pure water can effect little or nothing in wearing away rock.
At last the base of the cliff is undermined, huge fragments fall down, and these remaining fixed, have to be worn away, atom by atom, until reduced in size they can be rolled about by the waves, and then are more quickly ground into pebbles, sand, or mud.
But how often do we see along the bases of retreating cliffs rounded boulders, all thickly clothed by marine productions, showing how little they are abraded and how seldom they are rolled about!
Moreover, if we follow for a few miles any line of rocky cliff, which is undergoing degradation, we find that it is only here and there, along a short length or round a promontory, that the cliffs are at the present time suffering.
The appearance of the surface and the vegetation show that elsewhere years have elapsed since the waters washed their base.
He who most closely studies the action of the sea on our shores, will, I believe, be most deeply impressed with the slowness with which rocky coasts are worn away.
The observations on this head by Hugh Miller, and by that excellent observer Mr. Smith of Jordan Hill, are most impressive.
With the mind thus impressed, let any one examine beds of conglomerate many thousand feet in thickness, which, though probably formed at a quicker rate than many other deposits, yet, from being formed of worn and rounded pebbles, each of which bears the
Let him remember Lyell's profound remark, that the thickness and extent of sedimentary formations are the result and measure of the degradation which the earth's crust has elsewhere suffered.
And what an amount of degradation is implied by the sedimentary deposits of many countries!
Professor Ramsay has given me the maximum thickness, in most cases from actual measurement, in a few cases from estimate, of each formation in different parts of Great Britain; and this is the result:-- Feet Palaeozoic strata (not including igneous beds).
.
57,154.
Secondary strata...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
.
.
13,190.
Tertiary strata...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
.
2,240.
--making altogether 72,584 feet; that is, very nearly thirteen and three-quarters British miles.
Some of these formations, which are represented in England by thin beds, are thousands of feet in thickness on the Continent.
Moreover, between each successive formation, we have, in the opinion of most geologists, enormously long blank periods.
So that the lofty pile of sedimentary rocks in Britain, gives but an inadequate idea of the time which has elapsed during their accumulation; yet what time this must have consumed!
Good observers have estimated that sediment is deposited by the great Mississippi river at the rate of only 600 feet in a hundred thousand years.
This estimate may be quite erroneous; yet, considering over what wide spaces very fine sediment is transported by the currents of the sea, the process of accumulation in any one area must be extremely slow.
But the amount of denudation which the strata have in many places suffered, independently of the rate of accumulation of the degraded matter, probably offers the best evidence of the lapse of time.
I remember having been much struck with the evidence of denudation, when viewing volcanic islands, which have been worn by the waves and pared all round into perpendicular cliffs of one or two thousand feet in height; for the gentle slope of the
The same story is still more plainly told by faults,--those great cracks along which the strata have been upheaved on one side, or thrown down on the other, to the height or depth of thousands of feet; for since the crust cracked, the surface of the land
The Craven fault, for instance, extends for upwards of 30 miles, and along this line the vertical displacement of the strata has varied from 600 to 3000 feet.
Professor Ramsay has published an account of a downthrow in Anglesea of 2300 feet; and he informs me that he fully believes there is one in Merionethshire of 12,000 feet; yet in these cases there is nothing on the surface to show such prodigious movements;
The consideration of these facts impresses my mind almost in the same manner as does the vain endeavour to grapple with the idea of eternity.
I am tempted to give one other case, the well-known one of the denudation of the Weald.
Though it must be admitted that the denudation of the Weald has been a mere trifle, in comparison with that which has removed masses of our palaeozoic strata, in parts ten thousand feet in thickness, as shown in Professor Ramsay's masterly memoir on this
Yet it is an admirable lesson to stand on the North Downs and to look at the distant South Downs; for, remembering that at no great distance to the west the northern and southern escarpments meet and close, one can safely picture to oneself the great dome
The distance from the northern to the southern Downs is about 22 miles, and the thickness of the several formations is on an average about 1100 feet, as I am informed by Professor Ramsay.
But if, as some geologists suppose, a range of older rocks underlies the Weald, on the flanks of which the overlying sedimentary deposits might have accumulated in thinner masses than elsewhere, the above estimate would be erroneous; but this source of
If, then, we knew the rate at which the sea commonly wears away a line of cliff of any given height, we could measure the time requisite to have denuded the Weald.
This, of course, cannot be done; but we may, in order to form some crude notion on the subject, assume that the sea would eat into cliffs 500 feet in height at the rate of one inch in a century.
This will at first appear much too small an allowance; but it is the same as if we were to assume a cliff one yard in height to be eaten back along a whole line of coast at the rate of one yard in nearly every twenty-two years.
I doubt whether any rock, even as soft as chalk, would yield at this rate excepting on the most exposed coasts; though no doubt the degradation of a lofty cliff would be more rapid from the breakage of the fallen fragments.
On the other hand, I do not believe that any line of coast, ten or twenty miles in length, ever suffers degradation at the same time along its whole indented length; and we must remember that almost all strata contain harder layers or nodules, which from
Hence, under ordinary circumstances, I conclude that for a cliff 500 feet in height, a denudation of one inch per century for the whole length would be an ample allowance.
At this rate, on the above data, the denudation of the Weald must have required 306,662,400 years; or say three hundred million years.
The action of fresh water on the gently inclined Wealden district, when upraised, could hardly have been great, but it would somewhat reduce the above estimate.
On the other hand, during oscillations of level, which we know this area has undergone, the surface may have existed for millions of years as land, and thus have escaped the action of the sea: when deeply submerged for perhaps equally long periods, it
So that in all probability a far longer period than 300 million years has elapsed since the latter part of the Secondary period.
I have made these few remarks because it is highly important for us to gain some notion, however imperfect, of the lapse of years.
During each of these years, over the whole world, the land and the water has been peopled by hosts of living forms.
What an infinite number of generations, which the mind cannot grasp, must have succeeded each other in the long roll of years!
Now turn to our richest geological museums, and what a paltry display we behold!
ON THE POORNESS OF OUR PALAEONTOLOGICAL COLLECTIONS.
That our palaeontological collections are very imperfect, is admitted by every one.
The remark of that admirable palaeontologist, the late Edward Forbes, should not be forgotten, namely, that numbers of our fossil species are known and named from single and often broken specimens, or from a few specimens collected on some one spot.
Only a small portion of the surface of the earth has been geologically explored, and no part with sufficient care, as the important discoveries made every year in Europe prove.
No organism wholly soft can be preserved.
Shells and bones will decay and disappear when left on the bottom of the sea, where sediment is not accumulating.
I believe we are continually taking a most erroneous view, when we tacitly admit to ourselves that sediment is being deposited over nearly the whole bed of the sea, at a rate sufficiently quick to embed and preserve fossil remains.
Throughout an enormously large proportion of the ocean, the bright blue tint of the water bespeaks its purity.
The many cases on record of a formation conformably covered, after an enormous interval of time, by another and later formation, without the underlying bed having suffered in the interval any wear and tear, seem explicable only on the view of the bottom of
The remains which do become embedded, if in sand or gravel, will when the beds are upraised generally be dissolved by the percolation of rain-water.
I suspect that but few of the very many animals which live on the beach between high and low watermark are preserved.
For instance, the several species of the Chthamalinae (a sub-family of sessile cirripedes) coat the rocks all over the world in infinite numbers: they are all strictly littoral, with the exception of a single Mediterranean species, which inhabits deep
The molluscan genus Chiton offers a partially analogous case.
With respect to the terrestrial productions which lived during the Secondary and Palaeozoic periods, it is superfluous to state that our evidence from fossil remains is fragmentary in an extreme degree.
For instance, not a land shell is known belonging to either of these vast periods, with one exception discovered by Sir C. Lyell in the carboniferous strata of North America.
In regard to mammiferous remains, a single glance at the historical table published in the Supplement to Lyell's Manual, will bring home the truth, how accidental and rare is their preservation, far better than pages of detail.
Nor is their rarity surprising, when we remember how large a proportion of the bones of tertiary mammals have been discovered either in caves or in lacustrine deposits; and that not a cave or true lacustrine bed is known belonging to the age of our
But the imperfection in the geological record mainly results from another and more important cause than any of the foregoing; namely, from the several formations being separated from each other by wide intervals of time.
When we see the formations tabulated in written works, or when we follow them in nature, it is difficult to avoid believing that they are closely consecutive.
But we know, for instance, from Sir R. Murchison's great work on Russia, what wide gaps there are in that country between the superimposed formations; so it is in North America, and in many other parts of the world.
The most skilful geologist, if his attention had been exclusively confined to these large territories, would never have suspected that during the periods which were blank and barren in his own country, great piles of sediment, charged with new and peculiar
And if in each separate territory, hardly any idea can be formed of the length of time which has elapsed between the consecutive formations, we may infer that this could nowhere be ascertained.
The frequent and great changes in the mineralogical composition of consecutive formations, generally implying great changes in the geography of the surrounding lands, whence the sediment has been derived, accords with the belief of vast intervals of time
But we can, I think, see why the geological formations of each region are almost invariably intermittent; that is, have not followed each other in close sequence.
Scarcely any fact struck me more when examining many hundred miles of the South American coasts, which have been upraised several hundred feet within the recent period, than the absence of any recent deposits sufficiently extensive to last for even a short
Along the whole west coast, which is inhabited by a peculiar marine fauna, tertiary beds are so scantily developed, that no record of several successive and peculiar marine faunas will probably be preserved to a distant age.
A little reflection will explain why along the rising coast of the western side of South America, no extensive formations with recent or tertiary remains can anywhere be found, though the supply of sediment must for ages have been great, from the enormous
The explanation, no doubt, is, that the littoral and sub-littoral deposits are continually worn away, as soon as they are brought up by the slow and gradual rising of the land within the grinding action of the coast-waves.
We may, I think, safely conclude that sediment must be accumulated in extremely thick, solid, or extensive masses, in order to withstand the incessant action of the waves, when first upraised and during subsequent oscillations of level.
Such thick and extensive accumulations of sediment may be formed in two ways; either, in profound depths of the sea, in which case, judging from the researches of E. Forbes, we may conclude that the bottom will be inhabited by extremely few animals, and
In this latter case, as long as the rate of subsidence and supply of sediment nearly balance each other, the sea will remain shallow and favourable for life, and thus a fossiliferous formation thick enough, when upraised, to resist any amount of
I am convinced that all our ancient formations, which are rich in fossils, have thus been formed during subsidence.
Since publishing my views on this subject in 1845, I have watched the progress of Geology, and have been surprised to note how author after author, in treating of this or that great formation, has come to the conclusion that it was accumulated during
I may add, that the only ancient tertiary formation on the west coast of South America, which has been bulky enough to resist such degradation as it has as yet suffered, but which will hardly last to a distant geological age, was certainly deposited during
All geological facts tell us plainly that each area has undergone numerous slow oscillations of level, and apparently these oscillations have affected wide spaces.
Consequently formations rich in fossils and sufficiently thick and extensive to resist subsequent degradation, may have been formed over wide spaces during periods of subsidence, but only where the supply of sediment was sufficient to keep the sea shallow
On the other hand, as long as the bed of the sea remained stationary, THICK deposits could not have been accumulated in the shallow parts, which are the most favourable to life.
Still less could this have happened during the alternate periods of elevation; or, to speak more accurately, the beds which were then accumulated will have been destroyed by being upraised and brought within the limits of the coast-action.
Thus the geological record will almost necessarily be rendered intermittent.
I feel much confidence in the truth of these views, for they are in strict accordance with the general principles inculcated by Sir C. Lyell; and E. Forbes independently arrived at a similar conclusion.
One remark is here worth a passing notice.
During periods of elevation the area of the land and of the adjoining shoal parts of the sea will be increased, and new stations will often be formed;--all circumstances most favourable, as previously explained, for the formation of new varieties and
On the other hand, during subsidence, the inhabited area and number of inhabitants will decrease (excepting the productions on the shores of a continent when first broken up into an archipelago), and consequently during subsidence, though there will be
Nature may almost be said to have guarded against the frequent discovery of her transitional or linking forms.
From the foregoing considerations it cannot be doubted that the geological record, viewed as a whole, is extremely imperfect; but if we confine our attention to any one formation, it becomes more difficult to understand, why we do not therein find closely
Some cases are on record of the same species presenting distinct varieties in the upper and lower parts of the same formation, but, as they are rare, they may be here passed over.
Although each formation has indisputably required a vast number of years for its deposition, I can see several reasons why each should not include a graduated series of links between the species which then lived; but I can by no means pretend to assign due
Although each formation may mark a very long lapse of years, each perhaps is short compared with the period requisite to change one species into another.
I am aware that two palaeontologists, whose opinions are worthy of much deference, namely Bronn and Woodward, have concluded that the average duration of each formation is twice or thrice as long as the average duration of specific forms.
But insuperable difficulties, as it seems to me, prevent us coming to any just conclusion on this head.
When we see a species first appearing in the middle of any formation, it would be rash in the extreme to infer that it had not elsewhere previously existed.
So again when we find a species disappearing before the uppermost layers have been deposited, it would be equally rash to suppose that it then became wholly extinct.
We forget how small the area of Europe is compared with the rest of the world; nor have the several stages of the same formation throughout Europe been correlated with perfect accuracy.
With marine animals of all kinds, we may safely infer a large amount of migration during climatal and other changes; and when we see a species first appearing in any formation, the probability is that it only then first immigrated into that area.
It is well known, for instance, that several species appeared somewhat earlier in the palaeozoic beds of North America than in those of Europe; time having apparently been required for their migration from the American to the European seas.
In examining the latest deposits of various quarters of the world, it has everywhere been noted, that some few still existing species are common in the deposit, but have become extinct in the immediately surrounding sea; or, conversely, that some are now
It is an excellent lesson to reflect on the ascertained amount of migration of the inhabitants of Europe during the Glacial period, which forms only a part of one whole geological period; and likewise to reflect on the great changes of level, on the
Yet it may be doubted whether in any quarter of the world, sedimentary deposits, INCLUDING FOSSIL REMAINS, have gone on accumulating within the same area during the whole of this period.
It is not, for instance, probable that sediment was deposited during the whole of the glacial period near the mouth of the Mississippi, within that limit of depth at which marine animals can flourish; for we know what vast geographical changes occurred in
When such beds as were deposited in shallow water near the mouth of the Mississippi during some part of the glacial period shall have been upraised, organic remains will probably first appear and disappear at different levels, owing to the migration of
And in the distant future, a geologist examining these beds, might be tempted to conclude that the average duration of life of the embedded fossils had been less than that of the glacial period, instead of having been really far greater, that is extending
In order to get a perfect gradation between two forms in the upper and lower parts of the same formation, the deposit must have gone on accumulating for a very long period, in order to have given sufficient time for the slow process of variation; hence the
But we have seen that a thick fossiliferous formation can only be accumulated during a period of subsidence; and to keep the depth approximately the same, which is necessary in order to enable the same species to live on the same space, the supply of
But this same movement of subsidence will often tend to sink the area whence the sediment is derived, and thus diminish the supply whilst the downward movement continues.
In fact, this nearly exact balancing between the supply of sediment and the amount of subsidence is probably a rare contingency; for it has been observed by more than one palaeontologist, that very thick deposits are usually barren of organic remains,
It would seem that each separate formation, like the whole pile of formations in any country, has generally been intermittent in its accumulation.
When we see, as is so often the case, a formation composed of beds of different mineralogical composition, we may reasonably suspect that the process of deposition has been much interrupted, as a change in the currents of the sea and a supply of sediment
Nor will the closest inspection of a formation give any idea of the time which its deposition has consumed.
Many instances could be given of beds only a few feet in thickness, representing formations, elsewhere thousands of feet in thickness, and which must have required an enormous period for their accumulation; yet no one ignorant of this fact would have
Many cases could be given of the lower beds of a formation having been upraised, denuded, submerged, and then re-covered by the upper beds of the same formation,--facts, showing what wide, yet easily overlooked, intervals have occurred in its accumulation.
In other cases we have the plainest evidence in great fossilised trees, still standing upright as they grew, of many long intervals of time and changes of level during the process of deposition, which would never even have been suspected, had not the trees
Lyell and Dawson found carboniferous beds 1400 feet thick in Nova Scotia, with ancient root-bearing strata, one above the other, at no less than sixty-eight different levels.
Hence, when the same species occur at the bottom, middle, and top of a formation, the probability is that they have not lived on the same spot during the whole period of deposition, but have disappeared and reappeared, perhaps many times, during the same
So that if such species were to undergo a considerable amount of modification during any one geological period, a section would not probably include all the fine intermediate gradations which must on my theory have existed between them, but abrupt, though
It is all-important to remember that naturalists have no golden rule by which to distinguish species and varieties; they grant some little variability to each species, but when they meet with a somewhat greater amount of difference between any two forms,
And this from the reasons just assigned we can seldom hope to effect in any one geological section.
Supposing B and C to be two species, and a third, A, to be found in an underlying bed; even if A were strictly intermediate between B and C, it would simply be ranked as a third and distinct species, unless at the same time it could be most closely
Nor should it be forgotten, as before explained, that A might be the actual progenitor of B and C, and yet might not at all necessarily be strictly intermediate between them in all points of structure.
So that we might obtain the parent-species and its several modified descendants from the lower and upper beds of a formation, and unless we obtained numerous transitional gradations, we should not recognise their relationship, and should consequently be
It is notorious on what excessively slight differences many palaeontologists have founded their species; and they do this the more readily if the specimens come from different sub-stages of the same formation.
Some experienced conchologists are now sinking many of the very fine species of D'Orbigny and others into the rank of varieties; and on this view we do find the kind of evidence of change which on my theory we ought to find.
Moreover, if we look to rather wider intervals, namely, to distinct but consecutive stages of the same great formation, we find that the embedded fossils, though almost universally ranked as specifically different, yet are far more closely allied to each
One other consideration is worth notice: with animals and plants that can propagate rapidly and are not highly locomotive, there is reason to suspect, as we have formerly seen, that their varieties are generally at first local; and that such local
According to this view, the chance of discovering in a formation in any one country all the early stages of transition between any two forms, is small, for the successive changes are supposed to have been local or confined to some one spot.
Most marine animals have a wide range; and we have seen that with plants it is those which have the widest range, that oftenest present varieties; so that with shells and other marine animals, it is probably those which have had the widest range, far
It should not be forgotten, that at the present day, with perfect specimens for examination, two forms can seldom be connected by intermediate varieties and thus proved to be the same species, until many specimens have been collected from many places; and
We shall, perhaps, best perceive the improbability of our being enabled to connect species by numerous, fine, intermediate, fossil links, by asking ourselves whether, for instance, geologists at some future period will be able to prove, that our different
This could be effected only by the future geologist discovering in a fossil state numerous intermediate gradations; and such success seems to me improbable in the highest degree.
Geological research, though it has added numerous species to existing and extinct genera, and has made the intervals between some few groups less wide than they otherwise would have been, yet has done scarcely anything in breaking down the distinction
Hence it will be worth while to sum up the foregoing remarks, under an imaginary illustration.
The Malay Archipelago is of about the size of Europe from the North Cape to the Mediterranean, and from Britain to Russia; and therefore equals all the geological formations which have been examined with any accuracy, excepting those of the United States
I fully agree with Mr. Godwin-Austen, that the present condition of the Malay Archipelago, with its numerous large islands separated by wide and shallow seas, probably represents the former state of Europe, when most of our formations were accumulating.
The Malay Archipelago is one of the richest regions of the whole world in organic beings; yet if all the species were to be collected which have ever lived there, how imperfectly would they represent the natural history of the world!
But we have every reason to believe that the terrestrial productions of the archipelago would be preserved in an excessively imperfect manner in the formations which we suppose to be there accumulating.
I suspect that not many of the strictly littoral animals, or of those which lived on naked submarine rocks, would be embedded; and those embedded in gravel or sand, would not endure to a distant epoch.
Wherever sediment did not accumulate on the bed of the sea, or where it did not accumulate at a sufficient rate to protect organic bodies from decay, no remains could be preserved.
In our archipelago, I believe that fossiliferous formations could be formed of sufficient thickness to last to an age, as distant in futurity as the secondary formations lie in the past, only during periods of subsidence.
These periods of subsidence would be separated from each other by enormous intervals, during which the area would be either stationary or rising; whilst rising, each fossiliferous formation would be destroyed, almost as soon as accumulated, by the
During the periods of subsidence there would probably be much extinction of life; during the periods of elevation, there would be much variation, but the geological record would then be least perfect.
It may be doubted whether the duration of any one great period of subsidence over the whole or part of the archipelago, together with a contemporaneous accumulation of sediment, would EXCEED the average duration of the same specific forms; and these
If such gradations were not fully preserved, transitional varieties would merely appear as so many distinct species.
It is, also, probable that each great period of subsidence would be interrupted by oscillations of level, and that slight climatal changes would intervene during such lengthy periods; and in these cases the inhabitants of the archipelago would have to
Very many of the marine inhabitants of the archipelago now range thousands of miles beyond its confines; and analogy leads me to believe that it would be chiefly these far-ranging species which would oftenest produce new varieties; and the varieties would
When such varieties returned to their ancient homes, as they would differ from their former state, in a nearly uniform, though perhaps extremely slight degree, they would, according to the principles followed by many palaeontologists, be ranked as new and
If then, there be some degree of truth in these remarks, we have no right to expect to find in our geological formations, an infinite number of those fine transitional forms, which on my theory assuredly have connected all the past and present species of
We ought only to look for a few links, some more closely, some more distantly related to each other; and these links, let them be ever so close, if found in different stages of the same formation, would, by most palaeontologists, be ranked as distinct
But I do not pretend that I should ever have suspected how poor a record of the mutations of life, the best preserved geological section presented, had not the difficulty of our not discovering innumerable transitional links between the species which
ON THE SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF WHOLE GROUPS OF ALLIED SPECIES.
The abrupt manner in which whole groups of species suddenly appear in certain formations, has been urged by several palaeontologists, for instance, by Agassiz, Pictet, and by none more forcibly than by Professor Sedgwick, as a fatal objection to the belief
If numerous species, belonging to the same genera or families, have really started into life all at once, the fact would be fatal to the theory of descent with slow modification through natural selection.
For the development of a group of forms, all of which have descended from some one progenitor, must have been an extremely slow process; and the progenitors must have lived long ages before their modified descendants.
But we continually over-rate the perfection of the geological record, and falsely infer, because certain genera or families have not been found beneath a certain stage, that they did not exist before that stage.
We continually forget how large the world is, compared with the area over which our geological formations have been carefully examined; we forget that groups of species may elsewhere have long existed and have slowly multiplied before they invaded the
We do not make due allowance for the enormous intervals of time, which have probably elapsed between our consecutive formations,--longer perhaps in some cases than the time required for the accumulation of each formation.
These intervals will have given time for the multiplication of species from some one or some few parent-forms; and in the succeeding formation such species will appear as if suddenly created.
I may here recall a remark formerly made, namely that it might require a long succession of ages to adapt an organism to some new and peculiar line of life, for instance to fly through the air; but that when this had been effected, and a few species had
I will now give a few examples to illustrate these remarks; and to show how liable we are to error in supposing that whole groups of species have suddenly been produced.
I may recall the well-known fact that in geological treatises, published not many years ago, the great class of mammals was always spoken of as having abruptly come in at the commencement of the tertiary series.
And now one of the richest known accumulations of fossil mammals belongs to the middle of the secondary series; and one true mammal has been discovered in the new red sandstone at nearly the commencement of this great series.
Cuvier used to urge that no monkey occurred in any tertiary stratum; but now extinct species have been discovered in India, South America, and in Europe even as far back as the eocene stage.
The most striking case, however, is that of the Whale family; as these animals have huge bones, are marine, and range over the world, the fact of not a single bone of a whale having been discovered in any secondary formation, seemed fully to justify the
But now we may read in the Supplement to Lyell's 'Manual,' published in 1858, clear evidence of the existence of whales in the upper greensand, some time before the close of the secondary period.
I may give another instance, which from having passed under my own eyes has much struck me.
In a memoir on Fossil Sessile Cirripedes, I have stated that, from the number of existing and extinct tertiary species; from the extraordinary abundance of the individuals of many species all over the world, from the Arctic regions to the equator,
This was a sore trouble to me, adding as I thought one more instance of the abrupt appearance of a great group of species.
But my work had hardly been published, when a skilful palaeontologist, M. Bosquet, sent me a drawing of a perfect specimen of an unmistakeable sessile cirripede, which he had himself extracted from the chalk of Belgium.
And, as if to make the case as striking as possible, this sessile cirripede was a Chthamalus, a very common, large, and ubiquitous genus, of which not one specimen has as yet been found even in any tertiary stratum.
Hence we now positively know that sessile cirripedes existed during the secondary period; and these cirripedes might have been the progenitors of our many tertiary and existing species.
The case most frequently insisted on by palaeontologists of the apparently sudden appearance of a whole group of species, is that of the teleostean fishes, low down in the Chalk period.
This group includes the large majority of existing species.
Lately, Professor Pictet has carried their existence one sub-stage further back; and some palaeontologists believe that certain much older fishes, of which the affinities are as yet imperfectly known, are really teleostean.
Assuming, however, that the whole of them did appear, as Agassiz believes, at the commencement of the chalk formation, the fact would certainly be highly remarkable; but I cannot see that it would be an insuperable difficulty on my theory, unless it could
It is almost superfluous to remark that hardly any fossil-fish are known from south of the equator; and by running through Pictet's Palaeontology it will be seen that very few species are known from several formations in Europe.
Some few families of fish now have a confined range; the teleostean fish might formerly have had a similarly confined range, and after having been largely developed in some one sea, might have spread widely.
Nor have we any right to suppose that the seas of the world have always been so freely open from south to north as they are at present.
Even at this day, if the Malay Archipelago were converted into land, the tropical parts of the Indian Ocean would form a large and perfectly enclosed basin, in which any great group of marine animals might be multiplied; and here they would remain
From these and similar considerations, but chiefly from our ignorance of the geology of other countries beyond the confines of Europe and the United States; and from the revolution in our palaeontological ideas on many points, which the discoveries of even
ON THE SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF GROUPS OF ALLIED SPECIES IN THE LOWEST KNOWN FOSSILIFEROUS STRATA.
There is another and allied difficulty, which is much graver.
I allude to the manner in which numbers of species of the same group, suddenly appear in the lowest known fossiliferous rocks.
Most of the arguments which have convinced me that all the existing species of the same group have descended from one progenitor, apply with nearly equal force to the earliest known species.
For instance, I cannot doubt that all the Silurian trilobites have descended from some one crustacean, which must have lived long before the Silurian age, and which probably differed greatly from any known animal.
Some of the most ancient Silurian animals, as the Nautilus, Lingula, etc.
, do not differ much from living species; and it cannot on my theory be supposed, that these old species were the progenitors of all the species of the orders to which they belong, for they do not present characters in any degree intermediate between them.
If, moreover, they had been the progenitors of these orders, they would almost certainly have been long ago supplanted and exterminated by their numerous and improved descendants.
Consequently, if my theory be true, it is indisputable that before the lowest Silurian stratum was deposited, long periods elapsed, as long as, or probably far longer than, the whole interval from the Silurian age to the present day; and that during these
To the question why we do not find records of these vast primordial periods, I can give no satisfactory answer.
Several of the most eminent geologists, with Sir R. Murchison at their head, are convinced that we see in the organic remains of the lowest Silurian stratum the dawn of life on this planet.
Other highly competent judges, as Lyell and the late E. Forbes, dispute this conclusion.
We should not forget that only a small portion of the world is known with accuracy.
M. Barrande has lately added another and lower stage to the Silurian system, abounding with new and peculiar species.
Traces of life have been detected in the Longmynd beds beneath Barrande's so-called primordial zone.
The presence of phosphatic nodules and bituminous matter in some of the lowest azoic rocks, probably indicates the former existence of life at these periods.
But the difficulty of understanding the absence of vast piles of fossiliferous strata, which on my theory no doubt were somewhere accumulated before the Silurian epoch, is very great.
If these most ancient beds had been wholly worn away by denudation, or obliterated by metamorphic action, we ought to find only small remnants of the formations next succeeding them in age, and these ought to be very generally in a metamorphosed condition.
But the descriptions which we now possess of the Silurian deposits over immense territories in Russia and in North America, do not support the view, that the older a formation is, the more it has suffered the extremity of denudation and metamorphism.
The case at present must remain inexplicable; and may be truly urged as a valid argument against the views here entertained.
To show that it may hereafter receive some explanation, I will give the following hypothesis.
From the nature of the organic remains, which do not appear to have inhabited profound depths, in the several formations of Europe and of the United States; and from the amount of sediment, miles in thickness, of which the formations are composed, we may
But we do not know what was the state of things in the intervals between the successive formations; whether Europe and the United States during these intervals existed as dry land, or as a submarine surface near land, on which sediment was not deposited,
Looking to the existing oceans, which are thrice as extensive as the land, we see them studded with many islands; but not one oceanic island is as yet known to afford even a remnant of any palaeozoic or secondary formation.
Hence we may perhaps infer, that during the palaeozoic and secondary periods, neither continents nor continental islands existed where our oceans now extend; for had they existed there, palaeozoic and secondary formations would in all probability have been
If then we may infer anything from these facts, we may infer that where our oceans now extend, oceans have extended from the remotest period of which we have any record; and on the other hand, that where continents now exist, large tracts of land have
The coloured map appended to my volume on Coral Reefs, led me to conclude that the great oceans are still mainly areas of subsidence, the great archipelagoes still areas of oscillations of level, and the continents areas of elevation.
But have we any right to assume that things have thus remained from eternity?
Our continents seem to have been formed by a preponderance, during many oscillations of level, of the force of elevation; but may not the areas of preponderant movement have changed in the lapse of ages?
At a period immeasurably antecedent to the silurian epoch, continents may have existed where oceans are now spread out; and clear and open oceans may have existed where our continents now stand.
Nor should we be justified in assuming that if, for instance, the bed of the Pacific Ocean were now converted into a continent, we should there find formations older than the silurian strata, supposing such to have been formerly deposited; for it might
The immense areas in some parts of the world, for instance in South America, of bare metamorphic rocks, which must have been heated under great pressure, have always seemed to me to require some special explanation; and we may perhaps believe that we see
The several difficulties here discussed, namely our not finding in the successive formations infinitely numerous transitional links between the many species which now exist or have existed; the sudden manner in which whole groups of species appear in our
We see this in the plainest manner by the fact that all the most eminent palaeontologists, namely Cuvier, Owen, Agassiz, Barrande, Falconer, E. Forbes, etc.
, and all our greatest geologists, as Lyell, Murchison, Sedgwick, etc.
, have unanimously, often vehemently, maintained the immutability of species.
But I have reason to believe that one great authority, Sir Charles Lyell, from further reflexion entertains grave doubts on this subject.
I feel how rash it is to differ from these great authorities, to whom, with others, we owe all our knowledge.
Those who think the natural geological record in any degree perfect, and who do not attach much weight to the facts and arguments of other kinds given in this volume, will undoubtedly at once reject my theory.
For my part, following out Lyell's metaphor, I look at the natural geological record, as a history of the world imperfectly kept, and written in a changing dialect; of this history we possess the last volume alone, relating only to two or three countries.
Of this volume, only here and there a short chapter has been preserved; and of each page, only here and there a few lines.
Each word of the slowly-changing language, in which the history is supposed to be written, being more or less different in the interrupted succession of chapters, may represent the apparently abruptly changed forms of life, entombed in our consecutive, but
On this view, the difficulties above discussed are greatly diminished, or even disappear.
10.
ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS.
On the slow and successive appearance of new species.
On their different rates of change.
Species once lost do not reappear.
Groups of species follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as do single species.
On Extinction.
On simultaneous changes in the forms of life throughout the world.
On the affinities of extinct species to each other and to living species.
On the state of development of ancient forms.
On the succession of the same types within the same areas.
Summary of preceding and present chapters.
Let us now see whether the several facts and rules relating to the geological succession of organic beings, better accord with the common view of the immutability of species, or with that of their slow and gradual modification, through descent and natural
New species have appeared very slowly, one after another, both on the land and in the waters.
Lyell has shown that it is hardly possible to resist the evidence on this head in the case of the several tertiary stages; and every year tends to fill up the blanks between them, and to make the percentage system of lost and new forms more gradual.
In some of the most recent beds, though undoubtedly of high antiquity if measured by years, only one or two species are lost forms, and only one or two are new forms, having here appeared for the first time, either locally, or, as far as we know, on the
If we may trust the observations of Philippi in Sicily, the successive changes in the marine inhabitants of that island have been many and most gradual.
The secondary formations are more broken; but, as Bronn has remarked, neither the appearance nor disappearance of their many now extinct species has been simultaneous in each separate formation.
Species of different genera and classes have not changed at the same rate, or in the same degree.
In the oldest tertiary beds a few living shells may still be found in the midst of a multitude of extinct forms.
Falconer has given a striking instance of a similar fact, in an existing crocodile associated with many strange and lost mammals and reptiles in the sub-Himalayan deposits.
The Silurian Lingula differs but little from the living species of this genus; whereas most of the other Silurian Molluscs and all the Crustaceans have changed greatly.
The productions of the land seem to change at a quicker rate than those of the sea, of which a striking instance has lately been observed in Switzerland.
There is some reason to believe that organisms, considered high in the scale of nature, change more quickly than those that are low: though there are exceptions to this rule.
The amount of organic change, as Pictet has remarked, does not strictly correspond with the succession of our geological formations; so that between each two consecutive formations, the forms of life have seldom changed in exactly the same degree.
Yet if we compare any but the most closely related formations, all the species will be found to have undergone some change.
When a species has once disappeared from the face of the earth, we have reason to believe that the same identical form never reappears.
The strongest apparent exception to this latter rule, is that of the so-called "colonies" of M. Barrande, which intrude for a period in the midst of an older formation, and then allow the pre-existing fauna to reappear; but Lyell's explanation, namely,
These several facts accord well with my theory.
I believe in no fixed law of development, causing all the inhabitants of a country to change abruptly, or simultaneously, or to an equal degree.
The process of modification must be extremely slow.
The variability of each species is quite independent of that of all others.
Whether such variability be taken advantage of by natural selection, and whether the variations be accumulated to a greater or lesser amount, thus causing a greater or lesser amount of modification in the varying species, depends on many complex
Hence it is by no means surprising that one species should retain the same identical form much longer than others; or, if changing, that it should change less.
We see the same fact in geographical distribution; for instance, in the land-shells and coleopterous insects of Madeira having come to differ considerably from their nearest allies on the continent of Europe, whereas the marine shells and birds have
We can perhaps understand the apparently quicker rate of change in terrestrial and in more highly organised productions compared with marine and lower productions, by the more complex relations of the higher beings to their organic and inorganic conditions
When many of the inhabitants of a country have become modified and improved, we can understand, on the principle of competition, and on that of the many all-important relations of organism to organism, that any form which does not become in some degree
Hence we can see why all the species in the same region do at last, if we look to wide enough intervals of time, become modified; for those which do not change will become extinct.
In members of the same class the average amount of change, during long and equal periods of time, may, perhaps, be nearly the same; but as the accumulation of long-enduring fossiliferous formations depends on great masses of sediment having been deposited
Each formation, on this view, does not mark a new and complete act of creation, but only an occasional scene, taken almost at hazard, in a slowly changing drama.
We can clearly understand why a species when once lost should never reappear, even if the very same conditions of life, organic and inorganic, should recur.
For though the offspring of one species might be adapted (and no doubt this has occurred in innumerable instances) to fill the exact place of another species in the economy of nature, and thus supplant it; yet the two forms--the old and the new--would not
For instance, it is just possible, if our fantail-pigeons were all destroyed, that fanciers, by striving during long ages for the same object, might make a new breed hardly distinguishable from our present fantail; but if the parent rock-pigeon were also
Groups of species, that is, genera and families, follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as do single species, changing more or less quickly, and in a greater or lesser degree.
A group does not reappear after it has once disappeared; or its existence, as long as it lasts, is continuous.
I am aware that there are some apparent exceptions to this rule, but the exceptions are surprisingly few, so few, that E. Forbes, Pictet, and Woodward (though all strongly opposed to such views as I maintain) admit its truth; and the rule strictly accords
For as all the species of the same group have descended from some one species, it is clear that as long as any species of the group have appeared in the long succession of ages, so long must its members have continuously existed, in order to have generated
Species of the genus Lingula, for instance, must have continuously existed by an unbroken succession of generations, from the lowest Silurian stratum to the present day.
We have seen in the last chapter that the species of a group sometimes falsely appear to have come in abruptly; and I have attempted to give an explanation of this fact, which if true would have been fatal to my views.
But such cases are certainly exceptional; the general rule being a gradual increase in number, till the group reaches its maximum, and then, sooner or later, it gradually decreases.
If the number of the species of a genus, or the number of the genera of a family, be represented by a vertical line of varying thickness, crossing the successive geological formations in which the species are found, the line will sometimes falsely appear
This gradual increase in number of the species of a group is strictly conformable with my theory; as the species of the same genus, and the genera of the same family, can increase only slowly and progressively; for the process of modification and the
ON EXTINCTION.
We have as yet spoken only incidentally of the disappearance of species and of groups of species.
On the theory of natural selection the extinction of old forms and the production of new and improved forms are intimately connected together.
The old notion of all the inhabitants of the earth having been swept away at successive periods by catastrophes, is very generally given up, even by those geologists, as Elie de Beaumont, Murchison, Barrande, etc.
, whose general views would naturally lead them to this conclusion.
On the contrary, we have every reason to believe, from the study of the tertiary formations, that species and groups of species gradually disappear, one after another, first from one spot, then from another, and finally from the world.
Both single species and whole groups of species last for very unequal periods; some groups, as we have seen, having endured from the earliest known dawn of life to the present day; some having disappeared before the close of the palaeozoic period.
No fixed law seems to determine the length of time during which any single species or any single genus endures.
There is reason to believe that the complete extinction of the species of a group is generally a slower process than their production: if the appearance and disappearance of a group of species be represented, as before, by a vertical line of varying
In some cases, however, the extermination of whole groups of beings, as of ammonites towards the close of the secondary period, has been wonderfully sudden.
The whole subject of the extinction of species has been involved in the most gratuitous mystery.
Some authors have even supposed that as the individual has a definite length of life, so have species a definite duration.
No one I think can have marvelled more at the extinction of species, than I have done.
When I found in La Plata the tooth of a horse embedded with the remains of Mastodon, Megatherium, Toxodon, and other extinct monsters, which all co-existed with still living shells at a very late geological period, I was filled with astonishment; for
But how utterly groundless was my astonishment!
Professor Owen soon perceived that the tooth, though so like that of the existing horse, belonged to an extinct species.
Had this horse been still living, but in some degree rare, no naturalist would have felt the least surprise at its rarity; for rarity is the attribute of a vast number of species of all classes, in all countries.
If we ask ourselves why this or that species is rare, we answer that something is unfavourable in its conditions of life; but what that something is, we can hardly ever tell.
On the supposition of the fossil horse still existing as a rare species, we might have felt certain from the analogy of all other mammals, even of the slow-breeding elephant, and from the history of the naturalisation of the domestic horse in South
But we could not have told what the unfavourable conditions were which checked its increase, whether some one or several contingencies, and at what period of the horse's life, and in what degree, they severally acted.
If the conditions had gone on, however slowly, becoming less and less favourable, we assuredly should not have perceived the fact, yet the fossil horse would certainly have become rarer and rarer, and finally extinct;--its place being seized on by some
It is most difficult always to remember that the increase of every living being is constantly being checked by unperceived injurious agencies; and that these same unperceived agencies are amply sufficient to cause rarity, and finally extinction.
We see in many cases in the more recent tertiary formations, that rarity precedes extinction; and we know that this has been the progress of events with those animals which have been exterminated, either locally or wholly, through man's agency.
I may repeat what I published in 1845, namely, that to admit that species generally become rare before they become extinct--to feel no surprise at the rarity of a species, and yet to marvel greatly when it ceases to exist, is much the same as to admit that
The theory of natural selection is grounded on the belief that each new variety, and ultimately each new species, is produced and maintained by having some advantage over those with which it comes into competition; and the consequent extinction of
It is the same with our domestic productions: when a new and slightly improved variety has been raised, it at first supplants the less improved varieties in the same neighbourhood; when much improved it is transported far and near, like our short-horn
Thus the appearance of new forms and the disappearance of old forms, both natural and artificial, are bound together.
In certain flourishing groups, the number of new specific forms which have been produced within a given time is probably greater than that of the old forms which have been exterminated; but we know that the number of species has not gone on indefinitely
The competition will generally be most severe, as formerly explained and illustrated by examples, between the forms which are most like each other in all respects.
Hence the improved and modified descendants of a species will generally cause the extermination of the parent-species; and if many new forms have been developed from any one species, the nearest allies of that species, i.
e.
the species of the same genus, will be the most liable to extermination.
Thus, as I believe, a number of new species descended from one species, that is a new genus, comes to supplant an old genus, belonging to the same family.
But it must often have happened that a new species belonging to some one group will have seized on the place occupied by a species belonging to a distinct group, and thus caused its extermination; and if many allied forms be developed from the successful
But whether it be species belonging to the same or to a distinct class, which yield their places to other species which have been modified and improved, a few of the sufferers may often long be preserved, from being fitted to some peculiar line of life, or
For instance, a single species of Trigonia, a great genus of shells in the secondary formations, survives in the Australian seas; and a few members of the great and almost extinct group of Ganoid fishes still inhabit our fresh waters.
Therefore the utter extinction of a group is generally, as we have seen, a slower process than its production.
With respect to the apparently sudden extermination of whole families or orders, as of Trilobites at the close of the palaeozoic period and of Ammonites at the close of the secondary period, we must remember what has been already said on the probable wide
Moreover, when by sudden immigration or by unusually rapid development, many species of a new group have taken possession of a new area, they will have exterminated in a correspondingly rapid manner many of the old inhabitants; and the forms which thus
Thus, as it seems to me, the manner in which single species and whole groups of species become extinct, accords well with the theory of natural selection.
We need not marvel at extinction; if we must marvel, let it be at our presumption in imagining for a moment that we understand the many complex contingencies, on which the existence of each species depends.
If we forget for an instant, that each species tends to increase inordinately, and that some check is always in action, yet seldom perceived by us, the whole economy of nature will be utterly obscured.
Whenever we can precisely say why this species is more abundant in individuals than that; why this species and not another can be naturalised in a given country; then, and not till then, we may justly feel surprise why we cannot account for the extinction
ON THE FORMS OF LIFE CHANGING ALMOST SIMULTANEOUSLY THROUGHOUT THE WORLD.
Scarcely any palaeontological discovery is more striking than the fact, that the forms of life change almost simultaneously throughout the world.
Thus our European Chalk formation can be recognised in many distant parts of the world, under the most different climates, where not a fragment of the mineral chalk itself can be found; namely, in North America, in equatorial South America, in Tierra del
For at these distant points, the organic remains in certain beds present an unmistakeable degree of resemblance to those of the Chalk.
It is not that the same species are met with; for in some cases not one species is identically the same, but they belong to the same families, genera, and sections of genera, and sometimes are similarly characterised in such trifling points as mere
Moreover other forms, which are not found in the Chalk of Europe, but which occur in the formations either above or below, are similarly absent at these distant points of the world.
In the several successive palaeozoic formations of Russia, Western Europe and North America, a similar parallelism in the forms of life has been observed by several authors: so it is, according to Lyell, with the several European and North American
Even if the few fossil species which are common to the Old and New Worlds be kept wholly out of view, the general parallelism in the successive forms of life, in the stages of the widely separated palaeozoic and tertiary periods, would still be manifest,
These observations, however, relate to the marine inhabitants of distant parts of the world: we have not sufficient data to judge whether the productions of the land and of fresh water change at distant points in the same parallel manner.
We may doubt whether they have thus changed: if the Megatherium, Mylodon, Macrauchenia, and Toxodon had been brought to Europe from La Plata, without any information in regard to their geological position, no one would have suspected that they had
When the marine forms of life are spoken of as having changed simultaneously throughout the world, it must not be supposed that this expression relates to the same thousandth or hundred-thousandth year, or even that it has a very strict geological sense;
So, again, several highly competent observers believe that the existing productions of the United States are more closely related to those which lived in Europe during certain later tertiary stages, than to those which now live here; and if this be so, it
Nevertheless, looking to a remotely future epoch, there can, I think, be little doubt that all the more modern MARINE formations, namely, the upper pliocene, the pleistocene and strictly modern beds, of Europe, North and South America, and Australia, from
The fact of the forms of life changing simultaneously, in the above large sense, at distant parts of the world, has greatly struck those admirable observers, MM.
de Verneuil and d'Archiac.
After referring to the parallelism of the palaeozoic forms of life in various parts of Europe, they add, "If struck by this strange sequence, we turn our attention to North America, and there discover a series of analogous phenomena, it will appear certain
M. Barrande has made forcible remarks to precisely the same effect.
It is, indeed, quite futile to look to changes of currents, climate, or other physical conditions, as the cause of these great mutations in the forms of life throughout the world, under the most different climates.
We must, as Barrande has remarked, look to some special law.
We shall see this more clearly when we treat of the present distribution of organic beings, and find how slight is the relation between the physical conditions of various countries, and the nature of their inhabitants.
This great fact of the parallel succession of the forms of life throughout the world, is explicable on the theory of natural selection.
New species are formed by new varieties arising, which have some advantage over older forms; and those forms, which are already dominant, or have some advantage over the other forms in their own country, would naturally oftenest give rise to new varieties
We have distinct evidence on this head, in the plants which are dominant, that is, which are commonest in their own homes, and are most widely diffused, having produced the greatest number of new varieties.
It is also natural that the dominant, varying, and far-spreading species, which already have invaded to a certain extent the territories of other species, should be those which would have the best chance of spreading still further, and of giving rise in
The process of diffusion may often be very slow, being dependent on climatal and geographical changes, or on strange accidents, but in the long run the dominant forms will generally succeed in spreading.
The diffusion would, it is probable, be slower with the terrestrial inhabitants of distinct continents than with the marine inhabitants of the continuous sea.
We might therefore expect to find, as we apparently do find, a less strict degree of parallel succession in the productions of the land than of the sea.
Dominant species spreading from any region might encounter still more dominant species, and then their triumphant course, or even their existence, would cease.
We know not at all precisely what are all the conditions most favourable for the multiplication of new and dominant species; but we can, I think, clearly see that a number of individuals, from giving a better chance of the appearance of favourable
A certain amount of isolation, recurring at long intervals of time, would probably be also favourable, as before explained.
One quarter of the world may have been most favourable for the production of new and dominant species on the land, and another for those in the waters of the sea.
If two great regions had been for a long period favourably circumstanced in an equal degree, whenever their inhabitants met, the battle would be prolonged and severe; and some from one birthplace and some from the other might be victorious.
But in the course of time, the forms dominant in the highest degree, wherever produced, would tend everywhere to prevail.
As they prevailed, they would cause the extinction of other and inferior forms; and as these inferior forms would be allied in groups by inheritance, whole groups would tend slowly to disappear; though here and there a single member might long be enabled
Thus, as it seems to me, the parallel, and, taken in a large sense, simultaneous, succession of the same forms of life throughout the world, accords well with the principle of new species having been formed by dominant species spreading widely and varying;
The forms which are beaten and which yield their places to the new and victorious forms, will generally be allied in groups, from inheriting some inferiority in common; and therefore as new and improved groups spread throughout the world, old groups will
There is one other remark connected with this subject worth making.
I have given my reasons for believing that all our greater fossiliferous formations were deposited during periods of subsidence; and that blank intervals of vast duration occurred during the periods when the bed of the sea was either stationary or rising,
During these long and blank intervals I suppose that the inhabitants of each region underwent a considerable amount of modification and extinction, and that there was much migration from other parts of the world.
As we have reason to believe that large areas are affected by the same movement, it is probable that strictly contemporaneous formations have often been accumulated over very wide spaces in the same quarter of the world; but we are far from having any
When two formations have been deposited in two regions during nearly, but not exactly the same period, we should find in both, from the causes explained in the foregoing paragraphs, the same general succession in the forms of life; but the species would
I suspect that cases of this nature have occurred in Europe.
Mr. Prestwich, in his admirable Memoirs on the eocene deposits of England and France, is able to draw a close general parallelism between the successive stages in the two countries; but when he compares certain stages in England with those in France,
Lyell has made similar observations on some of the later tertiary formations.
Barrande, also, shows that there is a striking general parallelism in the successive Silurian deposits of Bohemia and Scandinavia; nevertheless he finds a surprising amount of difference in the species.
If the several formations in these regions have not been deposited during the same exact periods,--a formation in one region often corresponding with a blank interval in the other,--and if in both regions the species have gone on slowly changing during the
ON THE AFFINITIES OF EXTINCT SPECIES TO EACH OTHER, AND TO LIVING FORMS.
Let us now look to the mutual affinities of extinct and living species.
They all fall into one grand natural system; and this fact is at once explained on the principle of descent.
The more ancient any form is, the more, as a general rule, it differs from living forms.
But, as Buckland long ago remarked, all fossils can be classed either in still existing groups, or between them.
That the extinct forms of life help to fill up the wide intervals between existing genera, families, and orders, cannot be disputed.
For if we confine our attention either to the living or to the extinct alone, the series is far less perfect than if we combine both into one general system.
With respect to the Vertebrata, whole pages could be filled with striking illustrations from our great palaeontologist, Owen, showing how extinct animals fall in between existing groups.
Cuvier ranked the Ruminants and Pachyderms, as the two most distinct orders of mammals; but Owen has discovered so many fossil links, that he has had to alter the whole classification of these two orders; and has placed certain pachyderms in the same
In regard to the Invertebrata, Barrande, and a higher authority could not be named, asserts that he is every day taught that palaeozoic animals, though belonging to the same orders, families, or genera with those living at the present day, were not at this
Some writers have objected to any extinct species or group of species being considered as intermediate between living species or groups.
If by this term it is meant that an extinct form is directly intermediate in all its characters between two living forms, the objection is probably valid.
But I apprehend that in a perfectly natural classification many fossil species would have to stand between living species, and some extinct genera between living genera, even between genera belonging to distinct families.
The most common case, especially with respect to very distinct groups, such as fish and reptiles, seems to be, that supposing them to be distinguished at the present day from each other by a dozen characters, the ancient members of the same two groups
It is a common belief that the more ancient a form is, by so much the more it tends to connect by some of its characters groups now widely separated from each other.
This remark no doubt must be restricted to those groups which have undergone much change in the course of geological ages; and it would be difficult to prove the truth of the proposition, for every now and then even a living animal, as the Lepidosiren, is
Yet if we compare the older Reptiles and Batrachians, the older Fish, the older Cephalopods, and the eocene Mammals, with the more recent members of the same classes, we must admit that there is some truth in the remark.
Let us see how far these several facts and inferences accord with the theory of descent with modification.
As the subject is somewhat complex, I must request the reader to turn to the diagram in the fourth chapter.
We may suppose that the numbered letters represent genera, and the dotted lines diverging from them the species in each genus.
The diagram is much too simple, too few genera and too few species being given, but this is unimportant for us.
The horizontal lines may represent successive geological formations, and all the forms beneath the uppermost line may be considered as extinct.
The three existing genera, a14, q14, p14, will form a small family; b14 and f14 a closely allied family or sub-family; and o14, e14, m14, a third family.
These three families, together with the many extinct genera on the several lines of descent diverging from the parent-form A, will form an order; for all will have inherited something in common from their ancient and common progenitor.
On the principle of the continued tendency to divergence of character, which was formerly illustrated by this diagram, the more recent any form is, the more it will generally differ from its ancient progenitor.
Hence we can understand the rule that the most ancient fossils differ most from existing forms.
We must not, however, assume that divergence of character is a necessary contingency; it depends solely on the descendants from a species being thus enabled to seize on many and different places in the economy of nature.
Therefore it is quite possible, as we have seen in the case of some Silurian forms, that a species might go on being slightly modified in relation to its slightly altered conditions of life, and yet retain throughout a vast period the same general
This is represented in the diagram by the letter F14.
All the many forms, extinct and recent, descended from A, make, as before remarked, one order; and this order, from the continued effects of extinction and divergence of character, has become divided into several sub-families and families, some of which
By looking at the diagram we can see that if many of the extinct forms, supposed to be embedded in the successive formations, were discovered at several points low down in the series, the three existing families on the uppermost line would be rendered less
If, for instance, the genera a1, a5, a10, f8, m3, m6, m9 were disinterred, these three families would be so closely linked together that they probably would have to be united into one great family, in nearly the same manner as has occurred with ruminants
Yet he who objected to call the extinct genera, which thus linked the living genera of three families together, intermediate in character, would be justified, as they are intermediate, not directly, but only by a long and circuitous course through many
If many extinct forms were to be discovered above one of the middle horizontal lines or geological formations--for instance, above Number VI.
--but none from beneath this line, then only the two families on the left hand (namely, a14, etc.
, and b14, etc.
) would have to be united into one family; and the two other families (namely, a14 to f14 now including five genera, and o14 to m14) would yet remain distinct.
These two families, however, would be less distinct from each other than they were before the discovery of the fossils.
If, for instance, we suppose the existing genera of the two families to differ from each other by a dozen characters, in this case the genera, at the early period marked VI.
, would differ by a lesser number of characters; for at this early stage of descent they have not diverged in character from the common progenitor of the order, nearly so much as they subsequently diverged.
Thus it comes that ancient and extinct genera are often in some slight degree intermediate in character between their modified descendants, or between their collateral relations.
In nature the case will be far more complicated than is represented in the diagram; for the groups will have been more numerous, they will have endured for extremely unequal lengths of time, and will have been modified in various degrees.
As we possess only the last volume of the geological record, and that in a very broken condition, we have no right to expect, except in very rare cases, to fill up wide intervals in the natural system, and thus unite distinct families or orders.
All that we have a right to expect, is that those groups, which have within known geological periods undergone much modification, should in the older formations make some slight approach to each other; so that the older members should differ less from each
Thus, on the theory of descent with modification, the main facts with respect to the mutual affinities of the extinct forms of life to each other and to living forms, seem to me explained in a satisfactory manner.
And they are wholly inexplicable on any other view.
On this same theory, it is evident that the fauna of any great period in the earth's history will be intermediate in general character between that which preceded and that which succeeded it.
Thus, the species which lived at the sixth great stage of descent in the diagram are the modified offspring of those which lived at the fifth stage, and are the parents of those which became still more modified at the seventh stage; hence they could hardly
We must, however, allow for the entire extinction of some preceding forms, and for the coming in of quite new forms by immigration, and for a large amount of modification, during the long and blank intervals between the successive formations.
Subject to these allowances, the fauna of each geological period undoubtedly is intermediate in character, between the preceding and succeeding faunas.
I need give only one instance, namely, the manner in which the fossils of the Devonian system, when this system was first discovered, were at once recognised by palaeontologists as intermediate in character between those of the overlying carboniferous, and
But each fauna is not necessarily exactly intermediate, as unequal intervals of time have elapsed between consecutive formations.
It is no real objection to the truth of the statement, that the fauna of each period as a whole is nearly intermediate in character between the preceding and succeeding faunas, that certain genera offer exceptions to the rule.
For instance, mastodons and elephants, when arranged by Dr. Falconer in two series, first according to their mutual affinities and then according to their periods of existence, do not accord in arrangement.
The species extreme in character are not the oldest, or the most recent; nor are those which are intermediate in character, intermediate in age.
But supposing for an instant, in this and other such cases, that the record of the first appearance and disappearance of the species was perfect, we have no reason to believe that forms successively produced necessarily endure for corresponding lengths of
To compare small things with great: if the principal living and extinct races of the domestic pigeon were arranged as well as they could be in serial affinity, this arrangement would not closely accord with the order in time of their production, and still
Closely connected with the statement, that the organic remains from an intermediate formation are in some degree intermediate in character, is the fact, insisted on by all palaeontologists, that fossils from two consecutive formations are far more closely
Pictet gives as a well-known instance, the general resemblance of the organic remains from the several stages of the chalk formation, though the species are distinct in each stage.
This fact alone, from its generality, seems to have shaken Professor Pictet in his firm belief in the immutability of species.
He who is acquainted with the distribution of existing species over the globe, will not attempt to account for the close resemblance of the distinct species in closely consecutive formations, by the physical conditions of the ancient areas having remained
Let it be remembered that the forms of life, at least those inhabiting the sea, have changed almost simultaneously throughout the world, and therefore under the most different climates and conditions.
Consider the prodigious vicissitudes of climate during the pleistocene period, which includes the whole glacial period, and note how little the specific forms of the inhabitants of the sea have been affected.
On the theory of descent, the full meaning of the fact of fossil remains from closely consecutive formations, though ranked as distinct species, being closely related, is obvious.
As the accumulation of each formation has often been interrupted, and as long blank intervals have intervened between successive formations, we ought not to expect to find, as I attempted to show in the last chapter, in any one or two formations all the
We find, in short, such evidence of the slow and scarcely sensible mutation of specific forms, as we have a just right to expect to find.
ON THE STATE OF DEVELOPMENT OF ANCIENT FORMS.
There has been much discussion whether recent forms are more highly developed than ancient.
I will not here enter on this subject, for naturalists have not as yet defined to each other's satisfaction what is meant by high and low forms.
But in one particular sense the more recent forms must, on my theory, be higher than the more ancient; for each new species is formed by having had some advantage in the struggle for life over other and preceding forms.
If under a nearly similar climate, the eocene inhabitants of one quarter of the world were put into competition with the existing inhabitants of the same or some other quarter, the eocene fauna or flora would certainly be beaten and exterminated; as would
I do not doubt that this process of improvement has affected in a marked and sensible manner the organisation of the more recent and victorious forms of life, in comparison with the ancient and beaten forms; but I can see no way of testing this sort of
Crustaceans, for instance, not the highest in their own class, may have beaten the highest molluscs.
From the extraordinary manner in which European productions have recently spread over New Zealand, and have seized on places which must have been previously occupied, we may believe, if all the animals and plants of Great Britain were set free in New
On the other hand, from what we see now occurring in New Zealand, and from hardly a single inhabitant of the southern hemisphere having become wild in any part of Europe, we may doubt, if all the productions of New Zealand were set free in Great Britain,
Under this point of view, the productions of Great Britain may be said to be higher than those of New Zealand.
Yet the most skilful naturalist from an examination of the species of the two countries could not have foreseen this result.
Agassiz insists that ancient animals resemble to a certain extent the embryos of recent animals of the same classes; or that the geological succession of extinct forms is in some degree parallel to the embryological development of recent forms.
I must follow Pictet and Huxley in thinking that the truth of this doctrine is very far from proved.
Yet I fully expect to see it hereafter confirmed, at least in regard to subordinate groups, which have branched off from each other within comparatively recent times.
For this doctrine of Agassiz accords well with the theory of natural selection.
In a future chapter I shall attempt to show that the adult differs from its embryo, owing to variations supervening at a not early age, and being inherited at a corresponding age.
This process, whilst it leaves the embryo almost unaltered, continually adds, in the course of successive generations, more and more difference to the adult.
Thus the embryo comes to be left as a sort of picture, preserved by nature, of the ancient and less modified condition of each animal.
This view may be true, and yet it may never be capable of full proof.
Seeing, for instance, that the oldest known mammals, reptiles, and fish strictly belong to their own proper classes, though some of these old forms are in a slight degree less distinct from each other than are the typical members of the same groups at the
ON THE SUCCESSION OF THE SAME TYPES WITHIN THE SAME AREAS, DURING THE LATER TERTIARY PERIODS.
Mr. Clift many years ago showed that the fossil mammals from the Australian caves were closely allied to the living marsupials of that continent.
In South America, a similar relationship is manifest, even to an uneducated eye, in the gigantic pieces of armour like those of the armadillo, found in several parts of La Plata; and Professor Owen has shown in the most striking manner that most of the
This relationship is even more clearly seen in the wonderful collection of fossil bones made by MM.
Lund and Clausen in the caves of Brazil.
I was so much impressed with these facts that I strongly insisted, in 1839 and 1845, on this "law of the succession of types,"--on "this wonderful relationship in the same continent between the dead and the living".
Professor Owen has subsequently extended the same generalisation to the mammals of the Old World.
We see the same law in this author's restorations of the extinct and gigantic birds of New Zealand.
We see it also in the birds of the caves of Brazil.
Mr. Woodward has shown that the same law holds good with sea-shells, but from the wide distribution of most genera of molluscs, it is not well displayed by them.
Other cases could be added, as the relation between the extinct and living land-shells of Madeira; and between the extinct and living brackish-water shells of the Aralo-Caspian Sea.
Now what does this remarkable law of the succession of the same types within the same areas mean?
He would be a bold man, who after comparing the present climate of Australia and of parts of South America under the same latitude, would attempt to account, on the one hand, by dissimilar physical conditions for the dissimilarity of the inhabitants of
Nor can it be pretended that it is an immutable law that marsupials should have been chiefly or solely produced in Australia; or that Edentata and other American types should have been solely produced in South America.
For we know that Europe in ancient times was peopled by numerous marsupials; and I have shown in the publications above alluded to, that in America the law of distribution of terrestrial mammals was formerly different from what it now is.
North America formerly partook strongly of the present character of the southern half of the continent; and the southern half was formerly more closely allied, than it is at present, to the northern half.
In a similar manner we know from Falconer and Cautley's discoveries, that northern India was formerly more closely related in its mammals to Africa than it is at the present time.
Analogous facts could be given in relation to the distribution of marine animals.
On the theory of descent with modification, the great law of the long enduring, but not immutable, succession of the same types within the same areas, is at once explained; for the inhabitants of each quarter of the world will obviously tend to leave in
If the inhabitants of one continent formerly differed greatly from those of another continent, so will their modified descendants still differ in nearly the same manner and degree.
But after very long intervals of time and after great geographical changes, permitting much inter-migration, the feebler will yield to the more dominant forms, and there will be nothing immutable in the laws of past and present distribution.
It may be asked in ridicule, whether I suppose that the megatherium and other allied huge monsters have left behind them in South America the sloth, armadillo, and anteater, as their degenerate descendants.
This cannot for an instant be admitted.
These huge animals have become wholly extinct, and have left no progeny.
But in the caves of Brazil, there are many extinct species which are closely allied in size and in other characters to the species still living in South America; and some of these fossils may be the actual progenitors of living species.
It must not be forgotten that, on my theory, all the species of the same genus have descended from some one species; so that if six genera, each having eight species, be found in one geological formation, and in the next succeeding formation there be six
The other seven species of the old genera have all died out and have left no progeny.
Or, which would probably be a far commoner case, two or three species of two or three alone of the six older genera will have been the parents of the six new genera; the other old species and the other whole genera having become utterly extinct.
In failing orders, with the genera and species decreasing in numbers, as apparently is the case of the Edentata of South America, still fewer genera and species will have left modified blood-descendants.
SUMMARY OF THE PRECEDING AND PRESENT CHAPTERS.
I have attempted to show that the geological record is extremely imperfect; that only a small portion of the globe has been geologically explored with care; that only certain classes of organic beings have been largely preserved in a fossil state; that the
All these causes taken conjointly, must have tended to make the geological record extremely imperfect, and will to a large extent explain why we do not find interminable varieties, connecting together all the extinct and existing forms of life by the
He who rejects these views on the nature of the geological record, will rightly reject my whole theory.
For he may ask in vain where are the numberless transitional links which must formerly have connected the closely allied or representative species, found in the several stages of the same great formation.
He may disbelieve in the enormous intervals of time which have elapsed between our consecutive formations; he may overlook how important a part migration must have played, when the formations of any one great region alone, as that of Europe, are
He may ask where are the remains of those infinitely numerous organisms which must have existed long before the first bed of the Silurian system was deposited: I can answer this latter question only hypothetically, by saying that as far as we can see,
Passing from these difficulties, all the other great leading facts in palaeontology seem to me simply to follow on the theory of descent with modification through natural selection.
We can thus understand how it is that new species come in slowly and successively; how species of different classes do not necessarily change together, or at the same rate, or in the same degree; yet in the long run that all undergo modification to some
The extinction of old forms is the almost inevitable consequence of the production of new forms.
We can understand why when a species has once disappeared it never reappears.
Groups of species increase in numbers slowly, and endure for unequal periods of time; for the process of modification is necessarily slow, and depends on many complex contingencies.
The dominant species of the larger dominant groups tend to leave many modified descendants, and thus new sub-groups and groups are formed.
As these are formed, the species of the less vigorous groups, from their inferiority inherited from a common progenitor, tend to become extinct together, and to leave no modified offspring on the face of the earth.
But the utter extinction of a whole group of species may often be a very slow process, from the survival of a few descendants, lingering in protected and isolated situations.
When a group has once wholly disappeared, it does not reappear; for the link of generation has been broken.
We can understand how the spreading of the dominant forms of life, which are those that oftenest vary, will in the long run tend to people the world with allied, but modified, descendants; and these will generally succeed in taking the places of those
Hence, after long intervals of time, the productions of the world will appear to have changed simultaneously.
We can understand how it is that all the forms of life, ancient and recent, make together one grand system; for all are connected by generation.
We can understand, from the continued tendency to divergence of character, why the more ancient a form is, the more it generally differs from those now living.
Why ancient and extinct forms often tend to fill up gaps between existing forms, sometimes blending two groups previously classed as distinct into one; but more commonly only bringing them a little closer together.
The more ancient a form is, the more often, apparently, it displays characters in some degree intermediate between groups now distinct; for the more ancient a form is, the more nearly it will be related to, and consequently resemble, the common progenitor
Extinct forms are seldom directly intermediate between existing forms; but are intermediate only by a long and circuitous course through many extinct and very different forms.
We can clearly see why the organic remains of closely consecutive formations are more closely allied to each other, than are those of remote formations; for the forms are more closely linked together by generation: we can clearly see why the remains of an
The inhabitants of each successive period in the world's history have beaten their predecessors in the race for life, and are, in so far, higher in the scale of nature; and this may account for that vague yet ill-defined sentiment, felt by many
If it should hereafter be proved that ancient animals resemble to a certain extent the embryos of more recent animals of the same class, the fact will be intelligible.
The succession of the same types of structure within the same areas during the later geological periods ceases to be mysterious, and is simply explained by inheritance.
If then the geological record be as imperfect as I believe it to be, and it may at least be asserted that the record cannot be proved to be much more perfect, the main objections to the theory of natural selection are greatly diminished or disappear.
On the other hand, all the chief laws of palaeontology plainly proclaim, as it seems to me, that species have been produced by ordinary generation: old forms having been supplanted by new and improved forms of life, produced by the laws of variation still
11.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.
Present distribution cannot be accounted for by differences in physical conditions.
Importance of barriers.
Affinity of the productions of the same continent.
Centres of creation.
Means of dispersal, by changes of climate and of the level of the land, and by occasional means.
Dispersal during the Glacial period co-extensive with the world.
In considering the distribution of organic beings over the face of the globe, the first great fact which strikes us is, that neither the similarity nor the dissimilarity of the inhabitants of various regions can be accounted for by their climatal and other
Of late, almost every author who has studied the subject has come to this conclusion.
The case of America alone would almost suffice to prove its truth: for if we exclude the northern parts where the circumpolar land is almost continuous, all authors agree that one of the most fundamental divisions in geographical distribution is that
There is hardly a climate or condition in the Old World which cannot be paralleled in the New--at least as closely as the same species generally require; for it is a most rare case to find a group of organisms confined to any small spot, having conditions
Notwithstanding this parallelism in the conditions of the Old and New Worlds, how widely different are their living productions!
In the southern hemisphere, if we compare large tracts of land in Australia, South Africa, and western South America, between latitudes 25 deg and 35 deg, we shall find parts extremely similar in all their conditions, yet it would not be possible to point
Or again we may compare the productions of South America south of lat.
35 deg with those north of 25 deg, which consequently inhabit a considerably different climate, and they will be found incomparably more closely related to each other, than they are to the productions of Australia or Africa under nearly the same climate.
Analogous facts could be given with respect to the inhabitants of the sea.
A second great fact which strikes us in our general review is, that barriers of any kind, or obstacles to free migration, are related in a close and important manner to the differences between the productions of various regions.
We see this in the great difference of nearly all the terrestrial productions of the New and Old Worlds, excepting in the northern parts, where the land almost joins, and where, under a slightly different climate, there might have been free migration for
We see the same fact in the great difference between the inhabitants of Australia, Africa, and South America under the same latitude: for these countries are almost as much isolated from each other as is possible.
On each continent, also, we see the same fact; for on the opposite sides of lofty and continuous mountain-ranges, and of great deserts, and sometimes even of large rivers, we find different productions; though as mountain chains, deserts, etc.
, are not as impassable, or likely to have endured so long as the oceans separating continents, the differences are very inferior in degree to those characteristic of distinct continents.
Turning to the sea, we find the same law.
No two marine faunas are more distinct, with hardly a fish, shell, or crab in common, than those of the eastern and western shores of South and Central America; yet these great faunas are separated only by the narrow, but impassable, isthmus of Panama.
Westward of the shores of America, a wide space of open ocean extends, with not an island as a halting-place for emigrants; here we have a barrier of another kind, and as soon as this is passed we meet in the eastern islands of the Pacific, with another
So that here three marine faunas range far northward and southward, in parallel lines not far from each other, under corresponding climates; but from being separated from each other by impassable barriers, either of land or open sea, they are wholly
On the other hand, proceeding still further westward from the eastern islands of the tropical parts of the Pacific, we encounter no impassable barriers, and we have innumerable islands as halting-places, until after travelling over a hemisphere we come to
Although hardly one shell, crab or fish is common to the above-named three approximate faunas of Eastern and Western America and the eastern Pacific islands, yet many fish range from the Pacific into the Indian Ocean, and many shells are common to the
A third great fact, partly included in the foregoing statements, is the affinity of the productions of the same continent or sea, though the species themselves are distinct at different points and stations.
It is a law of the widest generality, and every continent offers innumerable instances.
Nevertheless the naturalist in travelling, for instance, from north to south never fails to be struck by the manner in which successive groups of beings, specifically distinct, yet clearly related, replace each other.
He hears from closely allied, yet distinct kinds of birds, notes nearly similar, and sees their nests similarly constructed, but not quite alike, with eggs coloured in nearly the same manner.
The plains near the Straits of Magellan are inhabited by one species of Rhea (American ostrich), and northward the plains of La Plata by another species of the same genus; and not by a true ostrich or emeu, like those found in Africa and Australia under
On these same plains of La Plata, we see the agouti and bizcacha, animals having nearly the same habits as our hares and rabbits and belonging to the same order of Rodents, but they plainly display an American type of structure.
We ascend the lofty peaks of the Cordillera and we find an alpine species of bizcacha; we look to the waters, and we do not find the beaver or musk-rat, but the coypu and capybara, rodents of the American type.
Innumerable other instances could be given.
If we look to the islands off the American shore, however much they may differ in geological structure, the inhabitants, though they may be all peculiar species, are essentially American.
We may look back to past ages, as shown in the last chapter, and we find American types then prevalent on the American continent and in the American seas.
We see in these facts some deep organic bond, prevailing throughout space and time, over the same areas of land and water, and independent of their physical conditions.
The naturalist must feel little curiosity, who is not led to inquire what this bond is.
This bond, on my theory, is simply inheritance, that cause which alone, as far as we positively know, produces organisms quite like, or, as we see in the case of varieties nearly like each other.
The dissimilarity of the inhabitants of different regions may be attributed to modification through natural selection, and in a quite subordinate degree to the direct influence of different physical conditions.
The degree of dissimilarity will depend on the migration of the more dominant forms of life from one region into another having been effected with more or less ease, at periods more or less remote;--on the nature and number of the former immigrants;--and
Thus the high importance of barriers comes into play by checking migration; as does time for the slow process of modification through natural selection.
Widely-ranging species, abounding in individuals, which have already triumphed over many competitors in their own widely-extended homes will have the best chance of seizing on new places, when they spread into new countries.
In their new homes they will be exposed to new conditions, and will frequently undergo further modification and improvement; and thus they will become still further victorious, and will produce groups of modified descendants.
On this principle of inheritance with modification, we can understand how it is that sections of genera, whole genera, and even families are confined to the same areas, as is so commonly and notoriously the case.
I believe, as was remarked in the last chapter, in no law of necessary development.
As the variability of each species is an independent property, and will be taken advantage of by natural selection, only so far as it profits the individual in its complex struggle for life, so the degree of modification in different species will be no
If, for instance, a number of species, which stand in direct competition with each other, migrate in a body into a new and afterwards isolated country, they will be little liable to modification; for neither migration nor isolation in themselves can do
These principles come into play only by bringing organisms into new relations with each other, and in a lesser degree with the surrounding physical conditions.
As we have seen in the last chapter that some forms have retained nearly the same character from an enormously remote geological period, so certain species have migrated over vast spaces, and have not become greatly modified.
On these views, it is obvious, that the several species of the same genus, though inhabiting the most distant quarters of the world, must originally have proceeded from the same source, as they have descended from the same progenitor.
In the case of those species, which have undergone during whole geological periods but little modification, there is not much difficulty in believing that they may have migrated from the same region; for during the vast geographical and climatal changes
But in many other cases, in which we have reason to believe that the species of a genus have been produced within comparatively recent times, there is great difficulty on this head.
It is also obvious that the individuals of the same species, though now inhabiting distant and isolated regions, must have proceeded from one spot, where their parents were first produced: for, as explained in the last chapter, it is incredible that
We are thus brought to the question which has been largely discussed by naturalists, namely, whether species have been created at one or more points of the earth's surface.
Undoubtedly there are very many cases of extreme difficulty, in understanding how the same species could possibly have migrated from some one point to the several distant and isolated points, where now found.
Nevertheless the simplicity of the view that each species was first produced within a single region captivates the mind.
He who rejects it, rejects the vera causa of ordinary generation with subsequent migration, and calls in the agency of a miracle.
It is universally admitted, that in most cases the area inhabited by a species is continuous; and when a plant or animal inhabits two points so distant from each other, or with an interval of such a nature, that the space could not be easily passed over by
The capacity of migrating across the sea is more distinctly limited in terrestrial mammals, than perhaps in any other organic beings; and, accordingly, we find no inexplicable cases of the same mammal inhabiting distant points of the world.
No geologist will feel any difficulty in such cases as Great Britain having been formerly united to Europe, and consequently possessing the same quadrupeds.
But if the same species can be produced at two separate points, why do we not find a single mammal common to Europe and Australia or South America?
The conditions of life are nearly the same, so that a multitude of European animals and plants have become naturalised in America and Australia; and some of the aboriginal plants are identically the same at these distant points of the northern and southern
The answer, as I believe, is, that mammals have not been able to migrate, whereas some plants, from their varied means of dispersal, have migrated across the vast and broken interspace.
The great and striking influence which barriers of every kind have had on distribution, is intelligible only on the view that the great majority of species have been produced on one side alone, and have not been able to migrate to the other side.
Some few families, many sub-families, very many genera, and a still greater number of sections of genera are confined to a single region; and it has been observed by several naturalists, that the most natural genera, or those genera in which the species
What a strange anomaly it would be, if, when coming one step lower in the series, to the individuals of the same species, a directly opposite rule prevailed; and species were not local, but had been produced in two or more distinct areas!
Hence it seems to me, as it has to many other naturalists, that the view of each species having been produced in one area alone, and having subsequently migrated from that area as far as its powers of migration and subsistence under past and present
Undoubtedly many cases occur, in which we cannot explain how the same species could have passed from one point to the other.
But the geographical and climatal changes, which have certainly occurred within recent geological times, must have interrupted or rendered discontinuous the formerly continuous range of many species.
So that we are reduced to consider whether the exceptions to continuity of range are so numerous and of so grave a nature, that we ought to give up the belief, rendered probable by general considerations, that each species has been produced within one
It would be hopelessly tedious to discuss all the exceptional cases of the same species, now living at distant and separated points; nor do I for a moment pretend that any explanation could be offered of many such cases.
But after some preliminary remarks, I will discuss a few of the most striking classes of facts; namely, the existence of the same species on the summits of distant mountain-ranges, and at distant points in the arctic and antarctic regions; and secondly (in
If the existence of the same species at distant and isolated points of the earth's surface, can in many instances be explained on the view of each species having migrated from a single birthplace; then, considering our ignorance with respect to former
In discussing this subject, we shall be enabled at the same time to consider a point equally important for us, namely, whether the several distinct species of a genus, which on my theory have all descended from a common progenitor, can have migrated
If it can be shown to be almost invariably the case, that a region, of which most of its inhabitants are closely related to, or belong to the same genera with the species of a second region, has probably received at some former period immigrants from this
A volcanic island, for instance, upheaved and formed at the distance of a few hundreds of miles from a continent, would probably receive from it in the course of time a few colonists, and their descendants, though modified, would still be plainly related
Cases of this nature are common, and are, as we shall hereafter more fully see, inexplicable on the theory of independent creation.
This view of the relation of species in one region to those in another, does not differ much (by substituting the word variety for species) from that lately advanced in an ingenious paper by Mr. Wallace, in which he concludes, that "every species has come
And I now know from correspondence, that this coincidence he attributes to generation with modification.
The previous remarks on "single and multiple centres of creation" do not directly bear on another allied question,--namely whether all the individuals of the same species have descended from a single pair, or single hermaphrodite, or whether, as some
With those organic beings which never intercross (if such exist), the species, on my theory, must have descended from a succession of improved varieties, which will never have blended with other individuals or varieties, but will have supplanted each
But in the majority of cases, namely, with all organisms which habitually unite for each birth, or which often intercross, I believe that during the slow process of modification the individuals of the species will have been kept nearly uniform by
To illustrate what I mean: our English racehorses differ slightly from the horses of every other breed; but they do not owe their difference and superiority to descent from any single pair, but to continued care in selecting and training many individuals
Before discussing the three classes of facts, which I have selected as presenting the greatest amount of difficulty on the theory of "single centres of creation," I must say a few words on the means of dispersal.
MEANS OF DISPERSAL.
Sir C. Lyell and other authors have ably treated this subject.
I can give here only the briefest abstract of the more important facts.
Change of climate must have had a powerful influence on migration: a region when its climate was different may have been a high road for migration, but now be impassable; I shall, however, presently have to discuss this branch of the subject in some
Changes of level in the land must also have been highly influential: a narrow isthmus now separates two marine faunas; submerge it, or let it formerly have been submerged, and the two faunas will now blend or may formerly have blended: where the sea now
No geologist will dispute that great mutations of level have occurred within the period of existing organisms.
Edward Forbes insisted that all the islands in the Atlantic must recently have been connected with Europe or Africa, and Europe likewise with America.
Other authors have thus hypothetically bridged over every ocean, and have united almost every island to some mainland.
If indeed the arguments used by Forbes are to be trusted, it must be admitted that scarcely a single island exists which has not recently been united to some continent.
This view cuts the Gordian knot of the dispersal of the same species to the most distant points, and removes many a difficulty: but to the best of my judgment we are not authorized in admitting such enormous geographical changes within the period of
It seems to me that we have abundant evidence of great oscillations of level in our continents; but not of such vast changes in their position and extension, as to have united them within the recent period to each other and to the several intervening
I freely admit the former existence of many islands, now buried beneath the sea, which may have served as halting places for plants and for many animals during their migration.
In the coral-producing oceans such sunken islands are now marked, as I believe, by rings of coral or atolls standing over them.
Whenever it is fully admitted, as I believe it will some day be, that each species has proceeded from a single birthplace, and when in the course of time we know something definite about the means of distribution, we shall be enabled to speculate with
But I do not believe that it will ever be proved that within the recent period continents which are now quite separate, have been continuously, or almost continuously, united with each other, and with the many existing oceanic islands.
Several facts in distribution,--such as the great difference in the marine faunas on the opposite sides of almost every continent,--the close relation of the tertiary inhabitants of several lands and even seas to their present inhabitants,--a certain
The nature and relative proportions of the inhabitants of oceanic islands likewise seem to me opposed to the belief of their former continuity with continents.
Nor does their almost universally volcanic composition favour the admission that they are the wrecks of sunken continents;--if they had originally existed as mountain-ranges on the land, some at least of the islands would have been formed, like other
I must now say a few words on what are called accidental means, but which more properly might be called occasional means of distribution.
I shall here confine myself to plants.
In botanical works, this or that plant is stated to be ill adapted for wide dissemination; but for transport across the sea, the greater or less facilities may be said to be almost wholly unknown.
Until I tried, with Mr. Berkeley's aid, a few experiments, it was not even known how far seeds could resist the injurious action of sea-water.
To my surprise I found that out of 87 kinds, 64 germinated after an immersion of 28 days, and a few survived an immersion of 137 days.
For convenience sake I chiefly tried small seeds, without the capsule or fruit; and as all of these sank in a few days, they could not be floated across wide spaces of the sea, whether or not they were injured by the salt-water.
Afterwards I tried some larger fruits, capsules, etc.
, and some of these floated for a long time.
It is well known what a difference there is in the buoyancy of green and seasoned timber; and it occurred to me that floods might wash down plants or branches, and that these might be dried on the banks, and then by a fresh rise in the stream be washed
Hence I was led to dry stems and branches of 94 plants with ripe fruit, and to place them on sea water.
The majority sank quickly, but some which whilst green floated for a very short time, when dried floated much longer; for instance, ripe hazel-nuts sank immediately, but when dried, they floated for 90 days and afterwards when planted they germinated; an
Altogether out of the 94 dried plants, 18 floated for above 28 days, and some of the 18 floated for a very much longer period.
So that as 64/87 seeds germinated after an immersion of 28 days; and as 18/94 plants with ripe fruit (but not all the same species as in the foregoing experiment) floated, after being dried, for above 28 days, as far as we may infer anything from these
In Johnston's Physical Atlas, the average rate of the several Atlantic currents is 33 miles per diem (some currents running at the rate of 60 miles per diem); on this average, the seeds of 14/100 plants belonging to one country might be floated across 924
Subsequently to my experiments, M. Martens tried similar ones, but in a much better manner, for he placed the seeds in a box in the actual sea, so that they were alternately wet and exposed to the air like really floating plants.
He tried 98 seeds, mostly different from mine; but he chose many large fruits and likewise seeds from plants which live near the sea; and this would have favoured the average length of their flotation and of their resistance to the injurious action of the
On the other hand he did not previously dry the plants or branches with the fruit; and this, as we have seen, would have caused some of them to have floated much longer.
The result was that 18/98 of his seeds floated for 42 days, and were then capable of germination.
But I do not doubt that plants exposed to the waves would float for a less time than those protected from violent movement as in our experiments.
Therefore it would perhaps be safer to assume that the seeds of about 10/100 plants of a flora, after having been dried, could be floated across a space of sea 900 miles in width, and would then germinate.
The fact of the larger fruits often floating longer than the small, is interesting; as plants with large seeds or fruit could hardly be transported by any other means; and Alph.
de Candolle has shown that such plants generally have restricted ranges.
But seeds may be occasionally transported in another manner.
Drift timber is thrown up on most islands, even on those in the midst of the widest oceans; and the natives of the coral-islands in the Pacific, procure stones for their tools, solely from the roots of drifted trees, these stones being a valuable royal
I find on examination, that when irregularly shaped stones are embedded in the roots of trees, small parcels of earth are very frequently enclosed in their interstices and behind them,--so perfectly that not a particle could be washed away in the longest
Again, I can show that the carcasses of birds, when floating on the sea, sometimes escape being immediately devoured; and seeds of many kinds in the crops of floating birds long retain their vitality: peas and vetches, for instance, are killed by even a
Living birds can hardly fail to be highly effective agents in the transportation of seeds.
I could give many facts showing how frequently birds of many kinds are blown by gales to vast distances across the ocean.
We may I think safely assume that under such circumstances their rate of flight would often be 35 miles an hour; and some authors have given a far higher estimate.
I have never seen an instance of nutritious seeds passing through the intestines of a bird; but hard seeds of fruit will pass uninjured through even the digestive organs of a turkey.
In the course of two months, I picked up in my garden 12 kinds of seeds, out of the excrement of small birds, and these seemed perfect, and some of them, which I tried, germinated.
But the following fact is more important: the crops of birds do not secrete gastric juice, and do not in the least injure, as I know by trial, the germination of seeds; now after a bird has found and devoured a large supply of food, it is positively
A bird in this interval might easily be blown to the distance of 500 miles, and hawks are known to look out for tired birds, and the contents of their torn crops might thus readily get scattered.
Mr. Brent informs me that a friend of his had to give up flying carrier-pigeons from France to England, as the hawks on the English coast destroyed so many on their arrival.
Some hawks and owls bolt their prey whole, and after an interval of from twelve to twenty hours, disgorge pellets, which, as I know from experiments made in the Zoological Gardens, include seeds capable of germination.
Some seeds of the oat, wheat, millet, canary, hemp, clover, and beet germinated after having been from twelve to twenty-one hours in the stomachs of different birds of prey; and two seeds of beet grew after having been thus retained for two days and
Freshwater fish, I find, eat seeds of many land and water plants: fish are frequently devoured by birds, and thus the seeds might be transported from place to place.
I forced many kinds of seeds into the stomachs of dead fish, and then gave their bodies to fishing-eagles, storks, and pelicans; these birds after an interval of many hours, either rejected the seeds in pellets or passed them in their excrement; and
Certain seeds, however, were always killed by this process.
Although the beaks and feet of birds are generally quite clean, I can show that earth sometimes adheres to them: in one instance I removed twenty-two grains of dry argillaceous earth from one foot of a partridge, and in this earth there was a pebble quite
Thus seeds might occasionally be transported to great distances; for many facts could be given showing that soil almost everywhere is charged with seeds.
Reflect for a moment on the millions of quails which annually cross the Mediterranean; and can we doubt that the earth adhering to their feet would sometimes include a few minute seeds?
But I shall presently have to recur to this subject.
As icebergs are known to be sometimes loaded with earth and stones, and have even carried brushwood, bones, and the nest of a land-bird, I can hardly doubt that they must occasionally have transported seeds from one part to another of the arctic and
In the Azores, from the large number of the species of plants common to Europe, in comparison with the plants of other oceanic islands nearer to the mainland, and (as remarked by Mr. H. C. Watson) from the somewhat northern character of the flora in
At my request Sir C. Lyell wrote to M. Hartung to inquire whether he had observed erratic boulders on these islands, and he answered that he had found large fragments of granite and other rocks, which do not occur in the archipelago.
Hence we may safely infer that icebergs formerly landed their rocky burthens on the shores of these mid-ocean islands, and it is at least possible that they may have brought thither the seeds of northern plants.
Considering that the several above means of transport, and that several other means, which without doubt remain to be discovered, have been in action year after year, for centuries and tens of thousands of years, it would I think be a marvellous fact if
These means of transport are sometimes called accidental, but this is not strictly correct: the currents of the sea are not accidental, nor is the direction of prevalent gales of wind.
It should be observed that scarcely any means of transport would carry seeds for very great distances; for seeds do not retain their vitality when exposed for a great length of time to the action of seawater; nor could they be long carried in the crops or
These means, however, would suffice for occasional transport across tracts of sea some hundred miles in breadth, or from island to island, or from a continent to a neighbouring island, but not from one distant continent to another.
The floras of distant continents would not by such means become mingled in any great degree; but would remain as distinct as we now see them to be.
The currents, from their course, would never bring seeds from North America to Britain, though they might and do bring seeds from the West Indies to our western shores, where, if not killed by so long an immersion in salt-water, they could not endure our
Almost every year, one or two land-birds are blown across the whole Atlantic Ocean, from North America to the western shores of Ireland and England; but seeds could be transported by these wanderers only by one means, namely, in dirt sticking to their
Even in this case, how small would the chance be of a seed falling on favourable soil, and coming to maturity!
But it would be a great error to argue that because a well-stocked island, like Great Britain, has not, as far as is known (and it would be very difficult to prove this), received within the last few centuries, through occasional means of transport,
I do not doubt that out of twenty seeds or animals transported to an island, even if far less well-stocked than Britain, scarcely more than one would be so well fitted to its new home, as to become naturalised.
But this, as it seems to me, is no valid argument against what would be effected by occasional means of transport, during the long lapse of geological time, whilst an island was being upheaved and formed, and before it had become fully stocked with
On almost bare land, with few or no destructive insects or birds living there, nearly every seed, which chanced to arrive, would be sure to germinate and survive.
DISPERSAL DURING THE GLACIAL PERIOD.
The identity of many plants and animals, on mountain-summits, separated from each other by hundreds of miles of lowlands, where the Alpine species could not possibly exist, is one of the most striking cases known of the same species living at distant
It is indeed a remarkable fact to see so many of the same plants living on the snowy regions of the Alps or Pyrenees, and in the extreme northern parts of Europe; but it is far more remarkable, that the plants on the White Mountains, in the United States
Even as long ago as 1747, such facts led Gmelin to conclude that the same species must have been independently created at several distinct points; and we might have remained in this same belief, had not Agassiz and others called vivid attention to the
We have evidence of almost every conceivable kind, organic and inorganic, that within a very recent geological period, central Europe and North America suffered under an Arctic climate.
The ruins of a house burnt by fire do not tell their tale more plainly, than do the mountains of Scotland and Wales, with their scored flanks, polished surfaces, and perched boulders, of the icy streams with which their valleys were lately filled.
So greatly has the climate of Europe changed, that in Northern Italy, gigantic moraines, left by old glaciers, are now clothed by the vine and maize.
Throughout a large part of the United States, erratic boulders, and rocks scored by drifted icebergs and coast-ice, plainly reveal a former cold period.
The former influence of the glacial climate on the distribution of the inhabitants of Europe, as explained with remarkable clearness by Edward Forbes, is substantially as follows.
But we shall follow the changes more readily, by supposing a new glacial period to come slowly on, and then pass away, as formerly occurred.
As the cold came on, and as each more southern zone became fitted for arctic beings and ill-fitted for their former more temperate inhabitants, the latter would be supplanted and arctic productions would take their places.
The inhabitants of the more temperate regions would at the same time travel southward, unless they were stopped by barriers, in which case they would perish.
The mountains would become covered with snow and ice, and their former Alpine inhabitants would descend to the plains.
By the time that the cold had reached its maximum, we should have a uniform arctic fauna and flora, covering the central parts of Europe, as far south as the Alps and Pyrenees, and even stretching into Spain.
The now temperate regions of the United States would likewise be covered by arctic plants and animals, and these would be nearly the same with those of Europe; for the present circumpolar inhabitants, which we suppose to have everywhere travelled
We may suppose that the Glacial period came on a little earlier or later in North America than in Europe, so will the southern migration there have been a little earlier or later; but this will make no difference in the final result.
As the warmth returned, the arctic forms would retreat northward, closely followed up in their retreat by the productions of the more temperate regions.
And as the snow melted from the bases of the mountains, the arctic forms would seize on the cleared and thawed ground, always ascending higher and higher, as the warmth increased, whilst their brethren were pursuing their northern journey.
Hence, when the warmth had fully returned, the same arctic species, which had lately lived in a body together on the lowlands of the Old and New Worlds, would be left isolated on distant mountain-summits (having been exterminated on all lesser heights) and
Thus we can understand the identity of many plants at points so immensely remote as on the mountains of the United States and of Europe.
We can thus also understand the fact that the Alpine plants of each mountain-range are more especially related to the arctic forms living due north or nearly due north of them: for the migration as the cold came on, and the re-migration on the returning
The Alpine plants, for example, of Scotland, as remarked by Mr. H. C. Watson, and those of the Pyrenees, as remarked by Ramond, are more especially allied to the plants of northern Scandinavia; those of the United States to Labrador; those of the mountains
These views, grounded as they are on the perfectly well-ascertained occurrence of a former Glacial period, seem to me to explain in so satisfactory a manner the present distribution of the Alpine and Arctic productions of Europe and America, that when in
If the climate, since the Glacial period, has ever been in any degree warmer than at present (as some geologists in the United States believe to have been the case, chiefly from the distribution of the fossil Gnathodon), then the arctic and temperate
The arctic forms, during their long southern migration and re-migration northward, will have been exposed to nearly the same climate, and, as is especially to be noticed, they will have kept in a body together; consequently their mutual relations will not
But with our Alpine productions, left isolated from the moment of the returning warmth, first at the bases and ultimately on the summits of the mountains, the case will have been somewhat different; for it is not likely that all the same arctic species
Their mutual relations will thus have been in some degree disturbed; consequently they will have been liable to modification; and this we find has been the case; for if we compare the present Alpine plants and animals of the several great European
In illustrating what, as I believe, actually took place during the Glacial period, I assumed that at its commencement the arctic productions were as uniform round the polar regions as they are at the present day.
But the foregoing remarks on distribution apply not only to strictly arctic forms, but also to many sub-arctic and to some few northern temperate forms, for some of these are the same on the lower mountains and on the plains of North America and Europe;
At the present day, the sub-arctic and northern temperate productions of the Old and New Worlds are separated from each other by the Atlantic Ocean and by the extreme northern part of the Pacific.
During the Glacial period, when the inhabitants of the Old and New Worlds lived further southwards than at present, they must have been still more completely separated by wider spaces of ocean.
I believe the above difficulty may be surmounted by looking to still earlier changes of climate of an opposite nature.
We have good reason to believe that during the newer Pliocene period, before the Glacial epoch, and whilst the majority of the inhabitants of the world were specifically the same as now, the climate was warmer than at the present day.
Hence we may suppose that the organisms now living under the climate of latitude 60 deg, during the Pliocene period lived further north under the Polar Circle, in latitude 66 deg-67 deg; and that the strictly arctic productions then lived on the broken
Now if we look at a globe, we shall see that under the Polar Circle there is almost continuous land from western Europe, through Siberia, to eastern America.
And to this continuity of the circumpolar land, and to the consequent freedom for intermigration under a more favourable climate, I attribute the necessary amount of uniformity in the sub-arctic and northern temperate productions of the Old and New Worlds,
Believing, from reasons before alluded to, that our continents have long remained in nearly the same relative position, though subjected to large, but partial oscillations of level, I am strongly inclined to extend the above view, and to infer that during
We now see, as I believe, their descendants, mostly in a modified condition, in the central parts of Europe and the United States.
On this view we can understand the relationship, with very little identity, between the productions of North America and Europe,--a relationship which is most remarkable, considering the distance of the two areas, and their separation by the Atlantic
We can further understand the singular fact remarked on by several observers, that the productions of Europe and America during the later tertiary stages were more closely related to each other than they are at the present time; for during these warmer
During the slowly decreasing warmth of the Pliocene period, as soon as the species in common, which inhabited the New and Old Worlds, migrated south of the Polar Circle, they must have been completely cut off from each other.
This separation, as far as the more temperate productions are concerned, took place long ages ago.
And as the plants and animals migrated southward, they will have become mingled in the one great region with the native American productions, and have had to compete with them; and in the other great region, with those of the Old World.
Consequently we have here everything favourable for much modification,--for far more modification than with the Alpine productions, left isolated, within a much more recent period, on the several mountain-ranges and on the arctic lands of the two Worlds.
Hence it has come, that when we compare the now living productions of the temperate regions of the New and Old Worlds, we find very few identical species (though Asa Gray has lately shown that more plants are identical than was formerly supposed), but we
As on the land, so in the waters of the sea, a slow southern migration of a marine fauna, which during the Pliocene or even a somewhat earlier period, was nearly uniform along the continuous shores of the Polar Circle, will account, on the theory of
Thus, I think, we can understand the presence of many existing and tertiary representative forms on the eastern and western shores of temperate North America; and the still more striking case of many closely allied crustaceans (as described in Dana's
These cases of relationship, without identity, of the inhabitants of seas now disjoined, and likewise of the past and present inhabitants of the temperate lands of North America and Europe, are inexplicable on the theory of creation.
We cannot say that they have been created alike, in correspondence with the nearly similar physical conditions of the areas; for if we compare, for instance, certain parts of South America with the southern continents of the Old World, we see countries
But we must return to our more immediate subject, the Glacial period.
I am convinced that Forbes's view may be largely extended.
In Europe we have the plainest evidence of the cold period, from the western shores of Britain to the Oural range, and southward to the Pyrenees.
We may infer, from the frozen mammals and nature of the mountain vegetation, that Siberia was similarly affected.
Along the Himalaya, at points 900 miles apart, glaciers have left the marks of their former low descent; and in Sikkim, Dr. Hooker saw maize growing on gigantic ancient moraines.
South of the equator, we have some direct evidence of former glacial action in New Zealand; and the same plants, found on widely separated mountains in this island, tell the same story.
If one account which has been published can be trusted, we have direct evidence of glacial action in the south-eastern corner of Australia.
Looking to America; in the northern half, ice-borne fragments of rock have been observed on the eastern side as far south as lat.
36 deg-37 deg, and on the shores of the Pacific, where the climate is now so different, as far south as lat.
46 deg; erratic boulders have, also, been noticed on the Rocky Mountains.
In the Cordillera of Equatorial South America, glaciers once extended far below their present level.
In central Chile I was astonished at the structure of a vast mound of detritus, about 800 feet in height, crossing a valley of the Andes; and this I now feel convinced was a gigantic moraine, left far below any existing glacier.
Further south on both sides of the continent, from lat.
41 deg to the southernmost extremity, we have the clearest evidence of former glacial action, in huge boulders transported far from their parent source.
We do not know that the Glacial epoch was strictly simultaneous at these several far distant points on opposite sides of the world.
But we have good evidence in almost every case, that the epoch was included within the latest geological period.
We have, also, excellent evidence, that it endured for an enormous time, as measured by years, at each point.
The cold may have come on, or have ceased, earlier at one point of the globe than at another, but seeing that it endured for long at each, and that it was contemporaneous in a geological sense, it seems to me probable that it was, during a part at least of
Without some distinct evidence to the contrary, we may at least admit as probable that the glacial action was simultaneous on the eastern and western sides of North America, in the Cordillera under the equator and under the warmer temperate zones, and on
If this be admitted, it is difficult to avoid believing that the temperature of the whole world was at this period simultaneously cooler.
But it would suffice for my purpose, if the temperature was at the same time lower along certain broad belts of longitude.
On this view of the whole world, or at least of broad longitudinal belts, having been simultaneously colder from pole to pole, much light can be thrown on the present distribution of identical and allied species.
In America, Dr. Hooker has shown that between forty and fifty of the flowering plants of Tierra del Fuego, forming no inconsiderable part of its scanty flora, are common to Europe, enormously remote as these two points are; and there are many closely
On the lofty mountains of equatorial America a host of peculiar species belonging to European genera occur.
On the highest mountains of Brazil, some few European genera were found by Gardner, which do not exist in the wide intervening hot countries.
So on the Silla of Caraccas the illustrious Humboldt long ago found species belonging to genera characteristic of the Cordillera.
On the mountains of Abyssinia, several European forms and some few representatives of the peculiar flora of the Cape of Good Hope occur.
At the Cape of Good Hope a very few European species, believed not to have been introduced by man, and on the mountains, some few representative European forms are found, which have not been discovered in the intertropical parts of Africa.
On the Himalaya, and on the isolated mountain-ranges of the peninsula of India, on the heights of Ceylon, and on the volcanic cones of Java, many plants occur, either identically the same or representing each other, and at the same time representing plants
A list of the genera collected on the loftier peaks of Java raises a picture of a collection made on a hill in Europe!
Still more striking is the fact that southern Australian forms are clearly represented by plants growing on the summits of the mountains of Borneo.
Some of these Australian forms, as I hear from Dr. Hooker, extend along the heights of the peninsula of Malacca, and are thinly scattered, on the one hand over India and on the other as far north as Japan.
On the southern mountains of Australia, Dr. F. Muller has discovered several European species; other species, not introduced by man, occur on the lowlands; and a long list can be given, as I am informed by Dr. Hooker, of European genera, found in
In the admirable 'Introduction to the Flora of New Zealand,' by Dr. Hooker, analogous and striking facts are given in regard to the plants of that large island.
Hence we see that throughout the world, the plants growing on the more lofty mountains, and on the temperate lowlands of the northern and southern hemispheres, are sometimes identically the same; but they are much oftener specifically distinct, though
This brief abstract applies to plants alone: some strictly analogous facts could be given on the distribution of terrestrial animals.
In marine productions, similar cases occur; as an example, I may quote a remark by the highest authority, Professor Dana, that "it is certainly a wonderful fact that New Zealand should have a closer resemblance in its crustacea to Great Britain, its
Sir J. Richardson, also, speaks of the reappearance on the shores of New Zealand, Tasmania, etc.
, of northern forms of fish.
Dr. Hooker informs me that twenty-five species of Algae are common to New Zealand and to Europe, but have not been found in the intermediate tropical seas.
It should be observed that the northern species and forms found in the southern parts of the southern hemisphere, and on the mountain-ranges of the intertropical regions, are not arctic, but belong to the northern temperate zones.
As Mr. H. C. Watson has recently remarked, "In receding from polar towards equatorial latitudes, the Alpine or mountain floras really become less and less arctic".
Many of the forms living on the mountains of the warmer regions of the earth and in the southern hemisphere are of doubtful value, being ranked by some naturalists as specifically distinct, by others as varieties; but some are certainly identical, and
Now let us see what light can be thrown on the foregoing facts, on the belief, supported as it is by a large body of geological evidence, that the whole world, or a large part of it, was during the Glacial period simultaneously much colder than at present.
The Glacial period, as measured by years, must have been very long; and when we remember over what vast spaces some naturalised plants and animals have spread within a few centuries, this period will have been ample for any amount of migration.
As the cold came slowly on, all the tropical plants and other productions will have retreated from both sides towards the equator, followed in the rear by the temperate productions, and these by the arctic; but with the latter we are not now concerned.
The tropical plants probably suffered much extinction; how much no one can say; perhaps formerly the tropics supported as many species as we see at the present day crowded together at the Cape of Good Hope, and in parts of temperate Australia.
As we know that many tropical plants and animals can withstand a considerable amount of cold, many might have escaped extermination during a moderate fall of temperature, more especially by escaping into the warmest spots.
But the great fact to bear in mind is, that all tropical productions will have suffered to a certain extent.
On the other hand, the temperate productions, after migrating nearer to the equator, though they will have been placed under somewhat new conditions, will have suffered less.
And it is certain that many temperate plants, if protected from the inroads of competitors, can withstand a much warmer climate than their own.
Hence, it seems to me possible, bearing in mind that the tropical productions were in a suffering state and could not have presented a firm front against intruders, that a certain number of the more vigorous and dominant temperate forms might have
The invasion would, of course, have been greatly favoured by high land, and perhaps by a dry climate; for Dr. Falconer informs me that it is the damp with the heat of the tropics which is so destructive to perennial plants from a temperate climate.
On the other hand, the most humid and hottest districts will have afforded an asylum to the tropical natives.
The mountain-ranges north-west of the Himalaya, and the long line of the Cordillera, seem to have afforded two great lines of invasion: and it is a striking fact, lately communicated to me by Dr. Hooker, that all the flowering plants, about forty-six in
But I do not doubt that some temperate productions entered and crossed even the LOWLANDS of the tropics at the period when the cold was most intense,--when arctic forms had migrated some twenty-five degrees of latitude from their native country and covered
At this period of extreme cold, I believe that the climate under the equator at the level of the sea was about the same with that now felt there at the height of six or seven thousand feet.
During this the coldest period, I suppose that large spaces of the tropical lowlands were clothed with a mingled tropical and temperate vegetation, like that now growing with strange luxuriance at the base of the Himalaya, as graphically described by
Thus, as I believe, a considerable number of plants, a few terrestrial animals, and some marine productions, migrated during the Glacial period from the northern and southern temperate zones into the intertropical regions, and some even crossed the
As the warmth returned, these temperate forms would naturally ascend the higher mountains, being exterminated on the lowlands; those which had not reached the equator, would re-migrate northward or southward towards their former homes; but the forms,
Although we have reason to believe from geological evidence that the whole body of arctic shells underwent scarcely any modification during their long southern migration and re-migration northward, the case may have been wholly different with those
These being surrounded by strangers will have had to compete with many new forms of life; and it is probable that selected modifications in their structure, habits, and constitutions will have profited them.
Thus many of these wanderers, though still plainly related by inheritance to their brethren of the northern or southern hemispheres, now exist in their new homes as well-marked varieties or as distinct species.
It is a remarkable fact, strongly insisted on by Hooker in regard to America, and by Alph.
de Candolle in regard to Australia, that many more identical plants and allied forms have apparently migrated from the north to the south, than in a reversed direction.
We see, however, a few southern vegetable forms on the mountains of Borneo and Abyssinia.
I suspect that this preponderant migration from north to south is due to the greater extent of land in the north, and to the northern forms having existed in their own homes in greater numbers, and having consequently been advanced through natural
And thus, when they became commingled during the Glacial period, the northern forms were enabled to beat the less powerful southern forms.
Just in the same manner as we see at the present day, that very many European productions cover the ground in La Plata, and in a lesser degree in Australia, and have to a certain extent beaten the natives; whereas extremely few southern forms have become
Something of the same kind must have occurred on the intertropical mountains: no doubt before the Glacial period they were stocked with endemic Alpine forms; but these have almost everywhere largely yielded to the more dominant forms, generated in the
In many islands the native productions are nearly equalled or even outnumbered by the naturalised; and if the natives have not been actually exterminated, their numbers have been greatly reduced, and this is the first stage towards extinction.
A mountain is an island on the land; and the intertropical mountains before the Glacial period must have been completely isolated; and I believe that the productions of these islands on the land yielded to those produced within the larger areas of the
I am far from supposing that all difficulties are removed on the view here given in regard to the range and affinities of the allied species which live in the northern and southern temperate zones and on the mountains of the intertropical regions.
Very many difficulties remain to be solved.
I do not pretend to indicate the exact lines and means of migration, or the reason why certain species and not others have migrated; why certain species have been modified and have given rise to new groups of forms, and others have remained unaltered.
We cannot hope to explain such facts, until we can say why one species and not another becomes naturalised by man's agency in a foreign land; why one ranges twice or thrice as far, and is twice or thrice as common, as another species within their own
I have said that many difficulties remain to be solved: some of the most remarkable are stated with admirable clearness by Dr. Hooker in his botanical works on the antarctic regions.
These cannot be here discussed.
I will only say that as far as regards the occurrence of identical species at points so enormously remote as Kerguelen Land, New Zealand, and Fuegia, I believe that towards the close of the Glacial period, icebergs, as suggested by Lyell, have been largely
But the existence of several quite distinct species, belonging to genera exclusively confined to the south, at these and other distant points of the southern hemisphere, is, on my theory of descent with modification, a far more remarkable case of
For some of these species are so distinct, that we cannot suppose that there has been time since the commencement of the Glacial period for their migration, and for their subsequent modification to the necessary degree.
The facts seem to me to indicate that peculiar and very distinct species have migrated in radiating lines from some common centre; and I am inclined to look in the southern, as in the northern hemisphere, to a former and warmer period, before the
I suspect that before this flora was exterminated by the Glacial epoch, a few forms were widely dispersed to various points of the southern hemisphere by occasional means of transport, and by the aid, as halting-places, of existing and now sunken islands,
By these means, as I believe, the southern shores of America, Australia, New Zealand have become slightly tinted by the same peculiar forms of vegetable life.
Sir C. Lyell in a striking passage has speculated, in language almost identical with mine, on the effects of great alternations of climate on geographical distribution.
I believe that the world has recently felt one of his great cycles of change; and that on this view, combined with modification through natural selection, a multitude of facts in the present distribution both of the same and of allied forms of life can be
The living waters may be said to have flowed during one short period from the north and from the south, and to have crossed at the equator; but to have flowed with greater force from the north so as to have freely inundated the south.
As the tide leaves its drift in horizontal lines, though rising higher on the shores where the tide rises highest, so have the living waters left their living drift on our mountain-summits, in a line gently rising from the arctic lowlands to a great height
The various beings thus left stranded may be compared with savage races of man, driven up and surviving in the mountain-fastnesses of almost every land, which serve as a record, full of interest to us, of the former inhabitants of the surrounding lowlands.
12.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION--continued.
Distribution of fresh-water productions.
On the inhabitants of oceanic islands.
Absence of Batrachians and of terrestrial Mammals.
On the relation of the inhabitants of islands to those of the nearest mainland.
On colonisation from the nearest source with subsequent modification.
Summary of the last and present chapters.
As lakes and river-systems are separated from each other by barriers of land, it might have been thought that fresh-water productions would not have ranged widely within the same country, and as the sea is apparently a still more impassable barrier, that
But the case is exactly the reverse.
Not only have many fresh-water species, belonging to quite different classes, an enormous range, but allied species prevail in a remarkable manner throughout the world.
I well remember, when first collecting in the fresh waters of Brazil, feeling much surprise at the similarity of the fresh-water insects, shells, etc.
, and at the dissimilarity of the surrounding terrestrial beings, compared with those of Britain.
But this power in fresh-water productions of ranging widely, though so unexpected, can, I think, in most cases be explained by their having become fitted, in a manner highly useful to them, for short and frequent migrations from pond to pond, or from
We can here consider only a few cases.
In regard to fish, I believe that the same species never occur in the fresh waters of distant continents.
But on the same continent the species often range widely and almost capriciously; for two river-systems will have some fish in common and some different.
A few facts seem to favour the possibility of their occasional transport by accidental means; like that of the live fish not rarely dropped by whirlwinds in India, and the vitality of their ova when removed from the water.
But I am inclined to attribute the dispersal of fresh-water fish mainly to slight changes within the recent period in the level of the land, having caused rivers to flow into each other.
Instances, also, could be given of this having occurred during floods, without any change of level.
We have evidence in the loess of the Rhine of considerable changes of level in the land within a very recent geological period, and when the surface was peopled by existing land and fresh-water shells.
The wide difference of the fish on opposite sides of continuous mountain-ranges, which from an early period must have parted river-systems and completely prevented their inosculation, seems to lead to this same conclusion.
With respect to allied fresh-water fish occurring at very distant points of the world, no doubt there are many cases which cannot at present be explained: but some fresh-water fish belong to very ancient forms, and in such cases there will have been ample
In the second place, salt-water fish can with care be slowly accustomed to live in fresh water; and, according to Valenciennes, there is hardly a single group of fishes confined exclusively to fresh water, so that we may imagine that a marine member of a
Some species of fresh-water shells have a very wide range, and allied species, which, on my theory, are descended from a common parent and must have proceeded from a single source, prevail throughout the world.
Their distribution at first perplexed me much, as their ova are not likely to be transported by birds, and they are immediately killed by sea water, as are the adults.
I could not even understand how some naturalised species have rapidly spread throughout the same country.
But two facts, which I have observed--and no doubt many others remain to be observed--throw some light on this subject.
When a duck suddenly emerges from a pond covered with duck-weed, I have twice seen these little plants adhering to its back; and it has happened to me, in removing a little duck-weed from one aquarium to another, that I have quite unintentionally stocked
But another agency is perhaps more effectual: I suspended a duck's feet, which might represent those of a bird sleeping in a natural pond, in an aquarium, where many ova of fresh-water shells were hatching; and I found that numbers of the extremely minute
These just hatched molluscs, though aquatic in their nature, survived on the duck's feet, in damp air, from twelve to twenty hours; and in this length of time a duck or heron might fly at least six or seven hundred miles, and would be sure to alight on a
Sir Charles Lyell also informs me that a Dyticus has been caught with an Ancylus (a fresh-water shell like a limpet) firmly adhering to it; and a water-beetle of the same family, a Colymbetes, once flew on board the 'Beagle,' when forty-five miles distant
With respect to plants, it has long been known what enormous ranges many fresh-water and even marsh-species have, both over continents and to the most remote oceanic islands.
This is strikingly shown, as remarked by Alph.
de Candolle, in large groups of terrestrial plants, which have only a very few aquatic members; for these latter seem immediately to acquire, as if in consequence, a very wide range.
I think favourable means of dispersal explain this fact.
I have before mentioned that earth occasionally, though rarely, adheres in some quantity to the feet and beaks of birds.
Wading birds, which frequent the muddy edges of ponds, if suddenly flushed, would be the most likely to have muddy feet.
Birds of this order I can show are the greatest wanderers, and are occasionally found on the most remote and barren islands in the open ocean; they would not be likely to alight on the surface of the sea, so that the dirt would not be washed off their
I do not believe that botanists are aware how charged the mud of ponds is with seeds: I have tried several little experiments, but will here give only the most striking case: I took in February three table-spoonfuls of mud from three different points,
Considering these facts, I think it would be an inexplicable circumstance if water-birds did not transport the seeds of fresh-water plants to vast distances, and if consequently the range of these plants was not very great.
The same agency may have come into play with the eggs of some of the smaller fresh-water animals.
Other and unknown agencies probably have also played a part.
I have stated that fresh-water fish eat some kinds of seeds, though they reject many other kinds after having swallowed them; even small fish swallow seeds of moderate size, as of the yellow water-lily and Potamogeton.
Herons and other birds, century after century, have gone on daily devouring fish; they then take flight and go to other waters, or are blown across the sea; and we have seen that seeds retain their power of germination, when rejected in pellets or in
When I saw the great size of the seeds of that fine water-lily, the Nelumbium, and remembered Alph.
de Candolle's remarks on this plant, I thought that its distribution must remain quite inexplicable; but Audubon states that he found the seeds of the great southern water-lily (probably, according to Dr. Hooker, the Nelumbium luteum) in a heron's stomach;
In considering these several means of distribution, it should be remembered that when a pond or stream is first formed, for instance, on a rising islet, it will be unoccupied; and a single seed or egg will have a good chance of succeeding.
Although there will always be a struggle for life between the individuals of the species, however few, already occupying any pond, yet as the number of kinds is small, compared with those on the land, the competition will probably be less severe between
We should, also, remember that some, perhaps many, fresh-water productions are low in the scale of nature, and that we have reason to believe that such low beings change or become modified less quickly than the high; and this will give longer time than the
We should not forget the probability of many species having formerly ranged as continuously as fresh-water productions ever can range, over immense areas, and having subsequently become extinct in intermediate regions.
But the wide distribution of fresh-water plants and of the lower animals, whether retaining the same identical form or in some degree modified, I believe mainly depends on the wide dispersal of their seeds and eggs by animals, more especially by
Nature, like a careful gardener, thus takes her seeds from a bed of a particular nature, and drops them in another equally well fitted for them.
ON THE INHABITANTS OF OCEANIC ISLANDS.
We now come to the last of the three classes of facts, which I have selected as presenting the greatest amount of difficulty, on the view that all the individuals both of the same and of allied species have descended from a single parent; and therefore
I have already stated that I cannot honestly admit Forbes's view on continental extensions, which, if legitimately followed out, would lead to the belief that within the recent period all existing islands have been nearly or quite joined to some continent.
This view would remove many difficulties, but it would not, I think, explain all the facts in regard to insular productions.
In the following remarks I shall not confine myself to the mere question of dispersal; but shall consider some other facts, which bear on the truth of the two theories of independent creation and of descent with modification.
The species of all kinds which inhabit oceanic islands are few in number compared with those on equal continental areas: Alph.
de Candolle admits this for plants, and Wollaston for insects.
If we look to the large size and varied stations of New Zealand, extending over 780 miles of latitude, and compare its flowering plants, only 750 in number, with those on an equal area at the Cape of Good Hope or in Australia, we must, I think, admit that
Even the uniform county of Cambridge has 847 plants, and the little island of Anglesea 764, but a few ferns and a few introduced plants are included in these numbers, and the comparison in some other respects is not quite fair.
We have evidence that the barren island of Ascension aboriginally possessed under half-a-dozen flowering plants; yet many have become naturalised on it, as they have on New Zealand and on every other oceanic island which can be named.
In St. Helena there is reason to believe that the naturalised plants and animals have nearly or quite exterminated many native productions.
He who admits the doctrine of the creation of each separate species, will have to admit, that a sufficient number of the best adapted plants and animals have not been created on oceanic islands; for man has unintentionally stocked them from various sources
Although in oceanic islands the number of kinds of inhabitants is scanty, the proportion of endemic species (i.
e.
those found nowhere else in the world) is often extremely large.
If we compare, for instance, the number of the endemic land-shells in Madeira, or of the endemic birds in the Galapagos Archipelago, with the number found on any continent, and then compare the area of the islands with that of the continent, we shall see
This fact might have been expected on my theory, for, as already explained, species occasionally arriving after long intervals in a new and isolated district, and having to compete with new associates, will be eminently liable to modification, and will
But it by no means follows, that, because in an island nearly all the species of one class are peculiar, those of another class, or of another section of the same class, are peculiar; and this difference seems to depend on the species which do not become
Thus in the Galapagos Islands nearly every land-bird, but only two out of the eleven marine birds, are peculiar; and it is obvious that marine birds could arrive at these islands more easily than land-birds.
Bermuda, on the other hand, which lies at about the same distance from North America as the Galapagos Islands do from South America, and which has a very peculiar soil, does not possess one endemic land bird; and we know from Mr. J. M. Jones's admirable
Madeira does not possess one peculiar bird, and many European and African birds are almost every year blown there, as I am informed by Mr. E. V. Harcourt.
So that these two islands of Bermuda and Madeira have been stocked by birds, which for long ages have struggled together in their former homes, and have become mutually adapted to each other; and when settled in their new homes, each kind will have been
Madeira, again, is inhabited by a wonderful number of peculiar land-shells, whereas not one species of sea-shell is confined to its shores: now, though we do not know how seashells are dispersed, yet we can see that their eggs or larvae, perhaps attached
The different orders of insects in Madeira apparently present analogous facts.
Oceanic islands are sometimes deficient in certain classes, and their places are apparently occupied by the other inhabitants; in the Galapagos Islands reptiles, and in New Zealand gigantic wingless birds, take the place of mammals.
In the plants of the Galapagos Islands, Dr. Hooker has shown that the proportional numbers of the different orders are very different from what they are elsewhere.
Such cases are generally accounted for by the physical conditions of the islands; but this explanation seems to me not a little doubtful.
Facility of immigration, I believe, has been at least as important as the nature of the conditions.
Many remarkable little facts could be given with respect to the inhabitants of remote islands.
For instance, in certain islands not tenanted by mammals, some of the endemic plants have beautifully hooked seeds; yet few relations are more striking than the adaptation of hooked seeds for transportal by the wool and fur of quadrupeds.
This case presents no difficulty on my view, for a hooked seed might be transported to an island by some other means; and the plant then becoming slightly modified, but still retaining its hooked seeds, would form an endemic species, having as useless an
Again, islands often possess trees or bushes belonging to orders which elsewhere include only herbaceous species; now trees, as Alph.
de Candolle has shown, generally have, whatever the cause may be, confined ranges.
Hence trees would be little likely to reach distant oceanic islands; and an herbaceous plant, though it would have no chance of successfully competing in stature with a fully developed tree, when established on an island and having to compete with
If so, natural selection would often tend to add to the stature of herbaceous plants when growing on an island, to whatever order they belonged, and thus convert them first into bushes and ultimately into trees.
With respect to the absence of whole orders on oceanic islands, Bory St. Vincent long ago remarked that Batrachians (frogs, toads, newts) have never been found on any of the many islands with which the great oceans are studded.
I have taken pains to verify this assertion, and I have found it strictly true.
I have, however, been assured that a frog exists on the mountains of the great island of New Zealand; but I suspect that this exception (if the information be correct) may be explained through glacial agency.
This general absence of frogs, toads, and newts on so many oceanic islands cannot be accounted for by their physical conditions; indeed it seems that islands are peculiarly well fitted for these animals; for frogs have been introduced into Madeira, the
But as these animals and their spawn are known to be immediately killed by sea-water, on my view we can see that there would be great difficulty in their transportal across the sea, and therefore why they do not exist on any oceanic island.
But why, on the theory of creation, they should not have been created there, it would be very difficult to explain.
Mammals offer another and similar case.
I have carefully searched the oldest voyages, but have not finished my search; as yet I have not found a single instance, free from doubt, of a terrestrial mammal (excluding domesticated animals kept by the natives) inhabiting an island situated above 300
The Falkland Islands, which are inhabited by a wolf-like fox, come nearest to an exception; but this group cannot be considered as oceanic, as it lies on a bank connected with the mainland; moreover, icebergs formerly brought boulders to its western
Yet it cannot be said that small islands will not support small mammals, for they occur in many parts of the world on very small islands, if close to a continent; and hardly an island can be named on which our smaller quadrupeds have not become naturalised
It cannot be said, on the ordinary view of creation, that there has not been time for the creation of mammals; many volcanic islands are sufficiently ancient, as shown by the stupendous degradation which they have suffered and by their tertiary strata:
Though terrestrial mammals do not occur on oceanic islands, aerial mammals do occur on almost every island.
New Zealand possesses two bats found nowhere else in the world: Norfolk Island, the Viti Archipelago, the Bonin Islands, the Caroline and Marianne Archipelagoes, and Mauritius, all possess their peculiar bats.
Why, it may be asked, has the supposed creative force produced bats and no other mammals on remote islands?
On my view this question can easily be answered; for no terrestrial mammal can be transported across a wide space of sea, but bats can fly across.
Bats have been seen wandering by day far over the Atlantic Ocean; and two North American species either regularly or occasionally visit Bermuda, at the distance of 600 miles from the mainland.
I hear from Mr. Tomes, who has specially studied this family, that many of the same species have enormous ranges, and are found on continents and on far distant islands.
Hence we have only to suppose that such wandering species have been modified through natural selection in their new homes in relation to their new position, and we can understand the presence of endemic bats on islands, with the absence of all terrestrial
Besides the absence of terrestrial mammals in relation to the remoteness of islands from continents, there is also a relation, to a certain extent independent of distance, between the depth of the sea separating an island from the neighbouring mainland,
Mr. Windsor Earl has made some striking observations on this head in regard to the great Malay Archipelago, which is traversed near Celebes by a space of deep ocean; and this space separates two widely distinct mammalian faunas.
On either side the islands are situated on moderately deep submarine banks, and they are inhabited by closely allied or identical quadrupeds.
No doubt some few anomalies occur in this great archipelago, and there is much difficulty in forming a judgment in some cases owing to the probable naturalisation of certain mammals through man's agency; but we shall soon have much light thrown on the
I have not as yet had time to follow up this subject in all other quarters of the world; but as far as I have gone, the relation generally holds good.
We see Britain separated by a shallow channel from Europe, and the mammals are the same on both sides; we meet with analogous facts on many islands separated by similar channels from Australia.
The West Indian Islands stand on a deeply submerged bank, nearly 1000 fathoms in depth, and here we find American forms, but the species and even the genera are distinct.
As the amount of modification in all cases depends to a certain degree on the lapse of time, and as during changes of level it is obvious that islands separated by shallow channels are more likely to have been continuously united within a recent period to
All the foregoing remarks on the inhabitants of oceanic islands,--namely, the scarcity of kinds--the richness in endemic forms in particular classes or sections of classes,--the absence of whole groups, as of batrachians, and of terrestrial mammals
,--seem to me to accord better with the view of occasional means of transport having been largely efficient in the long course of time, than with the view of all our oceanic islands having been formerly connected by continuous land with the nearest
I do not deny that there are many and grave difficulties in understanding how several of the inhabitants of the more remote islands, whether still retaining the same specific form or modified since their arrival, could have reached their present homes.
But the probability of many islands having existed as halting-places, of which not a wreck now remains, must not be overlooked.
I will here give a single instance of one of the cases of difficulty.
Almost all oceanic islands, even the most isolated and smallest, are inhabited by land-shells, generally by endemic species, but sometimes by species found elsewhere.
Dr. Aug.
A. Gould has given several interesting cases in regard to the land-shells of the islands of the Pacific.
Now it is notorious that land-shells are very easily killed by salt; their eggs, at least such as I have tried, sink in sea-water and are killed by it.
Yet there must be, on my view, some unknown, but highly efficient means for their transportal.
Would the just-hatched young occasionally crawl on and adhere to the feet of birds roosting on the ground, and thus get transported?
It occurred to me that land-shells, when hybernating and having a membranous diaphragm over the mouth of the shell, might be floated in chinks of drifted timber across moderately wide arms of the sea.
And I found that several species did in this state withstand uninjured an immersion in sea-water during seven days: one of these shells was the Helix pomatia, and after it had again hybernated I put it in sea-water for twenty days, and it perfectly
As this species has a thick calcareous operculum, I removed it, and when it had formed a new membranous one, I immersed it for fourteen days in sea-water, and it recovered and crawled away: but more experiments are wanted on this head.
The most striking and important fact for us in regard to the inhabitants of islands, is their affinity to those of the nearest mainland, without being actually the same species.
Numerous instances could be given of this fact.
I will give only one, that of the Galapagos Archipelago, situated under the equator, between 500 and 600 miles from the shores of South America.
Here almost every product of the land and water bears the unmistakeable stamp of the American continent.
There are twenty-six land birds, and twenty-five of these are ranked by Mr. Gould as distinct species, supposed to have been created here; yet the close affinity of most of these birds to American species in every character, in their habits, gestures, and
So it is with the other animals, and with nearly all the plants, as shown by Dr. Hooker in his admirable memoir on the Flora of this archipelago.
The naturalist, looking at the inhabitants of these volcanic islands in the Pacific, distant several hundred miles from the continent, yet feels that he is standing on American land.
Why should this be so?
why should the species which are supposed to have been created in the Galapagos Archipelago, and nowhere else, bear so plain a stamp of affinity to those created in America?
There is nothing in the conditions of life, in the geological nature of the islands, in their height or climate, or in the proportions in which the several classes are associated together, which resembles closely the conditions of the South American coast:
On the other hand, there is a considerable degree of resemblance in the volcanic nature of the soil, in climate, height, and size of the islands, between the Galapagos and Cape de Verde Archipelagos: but what an entire and absolute difference in their
The inhabitants of the Cape de Verde Islands are related to those of Africa, like those of the Galapagos to America.
I believe this grand fact can receive no sort of explanation on the ordinary view of independent creation; whereas on the view here maintained, it is obvious that the Galapagos Islands would be likely to receive colonists, whether by occasional means of
Many analogous facts could be given: indeed it is an almost universal rule that the endemic productions of islands are related to those of the nearest continent, or of other near islands.
The exceptions are few, and most of them can be explained.
Thus the plants of Kerguelen Land, though standing nearer to Africa than to America, are related, and that very closely, as we know from Dr. Hooker's account, to those of America: but on the view that this island has been mainly stocked by seeds brought
New Zealand in its endemic plants is much more closely related to Australia, the nearest mainland, than to any other region: and this is what might have been expected; but it is also plainly related to South America, which, although the next nearest
But this difficulty almost disappears on the view that both New Zealand, South America, and other southern lands were long ago partially stocked from a nearly intermediate though distant point, namely from the antarctic islands, when they were clothed with
The affinity, which, though feeble, I am assured by Dr. Hooker is real, between the flora of the south-western corner of Australia and of the Cape of Good Hope, is a far more remarkable case, and is at present inexplicable: but this affinity is confined to
The law which causes the inhabitants of an archipelago, though specifically distinct, to be closely allied to those of the nearest continent, we sometimes see displayed on a small scale, yet in a most interesting manner, within the limits of the same
Thus the several islands of the Galapagos Archipelago are tenanted, as I have elsewhere shown, in a quite marvellous manner, by very closely related species; so that the inhabitants of each separate island, though mostly distinct, are related in an
And this is just what might have been expected on my view, for the islands are situated so near each other that they would almost certainly receive immigrants from the same original source, or from each other.
But this dissimilarity between the endemic inhabitants of the islands may be used as an argument against my views; for it may be asked, how has it happened in the several islands situated within sight of each other, having the same geological nature, the
, that many of the immigrants should have been differently modified, though only in a small degree.
This long appeared to me a great difficulty: but it arises in chief part from the deeply-seated error of considering the physical conditions of a country as the most important for its inhabitants; whereas it cannot, I think, be disputed that the nature of
Now if we look to those inhabitants of the Galapagos Archipelago which are found in other parts of the world (laying on one side for the moment the endemic species, which cannot be here fairly included, as we are considering how they have come to be
This difference might indeed have been expected on the view of the islands having been stocked by occasional means of transport--a seed, for instance, of one plant having been brought to one island, and that of another plant to another island.
Hence when in former times an immigrant settled on any one or more of the islands, or when it subsequently spread from one island to another, it would undoubtedly be exposed to different conditions of life in the different islands, for it would have to
If then it varied, natural selection would probably favour different varieties in the different islands.
Some species, however, might spread and yet retain the same character throughout the group, just as we see on continents some species spreading widely and remaining the same.
The really surprising fact in this case of the Galapagos Archipelago, and in a lesser degree in some analogous instances, is that the new species formed in the separate islands have not quickly spread to the other islands.
But the islands, though in sight of each other, are separated by deep arms of the sea, in most cases wider than the British Channel, and there is no reason to suppose that they have at any former period been continuously united.
The currents of the sea are rapid and sweep across the archipelago, and gales of wind are extraordinarily rare; so that the islands are far more effectually separated from each other than they appear to be on a map.
Nevertheless a good many species, both those found in other parts of the world and those confined to the archipelago, are common to the several islands, and we may infer from certain facts that these have probably spread from some one island to the others.
But we often take, I think, an erroneous view of the probability of closely allied species invading each other's territory, when put into free intercommunication.
Undoubtedly if one species has any advantage whatever over another, it will in a very brief time wholly or in part supplant it; but if both are equally well fitted for their own places in nature, both probably will hold their own places and keep separate
Being familiar with the fact that many species, naturalised through man's agency, have spread with astonishing rapidity over new countries, we are apt to infer that most species would thus spread; but we should remember that the forms which become
de Candolle, to distinct genera.
In the Galapagos Archipelago, many even of the birds, though so well adapted for flying from island to island, are distinct on each; thus there are three closely-allied species of mocking-thrush, each confined to its own island.
Now let us suppose the mocking-thrush of Chatham Island to be blown to Charles Island, which has its own mocking-thrush: why should it succeed in establishing itself there?
We may safely infer that Charles Island is well stocked with its own species, for annually more eggs are laid there than can possibly be reared; and we may infer that the mocking-thrush peculiar to Charles Island is at least as well fitted for its home as
Sir C. Lyell and Mr. Wollaston have communicated to me a remarkable fact bearing on this subject; namely, that Madeira and the adjoining islet of Porto Santo possess many distinct but representative land-shells, some of which live in crevices of stone; and
From these considerations I think we need not greatly marvel at the endemic and representative species, which inhabit the several islands of the Galapagos Archipelago, not having universally spread from island to island.
In many other instances, as in the several districts of the same continent, pre-occupation has probably played an important part in checking the commingling of species under the same conditions of life.
Thus, the south-east and south-west corners of Australia have nearly the same physical conditions, and are united by continuous land, yet they are inhabited by a vast number of distinct mammals, birds, and plants.
The principle which determines the general character of the fauna and flora of oceanic islands, namely, that the inhabitants, when not identically the same, yet are plainly related to the inhabitants of that region whence colonists could most readily have
We see this on every mountain, in every lake and marsh.
For Alpine species, excepting in so far as the same forms, chiefly of plants, have spread widely throughout the world during the recent Glacial epoch, are related to those of the surrounding lowlands;--thus we have in South America, Alpine humming-birds,
, all of strictly American forms, and it is obvious that a mountain, as it became slowly upheaved, would naturally be colonised from the surrounding lowlands.
So it is with the inhabitants of lakes and marshes, excepting in so far as great facility of transport has given the same general forms to the whole world.
We see this same principle in the blind animals inhabiting the caves of America and of Europe.
Other analogous facts could be given.
And it will, I believe, be universally found to be true, that wherever in two regions, let them be ever so distant, many closely allied or representative species occur, there will likewise be found some identical species, showing, in accordance with the
And wherever many closely-allied species occur, there will be found many forms which some naturalists rank as distinct species, and some as varieties; these doubtful forms showing us the steps in the process of modification.
This relation between the power and extent of migration of a species, either at the present time or at some former period under different physical conditions, and the existence at remote points of the world of other species allied to it, is shown in
Mr. Gould remarked to me long ago, that in those genera of birds which range over the world, many of the species have very wide ranges.
I can hardly doubt that this rule is generally true, though it would be difficult to prove it.
Amongst mammals, we see it strikingly displayed in Bats, and in a lesser degree in the Felidae and Canidae.
We see it, if we compare the distribution of butterflies and beetles.
So it is with most fresh-water productions, in which so many genera range over the world, and many individual species have enormous ranges.
It is not meant that in world-ranging genera all the species have a wide range, or even that they have on an AVERAGE a wide range; but only that some of the species range very widely; for the facility with which widely-ranging species vary and give rise to
For instance, two varieties of the same species inhabit America and Europe, and the species thus has an immense range; but, if the variation had been a little greater, the two varieties would have been ranked as distinct species, and the common range would
Still less is it meant, that a species which apparently has the capacity of crossing barriers and ranging widely, as in the case of certain powerfully-winged birds, will necessarily range widely; for we should never forget that to range widely implies not
But on the view of all the species of a genus having descended from a single parent, though now distributed to the most remote points of the world, we ought to find, and I believe as a general rule we do find, that some at least of the species range very
In considering the wide distribution of certain genera, we should bear in mind that some are extremely ancient, and must have branched off from a common parent at a remote epoch; so that in such cases there will have been ample time for great climatal and
There is, also, some reason to believe from geological evidence that organisms low in the scale within each great class, generally change at a slower rate than the higher forms; and consequently the lower forms will have had a better chance of ranging
This fact, together with the seeds and eggs of many low forms being very minute and better fitted for distant transportation, probably accounts for a law which has long been observed, and which has lately been admirably discussed by Alph.
de Candolle in regard to plants, namely, that the lower any group of organisms is, the more widely it is apt to range.
The relations just discussed,--namely, low and slowly-changing organisms ranging more widely than the high,--some of the species of widely-ranging genera themselves ranging widely,--such facts, as alpine, lacustrine, and marsh productions being related
SUMMARY OF LAST AND PRESENT CHAPTERS.
In these chapters I have endeavoured to show, that if we make due allowance for our ignorance of the full effects of all the changes of climate and of the level of the land, which have certainly occurred within the recent period, and of other similar
And we are led to this conclusion, which has been arrived at by many naturalists under the designation of single centres of creation, by some general considerations, more especially from the importance of barriers and from the analogical distribution of
With respect to the distinct species of the same genus, which on my theory must have spread from one parent-source; if we make the same allowances as before for our ignorance, and remember that some forms of life change most slowly, enormous periods of
As exemplifying the effects of climatal changes on distribution, I have attempted to show how important has been the influence of the modern Glacial period, which I am fully convinced simultaneously affected the whole world, or at least great meridional
As showing how diversified are the means of occasional transport, I have discussed at some little length the means of dispersal of fresh-water productions.
If the difficulties be not insuperable in admitting that in the long course of time the individuals of the same species, and likewise of allied species, have proceeded from some one source; then I think all the grand leading facts of geographical
We can thus understand the high importance of barriers, whether of land or water, which separate our several zoological and botanical provinces.
We can thus understand the localisation of sub-genera, genera, and families; and how it is that under different latitudes, for instance in South America, the inhabitants of the plains and mountains, of the forests, marshes, and deserts, are in so
Bearing in mind that the mutual relations of organism to organism are of the highest importance, we can see why two areas having nearly the same physical conditions should often be inhabited by very different forms of life; for according to the length of
On these same principles, we can understand, as I have endeavoured to show, why oceanic islands should have few inhabitants, but of these a great number should be endemic or peculiar; and why, in relation to the means of migration, one group of beings,
We can see why whole groups of organisms, as batrachians and terrestrial mammals, should be absent from oceanic islands, whilst the most isolated islands possess their own peculiar species of aerial mammals or bats.
We can see why there should be some relation between the presence of mammals, in a more or less modified condition, and the depth of the sea between an island and the mainland.
We can clearly see why all the inhabitants of an archipelago, though specifically distinct on the several islets, should be closely related to each other, and likewise be related, but less closely, to those of the nearest continent or other source whence
We can see why in two areas, however distant from each other, there should be a correlation, in the presence of identical species, of varieties, of doubtful species, and of distinct but representative species.
As the late Edward Forbes often insisted, there is a striking parallelism in the laws of life throughout time and space: the laws governing the succession of forms in past times being nearly the same with those governing at the present time the differences
We see this in many facts.
The endurance of each species and group of species is continuous in time; for the exceptions to the rule are so few, that they may fairly be attributed to our not having as yet discovered in an intermediate deposit the forms which are therein absent, but
Both in time and space, species and groups of species have their points of maximum development.
Groups of species, belonging either to a certain period of time, or to a certain area, are often characterised by trifling characters in common, as of sculpture or colour.
In looking to the long succession of ages, as in now looking to distant provinces throughout the world, we find that some organisms differ little, whilst others belonging to a different class, or to a different order, or even only to a different family of
In both time and space the lower members of each class generally change less than the higher; but there are in both cases marked exceptions to the rule.
On my theory these several relations throughout time and space are intelligible; for whether we look to the forms of life which have changed during successive ages within the same quarter of the world, or to those which have changed after having migrated
13.
MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS: MORPHOLOGY: EMBRYOLOGY: RUDIMENTARY ORGANS.
CLASSIFICATION, groups subordinate to groups.
Natural system.
Rules and difficulties in classification, explained on the theory of descent with modification.
Classification of varieties.
Descent always used in classification.
Analogical or adaptive characters.
Affinities, general, complex and radiating.
Extinction separates and defines groups.
MORPHOLOGY, between members of the same class, between parts of the same individual.
EMBRYOLOGY, laws of, explained by variations not supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding age.
RUDIMENTARY ORGANS; their origin explained.
Summary.
From the first dawn of life, all organic beings are found to resemble each other in descending degrees, so that they can be classed in groups under groups.
This classification is evidently not arbitrary like the grouping of the stars in constellations.
The existence of groups would have been of simple signification, if one group had been exclusively fitted to inhabit the land, and another the water; one to feed on flesh, another on vegetable matter, and so on; but the case is widely different in nature;
In our second and fourth chapters, on Variation and on Natural Selection, I have attempted to show that it is the widely ranging, the much diffused and common, that is the dominant species belonging to the larger genera, which vary most.
The varieties, or incipient species, thus produced ultimately become converted, as I believe, into new and distinct species; and these, on the principle of inheritance, tend to produce other new and dominant species.
Consequently the groups which are now large, and which generally include many dominant species, tend to go on increasing indefinitely in size.
I further attempted to show that from the varying descendants of each species trying to occupy as many and as different places as possible in the economy of nature, there is a constant tendency in their characters to diverge.
This conclusion was supported by looking at the great diversity of the forms of life which, in any small area, come into the closest competition, and by looking to certain facts in naturalisation.
I attempted also to show that there is a constant tendency in the forms which are increasing in number and diverging in character, to supplant and exterminate the less divergent, the less improved, and preceding forms.
I request the reader to turn to the diagram illustrating the action, as formerly explained, of these several principles; and he will see that the inevitable result is that the modified descendants proceeding from one progenitor become broken up into groups
In the diagram each letter on the uppermost line may represent a genus including several species; and all the genera on this line form together one class, for all have descended from one ancient but unseen parent, and, consequently, have inherited
But the three genera on the left hand have, on this same principle, much in common, and form a sub-family, distinct from that including the next two genera on the right hand, which diverged from a common parent at the fifth stage of descent.
These five genera have also much, though less, in common; and they form a family distinct from that including the three genera still further to the right hand, which diverged at a still earlier period.
And all these genera, descended from (A), form an order distinct from the genera descended from (I).
So that we here have many species descended from a single progenitor grouped into genera; and the genera are included in, or subordinate to, sub-families, families, and orders, all united into one class.
Thus, the grand fact in natural history of the subordination of group under group, which, from its familiarity, does not always sufficiently strike us, is in my judgment fully explained.
Naturalists try to arrange the species, genera, and families in each class, on what is called the Natural System.
But what is meant by this system?
Some authors look at it merely as a scheme for arranging together those living objects which are most alike, and for separating those which are most unlike; or as an artificial means for enunciating, as briefly as possible, general propositions,--that is,
The ingenuity and utility of this system are indisputable.
But many naturalists think that something more is meant by the Natural System; they believe that it reveals the plan of the Creator; but unless it be specified whether order in time or space, or what else is meant by the plan of the Creator, it seems to me
Such expressions as that famous one of Linnaeus, and which we often meet with in a more or less concealed form, that the characters do not make the genus, but that the genus gives the characters, seem to imply that something more is included in our
I believe that something more is included; and that propinquity of descent,--the only known cause of the similarity of organic beings,--is the bond, hidden as it is by various degrees of modification, which is partially revealed to us by our
Let us now consider the rules followed in classification, and the difficulties which are encountered on the view that classification either gives some unknown plan of creation, or is simply a scheme for enunciating general propositions and of placing
It might have been thought (and was in ancient times thought) that those parts of the structure which determined the habits of life, and the general place of each being in the economy of nature, would be of very high importance in classification.
Nothing can be more false.
No one regards the external similarity of a mouse to a shrew, of a dugong to a whale, of a whale to a fish, as of any importance.
These resemblances, though so intimately connected with the whole life of the being, are ranked as merely "adaptive or analogical characters;" but to the consideration of these resemblances we shall have to recur.
It may even be given as a general rule, that the less any part of the organisation is concerned with special habits, the more important it becomes for classification.
As an instance: Owen, in speaking of the dugong, says, "The generative organs being those which are most remotely related to the habits and food of an animal, I have always regarded as affording very clear indications of its true affinities.
We are least likely in the modifications of these organs to mistake a merely adaptive for an essential character".
So with plants, how remarkable it is that the organs of vegetation, on which their whole life depends, are of little signification, excepting in the first main divisions; whereas the organs of reproduction, with their product the seed, are of paramount
We must not, therefore, in classifying, trust to resemblances in parts of the organisation, however important they may be for the welfare of the being in relation to the outer world.
Perhaps from this cause it has partly arisen, that almost all naturalists lay the greatest stress on resemblances in organs of high vital or physiological importance.
No doubt this view of the classificatory importance of organs which are important is generally, but by no means always, true.
But their importance for classification, I believe, depends on their greater constancy throughout large groups of species; and this constancy depends on such organs having generally been subjected to less change in the adaptation of the species to their
That the mere physiological importance of an organ does not determine its classificatory value, is almost shown by the one fact, that in allied groups, in which the same organ, as we have every reason to suppose, has nearly the same physiological value,
No naturalist can have worked at any group without being struck with this fact; and it has been most fully acknowledged in the writings of almost every author.
It will suffice to quote the highest authority, Robert Brown, who in speaking of certain organs in the Proteaceae, says their generic importance, "like that of all their parts, not only in this but, as I apprehend, in every natural family, is very unequal,
Again in another work he says, the genera of the Connaraceae "differ in having one or more ovaria, in the existence or absence of albumen, in the imbricate or valvular aestivation.
Any one of these characters singly is frequently of more than generic importance, though here even when all taken together they appear insufficient to separate Cnestis from Connarus".
To give an example amongst insects, in one great division of the Hymenoptera, the antennae, as Westwood has remarked, are most constant in structure; in another division they differ much, and the differences are of quite subordinate value in
Any number of instances could be given of the varying importance for classification of the same important organ within the same group of beings.
Again, no one will say that rudimentary or atrophied organs are of high physiological or vital importance; yet, undoubtedly, organs in this condition are often of high value in classification.
No one will dispute that the rudimentary teeth in the upper jaws of young ruminants, and certain rudimentary bones of the leg, are highly serviceable in exhibiting the close affinity between Ruminants and Pachyderms.
Robert Brown has strongly insisted on the fact that the rudimentary florets are of the highest importance in the classification of the Grasses.
Numerous instances could be given of characters derived from parts which must be considered of very trifling physiological importance, but which are universally admitted as highly serviceable in the definition of whole groups.
For instance, whether or not there is an open passage from the nostrils to the mouth, the only character, according to Owen, which absolutely distinguishes fishes and reptiles--the inflection of the angle of the jaws in Marsupials--the manner in which the
If the Ornithorhynchus had been covered with feathers instead of hair, this external and trifling character would, I think, have been considered by naturalists as important an aid in determining the degree of affinity of this strange creature to birds and
The importance, for classification, of trifling characters, mainly depends on their being correlated with several other characters of more or less importance.
The value indeed of an aggregate of characters is very evident in natural history.
Hence, as has often been remarked, a species may depart from its allies in several characters, both of high physiological importance and of almost universal prevalence, and yet leave us in no doubt where it should be ranked.
Hence, also, it has been found, that a classification founded on any single character, however important that may be, has always failed; for no part of the organisation is universally constant.
The importance of an aggregate of characters, even when none are important, alone explains, I think, that saying of Linnaeus, that the characters do not give the genus, but the genus gives the characters; for this saying seems founded on an appreciation of
Certain plants, belonging to the Malpighiaceae, bear perfect and degraded flowers; in the latter, as A. de Jussieu has remarked, "the greater number of the characters proper to the species, to the genus, to the family, to the class, disappear, and thus
But when Aspicarpa produced in France, during several years, only degraded flowers, departing so wonderfully in a number of the most important points of structure from the proper type of the order, yet M. Richard sagaciously saw, as Jussieu observes, that
This case seems to me well to illustrate the spirit with which our classifications are sometimes necessarily founded.
Practically when naturalists are at work, they do not trouble themselves about the physiological value of the characters which they use in defining a group, or in allocating any particular species.
If they find a character nearly uniform, and common to a great number of forms, and not common to others, they use it as one of high value; if common to some lesser number, they use it as of subordinate value.
This principle has been broadly confessed by some naturalists to be the true one; and by none more clearly than by that excellent botanist, Aug.
St. Hilaire.
If certain characters are always found correlated with others, though no apparent bond of connexion can be discovered between them, especial value is set on them.
As in most groups of animals, important organs, such as those for propelling the blood, or for aerating it, or those for propagating the race, are found nearly uniform, they are considered as highly serviceable in classification; but in some groups of
We can see why characters derived from the embryo should be of equal importance with those derived from the adult, for our classifications of course include all ages of each species.
But it is by no means obvious, on the ordinary view, why the structure of the embryo should be more important for this purpose than that of the adult, which alone plays its full part in the economy of nature.
Yet it has been strongly urged by those great naturalists, Milne Edwards and Agassiz, that embryonic characters are the most important of any in the classification of animals; and this doctrine has very generally been admitted as true.
The same fact holds good with flowering plants, of which the two main divisions have been founded on characters derived from the embryo,--on the number and position of the embryonic leaves or cotyledons, and on the mode of development of the plumule and
In our discussion on embryology, we shall see why such characters are so valuable, on the view of classification tacitly including the idea of descent.
Our classifications are often plainly influenced by chains of affinities.
Nothing can be easier than to define a number of characters common to all birds; but in the case of crustaceans, such definition has hitherto been found impossible.
There are crustaceans at the opposite ends of the series, which have hardly a character in common; yet the species at both ends, from being plainly allied to others, and these to others, and so onwards, can be recognised as unequivocally belonging to this,
Geographical distribution has often been used, though perhaps not quite logically, in classification, more especially in very large groups of closely allied forms.
Temminck insists on the utility or even necessity of this practice in certain groups of birds; and it has been followed by several entomologists and botanists.
Finally, with respect to the comparative value of the various groups of species, such as orders, sub-orders, families, sub-families, and genera, they seem to be, at least at present, almost arbitrary.
Several of the best botanists, such as Mr. Bentham and others, have strongly insisted on their arbitrary value.
Instances could be given amongst plants and insects, of a group of forms, first ranked by practised naturalists as only a genus, and then raised to the rank of a sub-family or family; and this has been done, not because further research has detected
All the foregoing rules and aids and difficulties in classification are explained, if I do not greatly deceive myself, on the view that the natural system is founded on descent with modification; that the characters which naturalists consider as showing
But I must explain my meaning more fully.
I believe that the ARRANGEMENT of the groups within each class, in due subordination and relation to the other groups, must be strictly genealogical in order to be natural; but that the AMOUNT of difference in the several branches or groups, though allied
The reader will best understand what is meant, if he will take the trouble of referring to the diagram in the fourth chapter.
We will suppose the letters A to L to represent allied genera, which lived during the Silurian epoch, and these have descended from a species which existed at an unknown anterior period.
Species of three of these genera (A, F, and I) have transmitted modified descendants to the present day, represented by the fifteen genera (a14 to z14) on the uppermost horizontal line.
Now all these modified descendants from a single species, are represented as related in blood or descent to the same degree; they may metaphorically be called cousins to the same millionth degree; yet they differ widely and in different degrees from each
The forms descended from A, now broken up into two or three families, constitute a distinct order from those descended from I, also broken up into two families.
Nor can the existing species, descended from A, be ranked in the same genus with the parent A; or those from I, with the parent I. But the existing genus F14 may be supposed to have been but slightly modified; and it will then rank with the parent-genus F;
So that the amount or value of the differences between organic beings all related to each other in the same degree in blood, has come to be widely different.
Nevertheless their genealogical ARRANGEMENT remains strictly true, not only at the present time, but at each successive period of descent.
All the modified descendants from A will have inherited something in common from their common parent, as will all the descendants from I; so will it be with each subordinate branch of descendants, at each successive period.
If, however, we choose to suppose that any of the descendants of A or of I have been so much modified as to have more or less completely lost traces of their parentage, in this case, their places in a natural classification will have been more or less
All the descendants of the genus F, along its whole line of descent, are supposed to have been but little modified, and they yet form a single genus.
But this genus, though much isolated, will still occupy its proper intermediate position; for F originally was intermediate in character between A and I, and the several genera descended from these two genera will have inherited to a certain extent their
This natural arrangement is shown, as far as is possible on paper, in the diagram, but in much too simple a manner.
If a branching diagram had not been used, and only the names of the groups had been written in a linear series, it would have been still less possible to have given a natural arrangement; and it is notoriously not possible to represent in a series, on a
Thus, on the view which I hold, the natural system is genealogical in its arrangement, like a pedigree; but the degrees of modification which the different groups have undergone, have to be expressed by ranking them under different so-called genera,
It may be worth while to illustrate this view of classification, by taking the case of languages.
If we possessed a perfect pedigree of mankind, a genealogical arrangement of the races of man would afford the best classification of the various languages now spoken throughout the world; and if all extinct languages, and all intermediate and slowly
Yet it might be that some very ancient language had altered little, and had given rise to few new languages, whilst others (owing to the spreading and subsequent isolation and states of civilisation of the several races, descended from a common race) had
The various degrees of difference in the languages from the same stock, would have to be expressed by groups subordinate to groups; but the proper or even only possible arrangement would still be genealogical; and this would be strictly natural, as it
In confirmation of this view, let us glance at the classification of varieties, which are believed or known to have descended from one species.
These are grouped under species, with sub-varieties under varieties; and with our domestic productions, several other grades of difference are requisite, as we have seen with pigeons.
The origin of the existence of groups subordinate to groups, is the same with varieties as with species, namely, closeness of descent with various degrees of modification.
Nearly the same rules are followed in classifying varieties, as with species.
Authors have insisted on the necessity of classing varieties on a natural instead of an artificial system; we are cautioned, for instance, not to class two varieties of the pine-apple together, merely because their fruit, though the most important part,
Whatever part is found to be most constant, is used in classing varieties: thus the great agriculturist Marshall says the horns are very useful for this purpose with cattle, because they are less variable than the shape or colour of the body, etc.
; whereas with sheep the horns are much less serviceable, because less constant.
In classing varieties, I apprehend if we had a real pedigree, a genealogical classification would be universally preferred; and it has been attempted by some authors.
For we might feel sure, whether there had been more or less modification, the principle of inheritance would keep the forms together which were allied in the greatest number of points.
In tumbler pigeons, though some sub-varieties differ from the others in the important character of having a longer beak, yet all are kept together from having the common habit of tumbling; but the short-faced breed has nearly or quite lost this habit;
If it could be proved that the Hottentot had descended from the Negro, I think he would be classed under the Negro group, however much he might differ in colour and other important characters from negroes.
With species in a state of nature, every naturalist has in fact brought descent into his classification; for he includes in his lowest grade, or that of a species, the two sexes; and how enormously these sometimes differ in the most important characters,
The naturalist includes as one species the several larval stages of the same individual, however much they may differ from each other and from the adult; as he likewise includes the so-called alternate generations of Steenstrup, which can only in a
He includes monsters; he includes varieties, not solely because they closely resemble the parent-form, but because they are descended from it.
He who believes that the cowslip is descended from the primrose, or conversely, ranks them together as a single species, and gives a single definition.
As soon as three Orchidean forms (Monochanthus, Myanthus, and Catasetum), which had previously been ranked as three distinct genera, were known to be sometimes produced on the same spike, they were immediately included as a single species.
But it may be asked, what ought we to do, if it could be proved that one species of kangaroo had been produced, by a long course of modification, from a bear?
Ought we to rank this one species with bears, and what should we do with the other species?
The supposition is of course preposterous; and I might answer by the argumentum ad hominem, and ask what should be done if a perfect kangaroo were seen to come out of the womb of a bear?
According to all analogy, it would be ranked with bears; but then assuredly all the other species of the kangaroo family would have to be classed under the bear genus.
The whole case is preposterous; for where there has been close descent in common, there will certainly be close resemblance or affinity.
As descent has universally been used in classing together the individuals of the same species, though the males and females and larvae are sometimes extremely different; and as it has been used in classing varieties which have undergone a certain, and
I believe it has thus been unconsciously used; and only thus can I understand the several rules and guides which have been followed by our best systematists.
We have no written pedigrees; we have to make out community of descent by resemblances of any kind.
Therefore we choose those characters which, as far as we can judge, are the least likely to have been modified in relation to the conditions of life to which each species has been recently exposed.
Rudimentary structures on this view are as good as, or even sometimes better than, other parts of the organisation.
We care not how trifling a character may be--let it be the mere inflection of the angle of the jaw, the manner in which an insect's wing is folded, whether the skin be covered by hair or feathers--if it prevail throughout many and different species,
We may err in this respect in regard to single points of structure, but when several characters, let them be ever so trifling, occur together throughout a large group of beings having different habits, we may feel almost sure, on the theory of descent,
And we know that such correlated or aggregated characters have especial value in classification.
We can understand why a species or a group of species may depart, in several of its most important characteristics, from its allies, and yet be safely classed with them.
This may be safely done, and is often done, as long as a sufficient number of characters, let them be ever so unimportant, betrays the hidden bond of community of descent.
Let two forms have not a single character in common, yet if these extreme forms are connected together by a chain of intermediate groups, we may at once infer their community of descent, and we put them all into the same class.
As we find organs of high physiological importance--those which serve to preserve life under the most diverse conditions of existence--are generally the most constant, we attach especial value to them; but if these same organs, in another group or section
We shall hereafter, I think, clearly see why embryological characters are of such high classificatory importance.
Geographical distribution may sometimes be brought usefully into play in classing large and widely-distributed genera, because all the species of the same genus, inhabiting any distinct and isolated region, have in all probability descended from the same
We can understand, on these views, the very important distinction between real affinities and analogical or adaptive resemblances.
Lamarck first called attention to this distinction, and he has been ably followed by Macleay and others.
The resemblance, in the shape of the body and in the fin-like anterior limbs, between the dugong, which is a pachydermatous animal, and the whale, and between both these mammals and fishes, is analogical.
Amongst insects there are innumerable instances: thus Linnaeus, misled by external appearances, actually classed an homopterous insect as a moth.
We see something of the same kind even in our domestic varieties, as in the thickened stems of the common and swedish turnip.
The resemblance of the greyhound and racehorse is hardly more fanciful than the analogies which have been drawn by some authors between very distinct animals.
On my view of characters being of real importance for classification, only in so far as they reveal descent, we can clearly understand why analogical or adaptive character, although of the utmost importance to the welfare of the being, are almost valueless
For animals, belonging to two most distinct lines of descent, may readily become adapted to similar conditions, and thus assume a close external resemblance; but such resemblances will not reveal--will rather tend to conceal their blood-relationship to
We can also understand the apparent paradox, that the very same characters are analogical when one class or order is compared with another, but give true affinities when the members of the same class or order are compared one with another: thus the shape
So it is with fishes.
As members of distinct classes have often been adapted by successive slight modifications to live under nearly similar circumstances,--to inhabit for instance the three elements of land, air, and water,--we can perhaps understand how it is that a numerical
A naturalist, struck by a parallelism of this nature in any one class, by arbitrarily raising or sinking the value of the groups in other classes (and all our experience shows that this valuation has hitherto been arbitrary), could easily extend the
As the modified descendants of dominant species, belonging to the larger genera, tend to inherit the advantages, which made the groups to which they belong large and their parents dominant, they are almost sure to spread widely, and to seize on more and
The larger and more dominant groups thus tend to go on increasing in size; and they consequently supplant many smaller and feebler groups.
Thus we can account for the fact that all organisms, recent and extinct, are included under a few great orders, under still fewer classes, and all in one great natural system.
As showing how few the higher groups are in number, and how widely spread they are throughout the world, the fact is striking, that the discovery of Australia has not added a single insect belonging to a new order; and that in the vegetable kingdom, as I
In the chapter on geological succession I attempted to show, on the principle of each group having generally diverged much in character during the long-continued process of modification, how it is that the more ancient forms of life often present
A few old and intermediate parent-forms having occasionally transmitted to the present day descendants but little modified, will give to us our so-called osculant or aberrant groups.
The more aberrant any form is, the greater must be the number of connecting forms which on my theory have been exterminated and utterly lost.
And we have some evidence of aberrant forms having suffered severely from extinction, for they are generally represented by extremely few species; and such species as do occur are generally very distinct from each other, which again implies extinction.
The genera Ornithorhynchus and Lepidosiren, for example, would not have been less aberrant had each been represented by a dozen species instead of by a single one; but such richness in species, as I find after some investigation, does not commonly fall to
We can, I think, account for this fact only by looking at aberrant forms as failing groups conquered by more successful competitors, with a few members preserved by some unusual coincidence of favourable circumstances.
Mr. Waterhouse has remarked that, when a member belonging to one group of animals exhibits an affinity to a quite distinct group, this affinity in most cases is general and not special: thus, according to Mr. Waterhouse, of all Rodents, the bizcacha is
As the points of affinity of the bizcacha to Marsupials are believed to be real and not merely adaptive, they are due on my theory to inheritance in common.
Therefore we must suppose either that all Rodents, including the bizcacha, branched off from some very ancient Marsupial, which will have had a character in some degree intermediate with respect to all existing Marsupials; or that both Rodents and
On either view we may suppose that the bizcacha has retained, by inheritance, more of the character of its ancient progenitor than have other Rodents; and therefore it will not be specially related to any one existing Marsupial, but indirectly to all or
On the other hand, of all Marsupials, as Mr. Waterhouse has remarked, the phascolomys resembles most nearly, not any one species, but the general order of Rodents.
In this case, however, it may be strongly suspected that the resemblance is only analogical, owing to the phascolomys having become adapted to habits like those of a Rodent.
The elder De Candolle has made nearly similar observations on the general nature of the affinities of distinct orders of plants.
On the principle of the multiplication and gradual divergence in character of the species descended from a common parent, together with their retention by inheritance of some characters in common, we can understand the excessively complex and radiating
For the common parent of a whole family of species, now broken up by extinction into distinct groups and sub-groups, will have transmitted some of its characters, modified in various ways and degrees, to all; and the several species will consequently be
As it is difficult to show the blood-relationship between the numerous kindred of any ancient and noble family, even by the aid of a genealogical tree, and almost impossible to do this without this aid, we can understand the extraordinary difficulty which
Extinction, as we have seen in the fourth chapter, has played an important part in defining and widening the intervals between the several groups in each class.
We may thus account even for the distinctness of whole classes from each other--for instance, of birds from all other vertebrate animals--by the belief that many ancient forms of life have been utterly lost, through which the early progenitors of birds
There has been less entire extinction of the forms of life which once connected fishes with batrachians.
There has been still less in some other classes, as in that of the Crustacea, for here the most wonderfully diverse forms are still tied together by a long, but broken, chain of affinities.
Extinction has only separated groups: it has by no means made them; for if every form which has ever lived on this earth were suddenly to reappear, though it would be quite impossible to give definitions by which each group could be distinguished from
We shall see this by turning to the diagram: the letters, A to L, may represent eleven Silurian genera, some of which have produced large groups of modified descendants.
Every intermediate link between these eleven genera and their primordial parent, and every intermediate link in each branch and sub-branch of their descendants, may be supposed to be still alive; and the links to be as fine as those between the finest
In this case it would be quite impossible to give any definition by which the several members of the several groups could be distinguished from their more immediate parents; or these parents from their ancient and unknown progenitor.
Yet the natural arrangement in the diagram would still hold good; and, on the principle of inheritance, all the forms descended from A, or from I, would have something in common.
In a tree we can specify this or that branch, though at the actual fork the two unite and blend together.
We could not, as I have said, define the several groups; but we could pick out types, or forms, representing most of the characters of each group, whether large or small, and thus give a general idea of the value of the differences between them.
This is what we should be driven to, if we were ever to succeed in collecting all the forms in any class which have lived throughout all time and space.
We shall certainly never succeed in making so perfect a collection: nevertheless, in certain classes, we are tending in this direction; and Milne Edwards has lately insisted, in an able paper, on the high importance of looking to types, whether or not we
Finally, we have seen that natural selection, which results from the struggle for existence, and which almost inevitably induces extinction and divergence of character in the many descendants from one dominant parent-species, explains that great and
We use the element of descent in classing the individuals of both sexes and of all ages, although having few characters in common, under one species; we use descent in classing acknowledged varieties, however different they may be from their parent; and I
On this idea of the natural system being, in so far as it has been perfected, genealogical in its arrangement, with the grades of difference between the descendants from a common parent, expressed by the terms genera, families, orders, etc.
, we can understand the rules which we are compelled to follow in our classification.
We can understand why we value certain resemblances far more than others; why we are permitted to use rudimentary and useless organs, or others of trifling physiological importance; why, in comparing one group with a distinct group, we summarily reject
We can clearly see how it is that all living and extinct forms can be grouped together in one great system; and how the several members of each class are connected together by the most complex and radiating lines of affinities.
We shall never, probably, disentangle the inextricable web of affinities between the members of any one class; but when we have a distinct object in view, and do not look to some unknown plan of creation, we may hope to make sure but slow progress.
MORPHOLOGY.
We have seen that the members of the same class, independently of their habits of life, resemble each other in the general plan of their organisation.
This resemblance is often expressed by the term "unity of type;" or by saying that the several parts and organs in the different species of the class are homologous.
The whole subject is included under the general name of Morphology.
This is the most interesting department of natural history, and may be said to be its very soul.
What can be more curious than that the hand of a man, formed for grasping, that of a mole for digging, the leg of the horse, the paddle of the porpoise, and the wing of the bat, should all be constructed on the same pattern, and should include the same
Geoffroy St. Hilaire has insisted strongly on the high importance of relative connexion in homologous organs: the parts may change to almost any extent in form and size, and yet they always remain connected together in the same order.
We never find, for instance, the bones of the arm and forearm, or of the thigh and leg, transposed.
Hence the same names can be given to the homologous bones in widely different animals.
We see the same great law in the construction of the mouths of insects: what can be more different than the immensely long spiral proboscis of a sphinx-moth, the curious folded one of a bee or bug, and the great jaws of a beetle?
--yet all these organs, serving for such different purposes, are formed by infinitely numerous modifications of an upper lip, mandibles, and two pairs of maxillae.
Analogous laws govern the construction of the mouths and limbs of crustaceans.
So it is with the flowers of plants.
Nothing can be more hopeless than to attempt to explain this similarity of pattern in members of the same class, by utility or by the doctrine of final causes.
The hopelessness of the attempt has been expressly admitted by Owen in his most interesting work on the 'Nature of Limbs.
' On the ordinary view of the independent creation of each being, we can only say that so it is;--that it has so pleased the Creator to construct each animal and plant.
The explanation is manifest on the theory of the natural selection of successive slight modifications,--each modification being profitable in some way to the modified form, but often affecting by correlation of growth other parts of the organisation.
In changes of this nature, there will be little or no tendency to modify the original pattern, or to transpose parts.
The bones of a limb might be shortened and widened to any extent, and become gradually enveloped in thick membrane, so as to serve as a fin; or a webbed foot might have all its bones, or certain bones, lengthened to any extent, and the membrane connecting
If we suppose that the ancient progenitor, the archetype as it may be called, of all mammals, had its limbs constructed on the existing general pattern, for whatever purpose they served, we can at once perceive the plain signification of the homologous
So with the mouths of insects, we have only to suppose that their common progenitor had an upper lip, mandibles, and two pair of maxillae, these parts being perhaps very simple in form; and then natural selection will account for the infinite diversity in
Nevertheless, it is conceivable that the general pattern of an organ might become so much obscured as to be finally lost, by the atrophy and ultimately by the complete abortion of certain parts, by the soldering together of other parts, and by the doubling
In the paddles of the extinct gigantic sea-lizards, and in the mouths of certain suctorial crustaceans, the general pattern seems to have been thus to a certain extent obscured.
There is another and equally curious branch of the present subject; namely, the comparison not of the same part in different members of a class, but of the different parts or organs in the same individual.
Most physiologists believe that the bones of the skull are homologous with--that is correspond in number and in relative connexion with--the elemental parts of a certain number of vertebrae.
The anterior and posterior limbs in each member of the vertebrate and articulate classes are plainly homologous.
We see the same law in comparing the wonderfully complex jaws and legs in crustaceans.
It is familiar to almost every one, that in a flower the relative position of the sepals, petals, stamens, and pistils, as well as their intimate structure, are intelligible on the view that they consist of metamorphosed leaves, arranged in a spire.
In monstrous plants, we often get direct evidence of the possibility of one organ being transformed into another; and we can actually see in embryonic crustaceans and in many other animals, and in flowers, that organs, which when mature become extremely
How inexplicable are these facts on the ordinary view of creation!
Why should the brain be enclosed in a box composed of such numerous and such extraordinarily shaped pieces of bone?
As Owen has remarked, the benefit derived from the yielding of the separate pieces in the act of parturition of mammals, will by no means explain the same construction in the skulls of birds.
Why should similar bones have been created in the formation of the wing and leg of a bat, used as they are for such totally different purposes?
Why should one crustacean, which has an extremely complex mouth formed of many parts, consequently always have fewer legs; or conversely, those with many legs have simpler mouths?
Why should the sepals, petals, stamens, and pistils in any individual flower, though fitted for such widely different purposes, be all constructed on the same pattern?
On the theory of natural selection, we can satisfactorily answer these questions.
In the vertebrata, we see a series of internal vertebrae bearing certain processes and appendages; in the articulata, we see the body divided into a series of segments, bearing external appendages; and in flowering plants, we see a series of successive
An indefinite repetition of the same part or organ is the common characteristic (as Owen has observed) of all low or little-modified forms; therefore we may readily believe that the unknown progenitor of the vertebrata possessed many vertebrae; the unknown
We have formerly seen that parts many times repeated are eminently liable to vary in number and structure; consequently it is quite probable that natural selection, during a long-continued course of modification, should have seized on a certain number of
And as the whole amount of modification will have been effected by slight successive steps, we need not wonder at discovering in such parts or organs, a certain degree of fundamental resemblance, retained by the strong principle of inheritance.
In the great class of molluscs, though we can homologise the parts of one species with those of another and distinct species, we can indicate but few serial homologies; that is, we are seldom enabled to say that one part or organ is homologous with another
And we can understand this fact; for in molluscs, even in the lowest members of the class, we do not find nearly so much indefinite repetition of any one part, as we find in the other great classes of the animal and vegetable kingdoms.
Naturalists frequently speak of the skull as formed of metamorphosed vertebrae: the jaws of crabs as metamorphosed legs; the stamens and pistils of flowers as metamorphosed leaves; but it would in these cases probably be more correct, as Professor Huxley
,--as having been metamorphosed, not one from the other, but from some common element.
Naturalists, however, use such language only in a metaphorical sense: they are far from meaning that during a long course of descent, primordial organs of any kind--vertebrae in the one case and legs in the other--have actually been modified into skulls or
Yet so strong is the appearance of a modification of this nature having occurred, that naturalists can hardly avoid employing language having this plain signification.
On my view these terms may be used literally; and the wonderful fact of the jaws, for instance, of a crab retaining numerous characters, which they would probably have retained through inheritance, if they had really been metamorphosed during a long course
EMBRYOLOGY.
It has already been casually remarked that certain organs in the individual, which when mature become widely different and serve for different purposes, are in the embryo exactly alike.
The embryos, also, of distinct animals within the same class are often strikingly similar: a better proof of this cannot be given, than a circumstance mentioned by Agassiz, namely, that having forgotten to ticket the embryo of some vertebrate animal, he
The vermiform larvae of moths, flies, beetles, etc.
, resemble each other much more closely than do the mature insects; but in the case of larvae, the embryos are active, and have been adapted for special lines of life.
A trace of the law of embryonic resemblance, sometimes lasts till a rather late age: thus birds of the same genus, and of closely allied genera, often resemble each other in their first and second plumage; as we see in the spotted feathers in the thrush
In the cat tribe, most of the species are striped or spotted in lines; and stripes can be plainly distinguished in the whelp of the lion.
We occasionally though rarely see something of this kind in plants: thus the embryonic leaves of the ulex or furze, and the first leaves of the phyllodineous acaceas, are pinnate or divided like the ordinary leaves of the leguminosae.
The points of structure, in which the embryos of widely different animals of the same class resemble each other, often have no direct relation to their conditions of existence.
We cannot, for instance, suppose that in the embryos of the vertebrata the peculiar loop-like course of the arteries near the branchial slits are related to similar conditions,--in the young mammal which is nourished in the womb of its mother, in the egg
We have no more reason to believe in such a relation, than we have to believe that the same bones in the hand of a man, wing of a bat, and fin of a porpoise, are related to similar conditions of life.
No one will suppose that the stripes on the whelp of a lion, or the spots on the young blackbird, are of any use to these animals, or are related to the conditions to which they are exposed.
The case, however, is different when an animal during any part of its embryonic career is active, and has to provide for itself.
The period of activity may come on earlier or later in life; but whenever it comes on, the adaptation of the larva to its conditions of life is just as perfect and as beautiful as in the adult animal.
From such special adaptations, the similarity of the larvae or active embryos of allied animals is sometimes much obscured; and cases could be given of the larvae of two species, or of two groups of species, differing quite as much, or even more, from each
In most cases, however, the larvae, though active, still obey more or less closely the law of common embryonic resemblance.
Cirripedes afford a good instance of this: even the illustrious Cuvier did not perceive that a barnacle was, as it certainly is, a crustacean; but a glance at the larva shows this to be the case in an unmistakeable manner.
So again the two main divisions of cirripedes, the pedunculated and sessile, which differ widely in external appearance, have larvae in all their several stages barely distinguishable.
The embryo in the course of development generally rises in organisation: I use this expression, though I am aware that it is hardly possible to define clearly what is meant by the organisation being higher or lower.
But no one probably will dispute that the butterfly is higher than the caterpillar.
In some cases, however, the mature animal is generally considered as lower in the scale than the larva, as with certain parasitic crustaceans.
To refer once again to cirripedes: the larvae in the first stage have three pairs of legs, a very simple single eye, and a probosciformed mouth, with which they feed largely, for they increase much in size.
In the second stage, answering to the chrysalis stage of butterflies, they have six pairs of beautifully constructed natatory legs, a pair of magnificent compound eyes, and extremely complex antennae; but they have a closed and imperfect mouth, and cannot
When this is completed they are fixed for life: their legs are now converted into prehensile organs; they again obtain a well-constructed mouth; but they have no antennae, and their two eyes are now reconverted into a minute, single, and very simple
In this last and complete state, cirripedes may be considered as either more highly or more lowly organised than they were in the larval condition.
But in some genera the larvae become developed either into hermaphrodites having the ordinary structure, or into what I have called complemental males: and in the latter, the development has assuredly been retrograde; for the male is a mere sack, which
We are so much accustomed to see differences in structure between the embryo and the adult, and likewise a close similarity in the embryos of widely different animals within the same class, that we might be led to look at these facts as necessarily
But there is no obvious reason why, for instance, the wing of a bat, or the fin of a porpoise, should not have been sketched out with all the parts in proper proportion, as soon as any structure became visible in the embryo.
And in some whole groups of animals and in certain members of other groups, the embryo does not at any period differ widely from the adult: thus Owen has remarked in regard to cuttle-fish, "there is no metamorphosis; the cephalopodic character is
The larvae of insects, whether adapted to the most diverse and active habits, or quite inactive, being fed by their parents or placed in the midst of proper nutriment, yet nearly all pass through a similar worm-like stage of development; but in some few
How, then, can we explain these several facts in embryology,--namely the very general, but not universal difference in structure between the embryo and the adult;--of parts in the same individual embryo, which ultimately become very unlike and serve for
I believe that all these facts can be explained, as follows, on the view of descent with modification.
It is commonly assumed, perhaps from monstrosities often affecting the embryo at a very early period, that slight variations necessarily appear at an equally early period.
But we have little evidence on this head--indeed the evidence rather points the other way; for it is notorious that breeders of cattle, horses, and various fancy animals, cannot positively tell, until some time after the animal has been born, what its
We see this plainly in our own children; we cannot always tell whether the child will be tall or short, or what its precise features will be.
The question is not, at what period of life any variation has been caused, but at what period it is fully displayed.
The cause may have acted, and I believe generally has acted, even before the embryo is formed; and the variation may be due to the male and female sexual elements having been affected by the conditions to which either parent, or their ancestors, have been
Nevertheless an effect thus caused at a very early period, even before the formation of the embryo, may appear late in life; as when an hereditary disease, which appears in old age alone, has been communicated to the offspring from the reproductive element
Or again, as when the horns of cross-bred cattle have been affected by the shape of the horns of either parent.
For the welfare of a very young animal, as long as it remains in its mother's womb, or in the egg, or as long as it is nourished and protected by its parent, it must be quite unimportant whether most of its characters are fully acquired a little earlier or
It would not signify, for instance, to a bird which obtained its food best by having a long beak, whether or not it assumed a beak of this particular length, as long as it was fed by its parents.
Hence, I conclude, that it is quite possible, that each of the many successive modifications, by which each species has acquired its present structure, may have supervened at a not very early period of life; and some direct evidence from our domestic
But in other cases it is quite possible that each successive modification, or most of them, may have appeared at an extremely early period.
I have stated in the first chapter, that there is some evidence to render it probable, that at whatever age any variation first appears in the parent, it tends to reappear at a corresponding age in the offspring.
Certain variations can only appear at corresponding ages, for instance, peculiarities in the caterpillar, cocoon, or imago states of the silk-moth; or, again, in the horns of almost full-grown cattle.
But further than this, variations which, for all that we can see, might have appeared earlier or later in life, tend to appear at a corresponding age in the offspring and parent.
I am far from meaning that this is invariably the case; and I could give a good many cases of variations (taking the word in the largest sense) which have supervened at an earlier age in the child than in the parent.
These two principles, if their truth be admitted, will, I believe, explain all the above specified leading facts in embryology.
But first let us look at a few analogous cases in domestic varieties.
Some authors who have written on Dogs, maintain that the greyhound and bulldog, though appearing so different, are really varieties most closely allied, and have probably descended from the same wild stock; hence I was curious to see how far their puppies
So, again, I was told that the foals of cart and race-horses differed as much as the full-grown animals; and this surprised me greatly, as I think it probable that the difference between these two breeds has been wholly caused by selection under
As the evidence appears to me conclusive, that the several domestic breeds of Pigeon have descended from one wild species, I compared young pigeons of various breeds, within twelve hours after being hatched; I carefully measured the proportions (but will
Now some of these birds, when mature, differ so extraordinarily in length and form of beak, that they would, I cannot doubt, be ranked in distinct genera, had they been natural productions.
But when the nestling birds of these several breeds were placed in a row, though most of them could be distinguished from each other, yet their proportional differences in the above specified several points were incomparably less than in the full-grown
Some characteristic points of difference--for instance, that of the width of mouth--could hardly be detected in the young.
But there was one remarkable exception to this rule, for the young of the short-faced tumbler differed from the young of the wild rock-pigeon and of the other breeds, in all its proportions, almost exactly as much as in the adult state.
The two principles above given seem to me to explain these facts in regard to the later embryonic stages of our domestic varieties.
Fanciers select their horses, dogs, and pigeons, for breeding, when they are nearly grown up: they are indifferent whether the desired qualities and structures have been acquired earlier or later in life, if the full-grown animal possesses them.
And the cases just given, more especially that of pigeons, seem to show that the characteristic differences which give value to each breed, and which have been accumulated by man's selection, have not generally first appeared at an early period of life,
But the case of the short-faced tumbler, which when twelve hours old had acquired its proper proportions, proves that this is not the universal rule; for here the characteristic differences must either have appeared at an earlier period than usual, or, if
Now let us apply these facts and the above two principles--which latter, though not proved true, can be shown to be in some degree probable--to species in a state of nature.
Let us take a genus of birds, descended on my theory from some one parent-species, and of which the several new species have become modified through natural selection in accordance with their diverse habits.
Then, from the many slight successive steps of variation having supervened at a rather late age, and having been inherited at a corresponding age, the young of the new species of our supposed genus will manifestly tend to resemble each other much more
We may extend this view to whole families or even classes.
The fore-limbs, for instance, which served as legs in the parent-species, may become, by a long course of modification, adapted in one descendant to act as hands, in another as paddles, in another as wings; and on the above two principles--namely of each
But in each individual new species, the embryonic fore-limbs will differ greatly from the fore-limbs in the mature animal; the limbs in the latter having undergone much modification at a rather late period of life, and having thus been converted into
Whatever influence long-continued exercise or use on the one hand, and disuse on the other, may have in modifying an organ, such influence will mainly affect the mature animal, which has come to its full powers of activity and has to gain its own living;
Whereas the young will remain unmodified, or be modified in a lesser degree, by the effects of use and disuse.
In certain cases the successive steps of variation might supervene, from causes of which we are wholly ignorant, at a very early period of life, or each step might be inherited at an earlier period than that at which it first appeared.
In either case (as with the short-faced tumbler) the young or embryo would closely resemble the mature parent-form.
We have seen that this is the rule of development in certain whole groups of animals, as with cuttle-fish and spiders, and with a few members of the great class of insects, as with Aphis.
With respect to the final cause of the young in these cases not undergoing any metamorphosis, or closely resembling their parents from their earliest age, we can see that this would result from the two following contingencies; firstly, from the young,
Some further explanation, however, of the embryo not undergoing any metamorphosis is perhaps requisite.
If, on the other hand, it profited the young to follow habits of life in any degree different from those of their parent, and consequently to be constructed in a slightly different manner, then, on the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages, the
Such differences might, also, become correlated with successive stages of development; so that the larvae, in the first stage, might differ greatly from the larvae in the second stage, as we have seen to be the case with cirripedes.
The adult might become fitted for sites or habits, in which organs of locomotion or of the senses, etc.
, would be useless; and in this case the final metamorphosis would be said to be retrograde.
As all the organic beings, extinct and recent, which have ever lived on this earth have to be classed together, and as all have been connected by the finest gradations, the best, or indeed, if our collections were nearly perfect, the only possible
Descent being on my view the hidden bond of connexion which naturalists have been seeking under the term of the natural system.
On this view we can understand how it is that, in the eyes of most naturalists, the structure of the embryo is even more important for classification than that of the adult.
For the embryo is the animal in its less modified state; and in so far it reveals the structure of its progenitor.
In two groups of animal, however much they may at present differ from each other in structure and habits, if they pass through the same or similar embryonic stages, we may feel assured that they have both descended from the same or nearly similar parents,
Thus, community in embryonic structure reveals community of descent.
It will reveal this community of descent, however much the structure of the adult may have been modified and obscured; we have seen, for instance, that cirripedes can at once be recognised by their larvae as belonging to the great class of crustaceans.
As the embryonic state of each species and group of species partially shows us the structure of their less modified ancient progenitors, we can clearly see why ancient and extinct forms of life should resemble the embryos of their descendants,--our
Agassiz believes this to be a law of nature; but I am bound to confess that I only hope to see the law hereafter proved true.
It can be proved true in those cases alone in which the ancient state, now supposed to be represented in many embryos, has not been obliterated, either by the successive variations in a long course of modification having supervened at a very early age, or
It should also be borne in mind, that the supposed law of resemblance of ancient forms of life to the embryonic stages of recent forms, may be true, but yet, owing to the geological record not extending far enough back in time, may remain for a long
Thus, as it seems to me, the leading facts in embryology, which are second in importance to none in natural history, are explained on the principle of slight modifications not appearing, in the many descendants from some one ancient progenitor, at a very
Embryology rises greatly in interest, when we thus look at the embryo as a picture, more or less obscured, of the common parent-form of each great class of animals.
RUDIMENTARY, ATROPHIED, OR ABORTED ORGANS.
Organs or parts in this strange condition, bearing the stamp of inutility, are extremely common throughout nature.
For instance, rudimentary mammae are very general in the males of mammals: I presume that the "bastard-wing" in birds may be safely considered as a digit in a rudimentary state: in very many snakes one lobe of the lungs is rudimentary; in other snakes
Some of the cases of rudimentary organs are extremely curious; for instance, the presence of teeth in foetal whales, which when grown up have not a tooth in their heads; and the presence of teeth, which never cut through the gums, in the upper jaws of our
It has even been stated on good authority that rudiments of teeth can be detected in the beaks of certain embryonic birds.
Nothing can be plainer than that wings are formed for flight, yet in how many insects do we see wings so reduced in size as to be utterly incapable of flight, and not rarely lying under wing-cases, firmly soldered together!
The meaning of rudimentary organs is often quite unmistakeable: for instance there are beetles of the same genus (and even of the same species) resembling each other most closely in all respects, one of which will have full-sized wings, and another mere
Rudimentary organs sometimes retain their potentiality, and are merely not developed: this seems to be the case with the mammae of male mammals, for many instances are on record of these organs having become well developed in full-grown males, and having
So again there are normally four developed and two rudimentary teats in the udders of the genus Bos, but in our domestic cows the two sometimes become developed and give milk.
In individual plants of the same species the petals sometimes occur as mere rudiments, and sometimes in a well-developed state.
In plants with separated sexes, the male flowers often have a rudiment of a pistil; and Kolreuter found that by crossing such male plants with an hermaphrodite species, the rudiment of the pistil in the hybrid offspring was much increased in size; and this
An organ serving for two purposes, may become rudimentary or utterly aborted for one, even the more important purpose; and remain perfectly efficient for the other.
Thus in plants, the office of the pistil is to allow the pollen-tubes to reach the ovules protected in the ovarium at its base.
The pistil consists of a stigma supported on the style; but in some Compositae, the male florets, which of course cannot be fecundated, have a pistil, which is in a rudimentary state, for it is not crowned with a stigma; but the style remains well
Again, an organ may become rudimentary for its proper purpose, and be used for a distinct object: in certain fish the swim-bladder seems to be rudimentary for its proper function of giving buoyancy, but has become converted into a nascent breathing organ
Other similar instances could be given.
Rudimentary organs in the individuals of the same species are very liable to vary in degree of development and in other respects.
Moreover, in closely allied species, the degree to which the same organ has been rendered rudimentary occasionally differs much.
This latter fact is well exemplified in the state of the wings of the female moths in certain groups.
Rudimentary organs may be utterly aborted; and this implies, that we find in an animal or plant no trace of an organ, which analogy would lead us to expect to find, and which is occasionally found in monstrous individuals of the species.
Thus in the snapdragon (antirrhinum) we generally do not find a rudiment of a fifth stamen; but this may sometimes be seen.
In tracing the homologies of the same part in different members of a class, nothing is more common, or more necessary, than the use and discovery of rudiments.
This is well shown in the drawings given by Owen of the bones of the leg of the horse, ox, and rhinoceros.
It is an important fact that rudimentary organs, such as teeth in the upper jaws of whales and ruminants, can often be detected in the embryo, but afterwards wholly disappear.
It is also, I believe, a universal rule, that a rudimentary part or organ is of greater size relatively to the adjoining parts in the embryo, than in the adult; so that the organ at this early age is less rudimentary, or even cannot be said to be in any
Hence, also, a rudimentary organ in the adult, is often said to have retained its embryonic condition.
I have now given the leading facts with respect to rudimentary organs.
In reflecting on them, every one must be struck with astonishment: for the same reasoning power which tells us plainly that most parts and organs are exquisitely adapted for certain purposes, tells us with equal plainness that these rudimentary or
In works on natural history rudimentary organs are generally said to have been created "for the sake of symmetry," or in order "to complete the scheme of nature;" but this seems to me no explanation, merely a restatement of the fact.
Would it be thought sufficient to say that because planets revolve in elliptic courses round the sun, satellites follow the same course round the planets, for the sake of symmetry, and to complete the scheme of nature?
An eminent physiologist accounts for the presence of rudimentary organs, by supposing that they serve to excrete matter in excess, or injurious to the system; but can we suppose that the minute papilla, which often represents the pistil in male flowers,
Can we suppose that the formation of rudimentary teeth which are subsequently absorbed, can be of any service to the rapidly growing embryonic calf by the excretion of precious phosphate of lime?
When a man's fingers have been amputated, imperfect nails sometimes appear on the stumps: I could as soon believe that these vestiges of nails have appeared, not from unknown laws of growth, but in order to excrete horny matter, as that the rudimentary
On my view of descent with modification, the origin of rudimentary organs is simple.
We have plenty of cases of rudimentary organs in our domestic productions,--as the stump of a tail in tailless breeds,--the vestige of an ear in earless breeds,--the reappearance of minute dangling horns in hornless breeds of cattle, more especially,
We often see rudiments of various parts in monsters.
But I doubt whether any of these cases throw light on the origin of rudimentary organs in a state of nature, further than by showing that rudiments can be produced; for I doubt whether species under nature ever undergo abrupt changes.
I believe that disuse has been the main agency; that it has led in successive generations to the gradual reduction of various organs, until they have become rudimentary,--as in the case of the eyes of animals inhabiting dark caverns, and of the wings of
Again, an organ useful under certain conditions, might become injurious under others, as with the wings of beetles living on small and exposed islands; and in this case natural selection would continue slowly to reduce the organ, until it was rendered
Any change in function, which can be effected by insensibly small steps, is within the power of natural selection; so that an organ rendered, during changed habits of life, useless or injurious for one purpose, might easily be modified and used for another
Or an organ might be retained for one alone of its former functions.
An organ, when rendered useless, may well be variable, for its variations cannot be checked by natural selection.
At whatever period of life disuse or selection reduces an organ, and this will generally be when the being has come to maturity and to its full powers of action, the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages will reproduce the organ in its reduced
Thus we can understand the greater relative size of rudimentary organs in the embryo, and their lesser relative size in the adult.
But if each step of the process of reduction were to be inherited, not at the corresponding age, but at an extremely early period of life (as we have good reason to believe to be possible) the rudimentary part would tend to be wholly lost, and we should
The principle, also, of economy, explained in a former chapter, by which the materials forming any part or structure, if not useful to the possessor, will be saved as far as is possible, will probably often come into play; and this will tend to cause the
As the presence of rudimentary organs is thus due to the tendency in every part of the organisation, which has long existed, to be inherited--we can understand, on the genealogical view of classification, how it is that systematists have found rudimentary
Rudimentary organs may be compared with the letters in a word, still retained in the spelling, but become useless in the pronunciation, but which serve as a clue in seeking for its derivation.
On the view of descent with modification, we may conclude that the existence of organs in a rudimentary, imperfect, and useless condition, or quite aborted, far from presenting a strange difficulty, as they assuredly do on the ordinary doctrine of
SUMMARY.
In this chapter I have attempted to show, that the subordination of group to group in all organisms throughout all time; that the nature of the relationship, by which all living and extinct beings are united by complex, radiating, and circuitous lines of
In considering this view of classification, it should be borne in mind that the element of descent has been universally used in ranking together the sexes, ages, and acknowledged varieties of the same species, however different they may be in structure.
If we extend the use of this element of descent,--the only certainly known cause of similarity in organic beings,--we shall understand what is meant by the natural system: it is genealogical in its attempted arrangement, with the grades of acquired
On this same view of descent with modification, all the great facts in Morphology become intelligible,--whether we look to the same pattern displayed in the homologous organs, to whatever purpose applied, of the different species of a class; or to the
On the principle of successive slight variations, not necessarily or generally supervening at a very early period of life, and being inherited at a corresponding period, we can understand the great leading facts in Embryology; namely, the resemblance in an
Larvae are active embryos, which have become specially modified in relation to their habits of life, through the principle of modifications being inherited at corresponding ages.
On this same principle--and bearing in mind, that when organs are reduced in size, either from disuse or selection, it will generally be at that period of life when the being has to provide for its own wants, and bearing in mind how strong is the principle
The importance of embryological characters and of rudimentary organs in classification is intelligible, on the view that an arrangement is only so far natural as it is genealogical.
Finally, the several classes of facts which have been considered in this chapter, seem to me to proclaim so plainly, that the innumerable species, genera, and families of organic beings, with which this world is peopled, have all descended, each within its
14.
RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION.
Recapitulation of the difficulties on the theory of Natural Selection.
Recapitulation of the general and special circumstances in its favour.
Causes of the general belief in the immutability of species.
How far the theory of natural selection may be extended.
Effects of its adoption on the study of Natural history.
Concluding remarks.
As this whole volume is one long argument, it may be convenient to the reader to have the leading facts and inferences briefly recapitulated.
That many and grave objections may be advanced against the theory of descent with modification through natural selection, I do not deny.
I have endeavoured to give to them their full force.
Nothing at first can appear more difficult to believe than that the more complex organs and instincts should have been perfected, not by means superior to, though analogous with, human reason, but by the accumulation of innumerable slight variations, each
Nevertheless, this difficulty, though appearing to our imagination insuperably great, cannot be considered real if we admit the following propositions, namely,--that gradations in the perfection of any organ or instinct, which we may consider, either do
The truth of these propositions cannot, I think, be disputed.
It is, no doubt, extremely difficult even to conjecture by what gradations many structures have been perfected, more especially amongst broken and failing groups of organic beings; but we see so many strange gradations in nature, as is proclaimed by the
There are, it must be admitted, cases of special difficulty on the theory of natural selection; and one of the most curious of these is the existence of two or three defined castes of workers or sterile females in the same community of ants; but I have
With respect to the almost universal sterility of species when first crossed, which forms so remarkable a contrast with the almost universal fertility of varieties when crossed, I must refer the reader to the recapitulation of the facts given at the end of
We see the truth of this conclusion in the vast difference in the result, when the same two species are crossed reciprocally; that is, when one species is first used as the father and then as the mother.
The fertility of varieties when intercrossed and of their mongrel offspring cannot be considered as universal; nor is their very general fertility surprising when we remember that it is not likely that either their constitutions or their reproductive
Moreover, most of the varieties which have been experimentised on have been produced under domestication; and as domestication apparently tends to eliminate sterility, we ought not to expect it also to produce sterility.
The sterility of hybrids is a very different case from that of first crosses, for their reproductive organs are more or less functionally impotent; whereas in first crosses the organs on both sides are in a perfect condition.
As we continually see that organisms of all kinds are rendered in some degree sterile from their constitutions having been disturbed by slightly different and new conditions of life, we need not feel surprise at hybrids being in some degree sterile, for
This parallelism is supported by another parallel, but directly opposite, class of facts; namely, that the vigour and fertility of all organic beings are increased by slight changes in their conditions of life, and that the offspring of slightly modified
So that, on the one hand, considerable changes in the conditions of life and crosses between greatly modified forms, lessen fertility; and on the other hand, lesser changes in the conditions of life and crosses between less modified forms, increase
Turning to geographical distribution, the difficulties encountered on the theory of descent with modification are grave enough.
All the individuals of the same species, and all the species of the same genus, or even higher group, must have descended from common parents; and therefore, in however distant and isolated parts of the world they are now found, they must in the course of
We are often wholly unable even to conjecture how this could have been effected.
Yet, as we have reason to believe that some species have retained the same specific form for very long periods, enormously long as measured by years, too much stress ought not to be laid on the occasional wide diffusion of the same species; for during very
A broken or interrupted range may often be accounted for by the extinction of the species in the intermediate regions.
It cannot be denied that we are as yet very ignorant of the full extent of the various climatal and geographical changes which have affected the earth during modern periods; and such changes will obviously have greatly facilitated migration.
As an example, I have attempted to show how potent has been the influence of the Glacial period on the distribution both of the same and of representative species throughout the world.
We are as yet profoundly ignorant of the many occasional means of transport.
With respect to distinct species of the same genus inhabiting very distant and isolated regions, as the process of modification has necessarily been slow, all the means of migration will have been possible during a very long period; and consequently the
As on the theory of natural selection an interminable number of intermediate forms must have existed, linking together all the species in each group by gradations as fine as our present varieties, it may be asked, Why do we not see these linking forms all
Why are not all organic beings blended together in an inextricable chaos?
With respect to existing forms, we should remember that we have no right to expect (excepting in rare cases) to discover DIRECTLY connecting links between them, but only between each and some extinct and supplanted form.
Even on a wide area, which has during a long period remained continuous, and of which the climate and other conditions of life change insensibly in going from a district occupied by one species into another district occupied by a closely allied species, we
For we have reason to believe that only a few species are undergoing change at any one period; and all changes are slowly effected.
I have also shown that the intermediate varieties which will at first probably exist in the intermediate zones, will be liable to be supplanted by the allied forms on either hand; and the latter, from existing in greater numbers, will generally be modified
On this doctrine of the extermination of an infinitude of connecting links, between the living and extinct inhabitants of the world, and at each successive period between the extinct and still older species, why is not every geological formation charged
Why does not every collection of fossil remains afford plain evidence of the gradation and mutation of the forms of life?
We meet with no such evidence, and this is the most obvious and forcible of the many objections which may be urged against my theory.
Why, again, do whole groups of allied species appear, though certainly they often falsely appear, to have come in suddenly on the several geological stages?
Why do we not find great piles of strata beneath the Silurian system, stored with the remains of the progenitors of the Silurian groups of fossils?
For certainly on my theory such strata must somewhere have been deposited at these ancient and utterly unknown epochs in the world's history.
I can answer these questions and grave objections only on the supposition that the geological record is far more imperfect than most geologists believe.
It cannot be objected that there has not been time sufficient for any amount of organic change; for the lapse of time has been so great as to be utterly inappreciable by the human intellect.
The number of specimens in all our museums is absolutely as nothing compared with the countless generations of countless species which certainly have existed.
We should not be able to recognise a species as the parent of any one or more species if we were to examine them ever so closely, unless we likewise possessed many of the intermediate links between their past or parent and present states; and these many
Numerous existing doubtful forms could be named which are probably varieties; but who will pretend that in future ages so many fossil links will be discovered, that naturalists will be able to decide, on the common view, whether or not these doubtful forms
As long as most of the links between any two species are unknown, if any one link or intermediate variety be discovered, it will simply be classed as another and distinct species.
Only a small portion of the world has been geologically explored.
Only organic beings of certain classes can be preserved in a fossil condition, at least in any great number.
Widely ranging species vary most, and varieties are often at first local,--both causes rendering the discovery of intermediate links less likely.
Local varieties will not spread into other and distant regions until they are considerably modified and improved; and when they do spread, if discovered in a geological formation, they will appear as if suddenly created there, and will be simply classed as
Most formations have been intermittent in their accumulation; and their duration, I am inclined to believe, has been shorter than the average duration of specific forms.
Successive formations are separated from each other by enormous blank intervals of time; for fossiliferous formations, thick enough to resist future degradation, can be accumulated only where much sediment is deposited on the subsiding bed of the sea.
During the alternate periods of elevation and of stationary level the record will be blank.
During these latter periods there will probably be more variability in the forms of life; during periods of subsidence, more extinction.
With respect to the absence of fossiliferous formations beneath the lowest Silurian strata, I can only recur to the hypothesis given in the ninth chapter.
That the geological record is imperfect all will admit; but that it is imperfect to the degree which I require, few will be inclined to admit.
If we look to long enough intervals of time, geology plainly declares that all species have changed; and they have changed in the manner which my theory requires, for they have changed slowly and in a graduated manner.
We clearly see this in the fossil remains from consecutive formations invariably being much more closely related to each other, than are the fossils from formations distant from each other in time.
Such is the sum of the several chief objections and difficulties which may justly be urged against my theory; and I have now briefly recapitulated the answers and explanations which can be given to them.
I have felt these difficulties far too heavily during many years to doubt their weight.
But it deserves especial notice that the more important objections relate to questions on which we are confessedly ignorant; nor do we know how ignorant we are.
We do not know all the possible transitional gradations between the simplest and the most perfect organs; it cannot be pretended that we know all the varied means of Distribution during the long lapse of years, or that we know how imperfect the Geological
Grave as these several difficulties are, in my judgment they do not overthrow the theory of descent with modification.
Now let us turn to the other side of the argument.
Under domestication we see much variability.
This seems to be mainly due to the reproductive system being eminently susceptible to changes in the conditions of life; so that this system, when not rendered impotent, fails to reproduce offspring exactly like the parent-form.
Variability is governed by many complex laws,--by correlation of growth, by use and disuse, and by the direct action of the physical conditions of life.
There is much difficulty in ascertaining how much modification our domestic productions have undergone; but we may safely infer that the amount has been large, and that modifications can be inherited for long periods.
As long as the conditions of life remain the same, we have reason to believe that a modification, which has already been inherited for many generations, may continue to be inherited for an almost infinite number of generations.
On the other hand we have evidence that variability, when it has once come into play, does not wholly cease; for new varieties are still occasionally produced by our most anciently domesticated productions.
Man does not actually produce variability; he only unintentionally exposes organic beings to new conditions of life, and then nature acts on the organisation, and causes variability.
But man can and does select the variations given to him by nature, and thus accumulate them in any desired manner.
He thus adapts animals and plants for his own benefit or pleasure.
He may do this methodically, or he may do it unconsciously by preserving the individuals most useful to him at the time, without any thought of altering the breed.
It is certain that he can largely influence the character of a breed by selecting, in each successive generation, individual differences so slight as to be quite inappreciable by an uneducated eye.
This process of selection has been the great agency in the production of the most distinct and useful domestic breeds.
That many of the breeds produced by man have to a large extent the character of natural species, is shown by the inextricable doubts whether very many of them are varieties or aboriginal species.
There is no obvious reason why the principles which have acted so efficiently under domestication should not have acted under nature.
In the preservation of favoured individuals and races, during the constantly-recurrent Struggle for Existence, we see the most powerful and ever-acting means of selection.
The struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high geometrical ratio of increase which is common to all organic beings.
This high rate of increase is proved by calculation, by the effects of a succession of peculiar seasons, and by the results of naturalisation, as explained in the third chapter.
More individuals are born than can possibly survive.
A grain in the balance will determine which individual shall live and which shall die,--which variety or species shall increase in number, and which shall decrease, or finally become extinct.
As the individuals of the same species come in all respects into the closest competition with each other, the struggle will generally be most severe between them; it will be almost equally severe between the varieties of the same species, and next in
But the struggle will often be very severe between beings most remote in the scale of nature.
The slightest advantage in one being, at any age or during any season, over those with which it comes into competition, or better adaptation in however slight a degree to the surrounding physical conditions, will turn the balance.
With animals having separated sexes there will in most cases be a struggle between the males for possession of the females.
The most vigorous individuals, or those which have most successfully struggled with their conditions of life, will generally leave most progeny.
But success will often depend on having special weapons or means of defence, or on the charms of the males; and the slightest advantage will lead to victory.
As geology plainly proclaims that each land has undergone great physical changes, we might have expected that organic beings would have varied under nature, in the same way as they generally have varied under the changed conditions of domestication.
And if there be any variability under nature, it would be an unaccountable fact if natural selection had not come into play.
It has often been asserted, but the assertion is quite incapable of proof, that the amount of variation under nature is a strictly limited quantity.
Man, though acting on external characters alone and often capriciously, can produce within a short period a great result by adding up mere individual differences in his domestic productions; and every one admits that there are at least individual
But, besides such differences, all naturalists have admitted the existence of varieties, which they think sufficiently distinct to be worthy of record in systematic works.
No one can draw any clear distinction between individual differences and slight varieties; or between more plainly marked varieties and sub-species, and species.
Let it be observed how naturalists differ in the rank which they assign to the many representative forms in Europe and North America.
If then we have under nature variability and a powerful agent always ready to act and select, why should we doubt that variations in any way useful to beings, under their excessively complex relations of life, would be preserved, accumulated, and
Why, if man can by patience select variations most useful to himself, should nature fail in selecting variations useful, under changing conditions of life, to her living products?
What limit can be put to this power, acting during long ages and rigidly scrutinising the whole constitution, structure, and habits of each creature,--favouring the good and rejecting the bad?
I can see no limit to this power, in slowly and beautifully adapting each form to the most complex relations of life.
The theory of natural selection, even if we looked no further than this, seems to me to be in itself probable.
I have already recapitulated, as fairly as I could, the opposed difficulties and objections: now let us turn to the special facts and arguments in favour of the theory.
On the view that species are only strongly marked and permanent varieties, and that each species first existed as a variety, we can see why it is that no line of demarcation can be drawn between species, commonly supposed to have been produced by special
On this same view we can understand how it is that in each region where many species of a genus have been produced, and where they now flourish, these same species should present many varieties; for where the manufactory of species has been active, we
Moreover, the species of the larger genera, which afford the greater number of varieties or incipient species, retain to a certain degree the character of varieties; for they differ from each other by a less amount of difference than do the species of
The closely allied species also of the larger genera apparently have restricted ranges, and they are clustered in little groups round other species--in which respects they resemble varieties.
These are strange relations on the view of each species having been independently created, but are intelligible if all species first existed as varieties.
As each species tends by its geometrical ratio of reproduction to increase inordinately in number; and as the modified descendants of each species will be enabled to increase by so much the more as they become more diversified in habits and structure, so
Hence during a long-continued course of modification, the slight differences, characteristic of varieties of the same species, tend to be augmented into the greater differences characteristic of species of the same genus.
New and improved varieties will inevitably supplant and exterminate the older, less improved and intermediate varieties; and thus species are rendered to a large extent defined and distinct objects.
Dominant species belonging to the larger groups tend to give birth to new and dominant forms; so that each large group tends to become still larger, and at the same time more divergent in character.
But as all groups cannot thus succeed in increasing in size, for the world would not hold them, the more dominant groups beat the less dominant.
This tendency in the large groups to go on increasing in size and diverging in character, together with the almost inevitable contingency of much extinction, explains the arrangement of all the forms of life, in groups subordinate to groups, all within a
This grand fact of the grouping of all organic beings seems to me utterly inexplicable on the theory of creation.
As natural selection acts solely by accumulating slight, successive, favourable variations, it can produce no great or sudden modification; it can act only by very short and slow steps.
Hence the canon of "Natura non facit saltum," which every fresh addition to our knowledge tends to make more strictly correct, is on this theory simply intelligible.
We can plainly see why nature is prodigal in variety, though niggard in innovation.
But why this should be a law of nature if each species has been independently created, no man can explain.
Many other facts are, as it seems to me, explicable on this theory.
How strange it is that a bird, under the form of woodpecker, should have been created to prey on insects on the ground; that upland geese, which never or rarely swim, should have been created with webbed feet; that a thrush should have been created to dive
and so on in endless other cases.
But on the view of each species constantly trying to increase in number, with natural selection always ready to adapt the slowly varying descendants of each to any unoccupied or ill-occupied place in nature, these facts cease to be strange, or perhaps
As natural selection acts by competition, it adapts the inhabitants of each country only in relation to the degree of perfection of their associates; so that we need feel no surprise at the inhabitants of any one country, although on the ordinary view
Nor ought we to marvel if all the contrivances in nature be not, as far as we can judge, absolutely perfect; and if some of them be abhorrent to our ideas of fitness.
We need not marvel at the sting of the bee causing the bee's own death; at drones being produced in such vast numbers for one single act, and being then slaughtered by their sterile sisters; at the astonishing waste of pollen by our fir-trees; at the
The wonder indeed is, on the theory of natural selection, that more cases of the want of absolute perfection have not been observed.
The complex and little known laws governing variation are the same, as far as we can see, with the laws which have governed the production of so-called specific forms.
In both cases physical conditions seem to have produced but little direct effect; yet when varieties enter any zone, they occasionally assume some of the characters of the species proper to that zone.
In both varieties and species, use and disuse seem to have produced some effect; for it is difficult to resist this conclusion when we look, for instance, at the logger-headed duck, which has wings incapable of flight, in nearly the same condition as in
In both varieties and species correlation of growth seems to have played a most important part, so that when one part has been modified other parts are necessarily modified.
In both varieties and species reversions to long-lost characters occur.
How inexplicable on the theory of creation is the occasional appearance of stripes on the shoulder and legs of the several species of the horse-genus and in their hybrids!
How simply is this fact explained if we believe that these species have descended from a striped progenitor, in the same manner as the several domestic breeds of pigeon have descended from the blue and barred rock-pigeon!
On the ordinary view of each species having been independently created, why should the specific characters, or those by which the species of the same genus differ from each other, be more variable than the generic characters in which they all agree?
Why, for instance, should the colour of a flower be more likely to vary in any one species of a genus, if the other species, supposed to have been created independently, have differently coloured flowers, than if all the species of the genus have the same
If species are only well-marked varieties, of which the characters have become in a high degree permanent, we can understand this fact; for they have already varied since they branched off from a common progenitor in certain characters, by which they have
It is inexplicable on the theory of creation why a part developed in a very unusual manner in any one species of a genus, and therefore, as we may naturally infer, of great importance to the species, should be eminently liable to variation; but, on my
But a part may be developed in the most unusual manner, like the wing of a bat, and yet not be more variable than any other structure, if the part be common to many subordinate forms, that is, if it has been inherited for a very long period; for in this
Glancing at instincts, marvellous as some are, they offer no greater difficulty than does corporeal structure on the theory of the natural selection of successive, slight, but profitable modifications.
We can thus understand why nature moves by graduated steps in endowing different animals of the same class with their several instincts.
I have attempted to show how much light the principle of gradation throws on the admirable architectural powers of the hive-bee.
Habit no doubt sometimes comes into play in modifying instincts; but it certainly is not indispensable, as we see, in the case of neuter insects, which leave no progeny to inherit the effects of long-continued habit.
On the view of all the species of the same genus having descended from a common parent, and having inherited much in common, we can understand how it is that allied species, when placed under considerably different conditions of life, yet should follow
On the view of instincts having been slowly acquired through natural selection we need not marvel at some instincts being apparently not perfect and liable to mistakes, and at many instincts causing other animals to suffer.
If species be only well-marked and permanent varieties, we can at once see why their crossed offspring should follow the same complex laws in their degrees and kinds of resemblance to their parents,--in being absorbed into each other by successive crosses,
On the other hand, these would be strange facts if species have been independently created, and varieties have been produced by secondary laws.
If we admit that the geological record is imperfect in an extreme degree, then such facts as the record gives, support the theory of descent with modification.
New species have come on the stage slowly and at successive intervals; and the amount of change, after equal intervals of time, is widely different in different groups.
The extinction of species and of whole groups of species, which has played so conspicuous a part in the history of the organic world, almost inevitably follows on the principle of natural selection; for old forms will be supplanted by new and improved
Neither single species nor groups of species reappear when the chain of ordinary generation has once been broken.
The gradual diffusion of dominant forms, with the slow modification of their descendants, causes the forms of life, after long intervals of time, to appear as if they had changed simultaneously throughout the world.
The fact of the fossil remains of each formation being in some degree intermediate in character between the fossils in the formations above and below, is simply explained by their intermediate position in the chain of descent.
The grand fact that all extinct organic beings belong to the same system with recent beings, falling either into the same or into intermediate groups, follows from the living and the extinct being the offspring of common parents.
As the groups which have descended from an ancient progenitor have generally diverged in character, the progenitor with its early descendants will often be intermediate in character in comparison with its later descendants; and thus we can see why the more
Recent forms are generally looked at as being, in some vague sense, higher than ancient and extinct forms; and they are in so far higher as the later and more improved forms have conquered the older and less improved organic beings in the struggle for
Lastly, the law of the long endurance of allied forms on the same continent,--of marsupials in Australia, of edentata in America, and other such cases,--is intelligible, for within a confined country, the recent and the extinct will naturally be allied by
Looking to geographical distribution, if we admit that there has been during the long course of ages much migration from one part of the world to another, owing to former climatal and geographical changes and to the many occasional and unknown means of
We can see why there should be so striking a parallelism in the distribution of organic beings throughout space, and in their geological succession throughout time; for in both cases the beings have been connected by the bond of ordinary generation, and
We see the full meaning of the wonderful fact, which must have struck every traveller, namely, that on the same continent, under the most diverse conditions, under heat and cold, on mountain and lowland, on deserts and marshes, most of the inhabitants
On this same principle of former migration, combined in most cases with modification, we can understand, by the aid of the Glacial period, the identity of some few plants, and the close alliance of many others, on the most distant mountains, under the most
Although two areas may present the same physical conditions of life, we need feel no surprise at their inhabitants being widely different, if they have been for a long period completely separated from each other; for as the relation of organism to organism
On this view of migration, with subsequent modification, we can see why oceanic islands should be inhabited by few species, but of these, that many should be peculiar.
We can clearly see why those animals which cannot cross wide spaces of ocean, as frogs and terrestrial mammals, should not inhabit oceanic islands; and why, on the other hand, new and peculiar species of bats, which can traverse the ocean, should so often
Such facts as the presence of peculiar species of bats, and the absence of all other mammals, on oceanic islands, are utterly inexplicable on the theory of independent acts of creation.
The existence of closely allied or representative species in any two areas, implies, on the theory of descent with modification, that the same parents formerly inhabited both areas; and we almost invariably find that wherever many closely allied species
Wherever many closely allied yet distinct species occur, many doubtful forms and varieties of the same species likewise occur.
It is a rule of high generality that the inhabitants of each area are related to the inhabitants of the nearest source whence immigrants might have been derived.
We see this in nearly all the plants and animals of the Galapagos archipelago, of Juan Fernandez, and of the other American islands being related in the most striking manner to the plants and animals of the neighbouring American mainland; and those of the
It must be admitted that these facts receive no explanation on the theory of creation.
The fact, as we have seen, that all past and present organic beings constitute one grand natural system, with group subordinate to group, and with extinct groups often falling in between recent groups, is intelligible on the theory of natural selection
On these same principles we see how it is, that the mutual affinities of the species and genera within each class are so complex and circuitous.
We see why certain characters are far more serviceable than others for classification;--why adaptive characters, though of paramount importance to the being, are of hardly any importance in classification; why characters derived from rudimentary parts,
The real affinities of all organic beings are due to inheritance or community of descent.
The natural system is a genealogical arrangement, in which we have to discover the lines of descent by the most permanent characters, however slight their vital importance may be.
The framework of bones being the same in the hand of a man, wing of a bat, fin of the porpoise, and leg of the horse,--the same number of vertebrae forming the neck of the giraffe and of the elephant,--and innumerable other such facts, at once explain
The similarity of pattern in the wing and leg of a bat, though used for such different purpose,--in the jaws and legs of a crab,--in the petals, stamens, and pistils of a flower, is likewise intelligible on the view of the gradual modification of parts or
On the principle of successive variations not always supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding not early period of life, we can clearly see why the embryos of mammals, birds, reptiles, and fishes should be so closely alike, and
We may cease marvelling at the embryo of an air-breathing mammal or bird having branchial slits and arteries running in loops, like those in a fish which has to breathe the air dissolved in water, by the aid of well-developed branchiae.
Disuse, aided sometimes by natural selection, will often tend to reduce an organ, when it has become useless by changed habits or under changed conditions of life; and we can clearly understand on this view the meaning of rudimentary organs.
But disuse and selection will generally act on each creature, when it has come to maturity and has to play its full part in the struggle for existence, and will thus have little power of acting on an organ during early life; hence the organ will not be
The calf, for instance, has inherited teeth, which never cut through the gums of the upper jaw, from an early progenitor having well-developed teeth; and we may believe, that the teeth in the mature animal were reduced, during successive generations, by
On the view of each organic being and each separate organ having been specially created, how utterly inexplicable it is that parts, like the teeth in the embryonic calf or like the shrivelled wings under the soldered wing-covers of some beetles, should
Nature may be said to have taken pains to reveal, by rudimentary organs and by homologous structures, her scheme of modification, which it seems that we wilfully will not understand.
I have now recapitulated the chief facts and considerations which have thoroughly convinced me that species have changed, and are still slowly changing by the preservation and accumulation of successive slight favourable variations.
Why, it may be asked, have all the most eminent living naturalists and geologists rejected this view of the mutability of species?
It cannot be asserted that organic beings in a state of nature are subject to no variation; it cannot be proved that the amount of variation in the course of long ages is a limited quantity; no clear distinction has been, or can be, drawn between species
It cannot be maintained that species when intercrossed are invariably sterile, and varieties invariably fertile; or that sterility is a special endowment and sign of creation.
The belief that species were immutable productions was almost unavoidable as long as the history of the world was thought to be of short duration; and now that we have acquired some idea of the lapse of time, we are too apt to assume, without proof, that
But the chief cause of our natural unwillingness to admit that one species has given birth to other and distinct species, is that we are always slow in admitting any great change of which we do not see the intermediate steps.
The difficulty is the same as that felt by so many geologists, when Lyell first insisted that long lines of inland cliffs had been formed, and great valleys excavated, by the slow action of the coast-waves.
The mind cannot possibly grasp the full meaning of the term of a hundred million years; it cannot add up and perceive the full effects of many slight variations, accumulated during an almost infinite number of generations.
Although I am fully convinced of the truth of the views given in this volume under the form of an abstract, I by no means expect to convince experienced naturalists whose minds are stocked with a multitude of facts all viewed, during a long course of
It is so easy to hide our ignorance under such expressions as the "plan of creation," "unity of design," etc.
, and to think that we give an explanation when we only restate a fact.
Any one whose disposition leads him to attach more weight to unexplained difficulties than to the explanation of a certain number of facts will certainly reject my theory.
A few naturalists, endowed with much flexibility of mind, and who have already begun to doubt on the immutability of species, may be influenced by this volume; but I look with confidence to the future, to young and rising naturalists, who will be able to
Whoever is led to believe that species are mutable will do good service by conscientiously expressing his conviction; for only thus can the load of prejudice by which this subject is overwhelmed be removed.
Several eminent naturalists have of late published their belief that a multitude of reputed species in each genus are not real species; but that other species are real, that is, have been independently created.
This seems to me a strange conclusion to arrive at.
They admit that a multitude of forms, which till lately they themselves thought were special creations, and which are still thus looked at by the majority of naturalists, and which consequently have every external characteristic feature of true
Nevertheless they do not pretend that they can define, or even conjecture, which are the created forms of life, and which are those produced by secondary laws.
They admit variation as a vera causa in one case, they arbitrarily reject it in another, without assigning any distinction in the two cases.
The day will come when this will be given as a curious illustration of the blindness of preconceived opinion.
These authors seem no more startled at a miraculous act of creation than at an ordinary birth.
But do they really believe that at innumerable periods in the earth's history certain elemental atoms have been commanded suddenly to flash into living tissues?
Do they believe that at each supposed act of creation one individual or many were produced?
Were all the infinitely numerous kinds of animals and plants created as eggs or seed, or as full grown?
and in the case of mammals, were they created bearing the false marks of nourishment from the mother's womb?
Although naturalists very properly demand a full explanation of every difficulty from those who believe in the mutability of species, on their own side they ignore the whole subject of the first appearance of species in what they consider reverent silence.
It may be asked how far I extend the doctrine of the modification of species.
The question is difficult to answer, because the more distinct the forms are which we may consider, by so much the arguments fall away in force.
But some arguments of the greatest weight extend very far.
All the members of whole classes can be connected together by chains of affinities, and all can be classified on the same principle, in groups subordinate to groups.
Fossil remains sometimes tend to fill up very wide intervals between existing orders.
Organs in a rudimentary condition plainly show that an early progenitor had the organ in a fully developed state; and this in some instances necessarily implies an enormous amount of modification in the descendants.
Throughout whole classes various structures are formed on the same pattern, and at an embryonic age the species closely resemble each other.
Therefore I cannot doubt that the theory of descent with modification embraces all the members of the same class.
I believe that animals have descended from at most only four or five progenitors, and plants from an equal or lesser number.
Analogy would lead me one step further, namely, to the belief that all animals and plants have descended from some one prototype.
But analogy may be a deceitful guide.
Nevertheless all living things have much in common, in their chemical composition, their germinal vesicles, their cellular structure, and their laws of growth and reproduction.
We see this even in so trifling a circumstance as that the same poison often similarly affects plants and animals; or that the poison secreted by the gall-fly produces monstrous growths on the wild rose or oak-tree.
Therefore I should infer from analogy that probably all the organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have descended from some one primordial form, into which life was first breathed.
When the views entertained in this volume on the origin of species, or when analogous views are generally admitted, we can dimly foresee that there will be a considerable revolution in natural history.
Systematists will be able to pursue their labours as at present; but they will not be incessantly haunted by the shadowy doubt whether this or that form be in essence a species.
This I feel sure, and I speak after experience, will be no slight relief.
The endless disputes whether or not some fifty species of British brambles are true species will cease.
Systematists will have only to decide (not that this will be easy) whether any form be sufficiently constant and distinct from other forms, to be capable of definition; and if definable, whether the differences be sufficiently important to deserve a
This latter point will become a far more essential consideration than it is at present; for differences, however slight, between any two forms, if not blended by intermediate gradations, are looked at by most naturalists as sufficient to raise both forms
Hereafter we shall be compelled to acknowledge that the only distinction between species and well-marked varieties is, that the latter are known, or believed, to be connected at the present day by intermediate gradations, whereas species were formerly thus
Hence, without quite rejecting the consideration of the present existence of intermediate gradations between any two forms, we shall be led to weigh more carefully and to value higher the actual amount of difference between them.
It is quite possible that forms now generally acknowledged to be merely varieties may hereafter be thought worthy of specific names, as with the primrose and cowslip; and in this case scientific and common language will come into accordance.
In short, we shall have to treat species in the same manner as those naturalists treat genera, who admit that genera are merely artificial combinations made for convenience.
This may not be a cheering prospect; but we shall at least be freed from the vain search for the undiscovered and undiscoverable essence of the term species.
The other and more general departments of natural history will rise greatly in interest.
The terms used by naturalists of affinity, relationship, community of type, paternity, morphology, adaptive characters, rudimentary and aborted organs, etc.
, will cease to be metaphorical, and will have a plain signification.
When we no longer look at an organic being as a savage looks at a ship, as at something wholly beyond his comprehension; when we regard every production of nature as one which has had a history; when we contemplate every complex structure and instinct as
A grand and almost untrodden field of inquiry will be opened, on the causes and laws of variation, on correlation of growth, on the effects of use and disuse, on the direct action of external conditions, and so forth.
The study of domestic productions will rise immensely in value.
A new variety raised by man will be a far more important and interesting subject for study than one more species added to the infinitude of already recorded species.
Our classifications will come to be, as far as they can be so made, genealogies; and will then truly give what may be called the plan of creation.
The rules for classifying will no doubt become simpler when we have a definite object in view.
We possess no pedigrees or armorial bearings; and we have to discover and trace the many diverging lines of descent in our natural genealogies, by characters of any kind which have long been inherited.
Rudimentary organs will speak infallibly with respect to the nature of long-lost structures.
Species and groups of species, which are called aberrant, and which may fancifully be called living fossils, will aid us in forming a picture of the ancient forms of life.
Embryology will reveal to us the structure, in some degree obscured, of the prototypes of each great class.
When we can feel assured that all the individuals of the same species, and all the closely allied species of most genera, have within a not very remote period descended from one parent, and have migrated from some one birthplace; and when we better know
Even at present, by comparing the differences of the inhabitants of the sea on the opposite sides of a continent, and the nature of the various inhabitants of that continent in relation to their apparent means of immigration, some light can be thrown on
The noble science of Geology loses glory from the extreme imperfection of the record.
The crust of the earth with its embedded remains must not be looked at as a well-filled museum, but as a poor collection made at hazard and at rare intervals.
The accumulation of each great fossiliferous formation will be recognised as having depended on an unusual concurrence of circumstances, and the blank intervals between the successive stages as having been of vast duration.
But we shall be able to gauge with some security the duration of these intervals by a comparison of the preceding and succeeding organic forms.
We must be cautious in attempting to correlate as strictly contemporaneous two formations, which include few identical species, by the general succession of their forms of life.
As species are produced and exterminated by slowly acting and still existing causes, and not by miraculous acts of creation and by catastrophes; and as the most important of all causes of organic change is one which is almost independent of altered and
A number of species, however, keeping in a body might remain for a long period unchanged, whilst within this same period, several of these species, by migrating into new countries and coming into competition with foreign associates, might become modified;
During early periods of the earth's history, when the forms of life were probably fewer and simpler, the rate of change was probably slower; and at the first dawn of life, when very few forms of the simplest structure existed, the rate of change may have
The whole history of the world, as at present known, although of a length quite incomprehensible by us, will hereafter be recognised as a mere fragment of time, compared with the ages which have elapsed since the first creature, the progenitor of
In the distant future I see open fields for far more important researches.
Psychology will be based on a new foundation, that of the necessary acquirement of each mental power and capacity by gradation.
Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.
Authors of the highest eminence seem to be fully satisfied with the view that each species has been independently created.
To my mind it accords better with what we know of the laws impressed on matter by the Creator, that the production and extinction of the past and present inhabitants of the world should have been due to secondary causes, like those determining the birth
When I view all beings not as special creations, but as the lineal descendants of some few beings which lived long before the first bed of the Silurian system was deposited, they seem to me to become ennobled.
Judging from the past, we may safely infer that not one living species will transmit its unaltered likeness to a distant futurity.
And of the species now living very few will transmit progeny of any kind to a far distant futurity; for the manner in which all organic beings are grouped, shows that the greater number of species of each genus, and all the species of many genera, have
We can so far take a prophetic glance into futurity as to foretel that it will be the common and widely-spread species, belonging to the larger and dominant groups, which will ultimately prevail and procreate new and dominant species.
As all the living forms of life are the lineal descendants of those which lived long before the Silurian epoch, we may feel certain that the ordinary succession by generation has never once been broken, and that no cataclysm has desolated the whole world.
Hence we may look with some confidence to a secure future of equally inappreciable length.
And as natural selection works solely by and for the good of each being, all corporeal and mental endowments will tend to progress towards perfection.
It is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank, clothed with many plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth, and to reflect that these elaborately
These laws, taken in the largest sense, being Growth with Reproduction; Inheritance which is almost implied by reproduction; Variability from the indirect and direct action of the external conditions of life, and from use and disuse; a Ratio of Increase so
Thus, from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of the higher animals, directly follows.
There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms
INDEX.
Aberrant groups, 429.
Abyssinia, plants of, 375.
Acclimatisation, 139.
Affinities: of extinct species, 329.
of organic beings, 411.
Agassiz: on Amblyopsis, 139.
on groups of species suddenly appearing, 302, 305.
on embryological succession, 338.
on the glacial period, 366.
on embryological characters, 418.
on the embryos of vertebrata, 439.
on parallelism of embryological development and geological succession, 449.
Algae of New Zealand, 376.
Alligators, males, fighting, 88.
Amblyopsis, blind fish, 139.
America, North: productions allied to those of Europe, 371.
boulders and glaciers of, 373.
South, no modern formations on west coast, 290.
Ammonites, sudden extinction of, 321.
Anagallis, sterility of, 247.
Analogy of variations, 159.
Ancylus, 386.
Animals: not domesticated from being variable, 17.
domestic, descended from several stocks, 19.
acclimatisation of, 141.
of Australia, 116.
with thicker fur in cold climates, 133.
blind, in caves, 137.
extinct, of Australia, 339.
Anomma, 240.
Antarctic islands, ancient flora of, 399.
Antirrhinum, 161.
Ants: attending aphides, 211.
slave-making instinct, 219.
Ants, neuter, structure of, 236.
Aphides attended by ants, 211.
Aphis, development of, 442.
Apteryx, 182.
Arab horses, 35, Aralo-Caspian Sea, 339.
Archiac, M. de, on the succession of species, 325.
Artichoke, Jerusalem, 142.
Ascension, plants of, 389.
Asclepias, pollen of, 193.
Asparagus, 359.
Aspicarpa, 417.
Asses, striped, 163.
Ateuchus, 135, Audubon: on habits of frigate-bird, 185.
on variation in birds'-nests, 212, on heron eating seeds, 387.
Australia: animals of, 116.
dogs of, 215.
extinct animals of, 339.
European plants in, 375.
Azara on flies destroying cattle, 72.
Azores, flora of, 363.
Babington, Mr., on British plants, 48.
Balancement of growth, 147.
Bamboo with hooks, 197.
Barberry, flowers of, 98.
Barrande, M.: on Silurian colonies, 313.
on the succession of species, 325.
on parallelism of palaeozoic formations, 328.
on affinities of ancient species, 330.
Barriers, importance of, 347.
Batrachians on islands, 393.
Bats: how structure acquired, 180.
distribution of, 394.
Bear, catching water-insects, 184.
Bee: sting of, 202.
queen, killing rivals, 202.
Bees fertilising flowers, 73.
Bees: hive, not sucking the red clover, 95.
cell-making instinct, 224.
humble, cells of, 225.
parasitic, 218.
Beetles: wingless, in Madeira, 135.
with deficient tarsi, 135.
Bentham, Mr.: on British plants, 48.
on classification, 419.
Berkeley, Mr., on seeds in salt-water, 358.
Bermuda, birds of, 391.
Birds: acquiring fear, 212.
annually cross the Atlantic, 364.
colour of, on continents, 132.
fossil, in caves of Brazil, 339.
of Madeira, Bermuda, and Galapagos, 390.
song of males, 89.
transporting seeds, 361.
waders, 386.
wingless, 134, 182.
with traces of embryonic teeth, 451.
Bizcacha, 349.
affinities of, 429.
Bladder for swimming in fish, 190.
Blindness of cave animals, 137, Blyth, Mr.: on distinctness of Indian cattle, 18.
on striped Hemionus, 163.
on crossed geese, 253.
Boar, shoulder-pad of, 88.
Borrow, Mr., on the Spanish pointer, 35.
Bory St. Vincent on Batrachians, 393.
Bosquet, M., on fossil Chthamalus, 304.
Boulders, erratic, on the Azores, 363.
Branchiae, 190.
Brent, Mr.: on house-tumblers, 214.
on hawks killing pigeons, 362.
Brewer, Dr., on American cuckoo, 217.
Britain, mammals of, 395.
Bronn on duration of specific forms, 293.
Brown, Robert, on classification, 414.
Buckman on variation in plants, 10.
Buzareingues on sterility of varieties, 270.
Cabbage, varieties of, crossed, 99.
Calceolaria, 251.
Canary-birds, sterility of hybrids, 252.
Cape de Verde islands, 398.
Cape of Good Hope, plants of, 110, 375.
Carrier-pigeons killed by hawks, 362.
Cassini on flowers of compositae, 145.
Catasetum, 424.
Cats: with blue eyes, deaf, 12.
variation in habits of, 91.
curling tail when going to spring, 201.
Cattle: destroying fir-trees, 71.
destroyed by flies in La Plata, 72.
breeds of, locally extinct, 111.
fertility of Indian and European breeds, 254.
Cave, inhabitants of, blind, 137.
Centres of creation, 352.
Cephalopodae, development of, 442.
Cervulus, 253.
Cetacea, teeth and hair, 144.
Ceylon, plants of, 375.
Chalk formation, 322.
Characters: divergence of, 111.
sexual, variable, 156.
adaptive or analogical, 427.
Charlock, 76, Checks: to increase, 67.
mutual, 71.
Chickens, instinctive tameness of, 216.
Chthamalinae, 288.
Chthamalus, cretacean species of, 304.
Circumstances favourable: to selection of domestic products, 40.
to natural selection, 101.
Cirripedes: capable of crossing, 101.
carapace aborted, 148.
their ovigerous frena, 192.
fossil, 304.
larvae of, 440.
Classification, 413.
Clift, Mr., on the succession of types, 339.
Climate: effects of, in checking increase of beings, 68.
adaptation of, to organisms, 139.
Cobites, intestine of, 190.
Cockroach, 76.
Collections, palaeontological, poor, 287.
Colour: influenced by climate, 132.
in relation to attacks by flies, 198.
Columba livia, parent of domestic pigeons, 23.
Colymbetes, 386.
Compensation of growth, 147.
Compositae: outer and inner florets of, 144.
male flowers of, 451.
Conclusion, general, 480.
Conditions, slight changes in, favourable to fertility, 267.
Coot, 185.
Coral: islands, seeds drifted to, 360.
reefs, indicating movements of earth, 309.
Corn-crake, 185.
Correlation: of growth in domestic productions, 11.
of growth, 143, 198.
Cowslip, 49.
Creation, single centres of, 352.
Crinum, 250.
Crosses, reciprocal, 258.
Crossing: of domestic animals, importance in altering breeds, 20.
advantages of, 96.
unfavourable to selection, 102.
Crustacea of New Zealand, 376.
Crustacean, blind, 137.
Cryptocerus, 238.
Ctenomys, blind, 137.
Cuckoo, instinct of, 216.
Currants, grafts of, 262.
Currents of sea, rate of, 359.
Cuvier: on conditions of existence, 206.
on fossil monkeys, 303.
Cuvier, Fred.
, on instinct, 208.
Dana, Professor: on blind cave-animals, 139.
on relations of crustaceans of Japan, 372.
on crustaceans of New Zealand, 376.
De Candolle: on struggle for existence, 62.
on umbelliferae, 146.
on general affinities, 430.
De Candolle, Alph.
: on low plants, widely dispersed, 406.
on widely-ranging plants being variable, 53.
on naturalisation, 115.
on winged seeds, 146.
on Alpine species suddenly becoming rare, 175.
on distribution of plants with large seeds, 360.
on vegetation of Australia, 379.
on fresh-water plants, 386.
on insular plants, 389.
Degradation of coast-rocks, 282.
Denudation: rate of, 285.
of oldest rocks, 308.
Development of ancient forms, 336.
Devonian system, 334.
Dianthus, fertility of crosses, 256.
Dirt on feet of birds, 362.
Dispersal: means of, 356.
during glacial period, 365.
Distribution: geographical, 346.
means of, 356.
Disuse, effects of, under nature, 134.
Divergence of character, 111.
Division, physiological, of labour, 115.
Dogs: hairless, with imperfect teeth, 12.
descended from several wild stocks, 18.
domestic instincts of, 213.
inherited civilisation of, 215.
fertility of breeds together, 254.
of crosses, 268, proportions of, when young, 444.
Domestication, variation under, 7.
Downing, Mr., on fruit-trees in America, 85.
Downs, North and South, 285.
Dragon-flies, intestines of, 190.
Drift-timber, 360.
Driver-ant, 240.
Drones killed by other bees, 202.
Duck: domestic, wings of, reduced, 11.
logger-headed, 182.
Duckweed, 385.
Dugong, affinities of, 414.
Dung-beetles with deficient tarsi, 135.
Dyticus, 386.
Earl, Mr. W., on the Malay Archipelago, 395.
Ears: drooping, in domestic animals, 11.
rudimentary, 454.
Earth, seeds in roots of trees, 361.
Eciton, 238.
Economy of organisation, 147.
Edentata: teeth and hair, 144.
fossil species of, 339.
Edwards, Milne: on physiological divisions of labour, 115.
on gradations of structure, 194.
on embryological characters, 418.
Eggs, young birds escaping from, 87.
Electric organs, 192.
Elephant: rate of increase, 64.
of glacial period, 141.
Embryology, 439.
Existence: struggle for, 60.
conditions of, 206.
Extinction: as bearing on natural selection, 109.
of domestic varieties, 111.
317.
Eye: structure of, 187.
correction for aberration, 202.
Eyes reduced in moles, 137.
Fabre, M., on parasitic sphex, 218.
Falconer, Dr.: on naturalization of plants in India, 65.
on fossil crocodile, 313.
on elephants and mastodons, 334, and Cautley on mammals of sub-Himalayan beds, 340.
Falkland Island, wolf of, 393.
Faults, 285.
Faunas, marine, 348.
Fear, instinctive, in birds, 212.
Feet of birds, young molluscs adhering to, 385.
Fertility: of hybrids, 249.
from slight changes in conditions, 267.
of crossed varieties, 267.
Fir-trees: destroyed by cattle, 71.
pollen of, 203.
Fish: flying, 182.
teleostean, sudden appearance of, 305.
eating seeds, 362, 387.
fresh-water, distribution of, 384.
Fishes: ganoid, now confined to fresh water, 107.
electric organs of, 192.
ganoid, living in fresh water, 321.
of southern hemisphere, 376.
Flight, powers of, how acquired, 182.
Flowers: structure of, in relation to crossing, 97.
of compositae and umbelliferae, 144.
Forbes, E.: on colours of shells, 132.
on abrupt range of shells in depth, 175.
on poorness of palaeontological collections, 287.
on continuous succession of genera, 316.
on continental extensions, 357.
on distribution during glacial period, 366, on parallelism in time and space, 409.
Forests, changes in, in America, 74.
Formation, Devonian, 334.
Formations: thickness of, in Britain, 284.
intermittent, 290.
Formica rufescens, 219.
Formica sanguinea, 219.
Formica flava, neuter of, 239.
Frena, ovigerous, of cirripedes, 192.
Fresh-water productions, dispersal of, 383.
Fries on species in large genera being closely allied to other species, 57.
Frigate-bird, 185.
Frogs on islands, 393.
Fruit-trees: gradual improvement of, 37.
in United States, 85.
varieties of, acclimatised in United States, 142.
Fuci, crossed, 258.
Fur, thicker in cold climates, 133.
Furze, 439.
Galapagos Archipelago: birds of, 390.
productions of, 398, 400.
Galeopithecus, 181.
Game, increase of, checked by vermin, 68.
Gartner: on sterility of hybrids, 247, 255.
on reciprocal crosses, 258.
on crossed maize and verbascum, 270.
on comparison of hybrids and mongrels, 272.
Geese: fertility when crossed, 253.
upland, 185.
Genealogy important in classification, 425.
Geoffrey St. Hilaire: on balancement, 147.
on homologous organs, 434.
Geoffrey St. Hilaire, Isidore: on variability of repeated parts, 149.
on correlation in monstrosities, 11.
on correlation, 144.
on variable parts being often monstrous, 155.
Geographical distribution, 346.
Geography, ancient, 487.
Geology: future progress of, 487.
imperfection of the record, 279.
Giraffe, tail of, 195.
Glacial period, 365.
Gmelin on distribution, 365.
Gnathodon, fossil, 368.
Godwin-Austen, Mr., on the Malay Archipelago, 299.
Goethe on compensation of growth, 147.
Gooseberry, grafts of, 262.
Gould, Dr. A., on land-shells, 397.
Gould, Mr.: on colours of birds, 132.
on birds of the Galapagos, 398.
on distribution of genera of birds, 404.
Gourds, crossed, 270.
Grafts, capacity of, 261.
Grasses, varieties of, 113.
Gray, Dr. Asa: on trees of United States, 100.
on naturalised plants in the United States, 115.
on rarity of intermediate varieties, 176.
on Alpine plants, 365.
Gray, Dr. J. E., on striped mule, 165.
Grebe, 185.
Groups, aberrant, 429.
Grouse: colours of, 84.
red, a doubtful species, 49.
Growth: compensation of, 147.
correlation of, in domestic products, 11.
correlation of, 143.
Habit: effect of, under domestication, 11.
effect of, under nature, 134.
diversified, of same species, 183.
Hair and teeth, correlated, 144.
Harcourt, Mr. E. V., on the birds of Madeira, 391.
Hartung, M., on boulders in the Azores, 363.
Hazel-nuts, 359.
Hearne on habits of bears, 184.
Heath, changes in vegetation, 72, Heer, O., on plants of Madeira, 107.
Helix pomatia, 397.
Helosciadium, 359.
Hemionus, striped, 163.
Herbert, W.: on struggle for existence, 62.
on sterility of hybrids, 249.
Hermaphrodites crossing, 96.
Heron eating seed, 387.
Heron, Sir R., on peacocks, 89.
Heusinger on white animals not poisoned by certain plants, 12.
Hewitt, Mr., on sterility of first crosses.
264.
Himalaya: glaciers of, 373.
plants of, 375.
Hippeastrum, 250.
Holly-trees, sexes of, 93.
Hollyhock, varieties of, crossed, 271.
Hooker, Dr., on trees of New Zealand, 100.
Hooker, Dr.: on acclimatisation of Himalayan trees, 140.
on flowers of umbelliferae, 145.
on glaciers of Himalaya, 373.
on algae of New Zealand, 376.
on vegetation at the base of the Himalaya, 378.
on plants of Tierra del Fuego, 374, 378.
on Australian plants, 375, 399.
on relations of flora of South America, 379.
on flora of the Antarctic lands, 381, 399.
on the plants of the Galapagos, 391, 398.
Hooks: on bamboos, 197.
to seeds on islands, 392.
Horner, Mr., on the antiquity of Egyptians, 18.
Horns, rudimentary, 454.
Horse, fossil, in La Plata, 318.
Horses: destroyed by flies in La Plata, 72.
striped, 163.
proportions of, when young, 445.
Horticulturists, selection applied by, 32.
Huber on cells of bees, 230.
Huber, P.: on reason blended with instinct, 208.
on habitual nature of instincts, 208.
on slave making ants, 219.
on Melipona domestica, 225.
Humble-bees, cells of, 225.
Hunter, J., on secondary sexual characters, 150.
Hutton, Captain, on crossed geese, 253.
Huxley, Professor: on structure of hermaphrodites, 101.
on embryological succession, 338.
on homologous organs, 438.
on the development of aphis, 442.
Hybrids and mongrels compared, 272.
Hybridism, 245.
Hydra, structure of, 190.
Ibla, 148.
Icebergs transporting seeds, 363.
Increase, rate of, 63.
Individuals: numbers favourable to selection, 102.
many, whether simultaneously created, 356.
Inheritance: laws of, 12.
at corresponding ages, 14, 86.
Insects: colour of, fitted for habitations, 84.
sea-side, colours of, 132.
blind, in caves, 138.
luminous, 193.
neuter, 236.
Instinct, 207.
Instincts, domestic, 213.
Intercrossing, advantages of, 96.
Islands, oceanic, 388.
Isolation favourable to selection, 104.
Japan, productions of, 372.
Java, plants of, 375.
Jones, Mr. J. M., on the birds of Bermuda, 391.
Jussieu on classification, 417.
Kentucky, caves of, 137.
Kerguelen-land, flora of, 381, 399.
Kidney-bean, acclimatisation of, 142.
Kidneys of birds, 144.
Kirby on tarsi deficient in beetles, 135.
Knight, Andrew, on cause of variation, 7.
Kolreuter: on the barberry, 98.
on sterility of hybrids, 247.
on reciprocal crosses, 258.
on crossed varieties of nicotiana, 271.
on crossing male and hermaphrodite flowers, 451.
Lamarck on adaptive characters, 427.
Land-shells: distribution of, 397.
of Madeira, naturalised, 402.
Languages, classification of, 422.
Lapse, great, of time, 282.
Larvae, 440.
Laurel, nectar secreted by the leaves, 92.
Laws of variation, 131.
Leech, varieties of, 76.
Leguminosae, nectar secreted by glands, 92.
Lepidosiren, 107, 330.
Life, struggle for, 60.
Lingula, Silurian, 306.
Linnaeus, aphorism of, 413.
Lion: mane of, 88.
young of, striped, 439.
Lobelia fulgens, 73, 98, Lobelia, sterility of crosses, 250.
Loess of the Rhine, 384.
Lowness of structure connected with variability, 149.
Lowness, related to wide distribution, 406.
Lubbock, Mr., on the nerves of coccus, 46.
Lucas, Dr. P.: on inheritance, 12.
on resemblance of child to parent, 275.
Lund and Clausen on fossils of Brazil, 339.
Lyell, Sir C.: on the struggle for existence, 62.
on modern changes of the earth, 95.
on measure of denudation, 283.
on a carboniferous land-shell, 289.
on fossil whales, 303.
on strata beneath Silurian system, 307.
on the imperfection of the geological record, 310.
on the appearance of species, 312.
on Barrande's colonies, 313.
on tertiary formations of Europe and North America, 323.
on parallelism of tertiary formations, 328.
on transport of seeds by icebergs, 363.
on great alternations of climate, 382.
on the distribution of fresh-water shells, 385.
on land-shells of Madeira, 402.
Lyell and Dawson on fossilized trees in Nova Scotia, 296.
Macleay on analogical characters, 427.
Madeira: plants of, 107.
beetles of, wingless, 135.
fossil land-shells of, 339.
birds of, 390.
Magpie tame in Norway, 212.
Maize, crossed, 270.
Malay Archipelago: compared with Europe, 299.
mammals of, 395.
Malpighiaceae, 417.
Mammae, rudimentary, 451.
Mammals: fossil, in secondary formation, 303.
insular, 393.
Man, origin of races of, 199.
Manatee, rudimentary nails of, 454.
Marsupials: of Australia, 116.
fossil species of, 339.
Martens, M., experiment on seeds, 360.
Martin, Mr. W. C., on striped mules, 165.
Matteuchi on the electric organs of rays, 193.
Matthiola, reciprocal crosses of, 258.
Means of dispersal, 356.
Melipona domestica, 225.
Metamorphism of oldest rocks 308.
Mice: destroying bees, 74.
acclimatisation of, 141.
Migration, bears on first appearance of fossils, 296.
Miller, Professor, on the cells of bees, 226.
Mirabilis, crosses of, 258.
Missel-thrush, 76.
Misseltoe, complex relations of, 3.
Mississippi, rate of deposition at mouth, 284.
Mocking-thrush of the Galapagos, 402.
Modification of species, how far applicable, 483.
Moles, blind, 137.
Mongrels: fertility and sterility of, 267.
and hybrids compared, 272.
Monkeys, fossil, 303, Monocanthus, 424.
Mons, Van, on the origin of fruit-trees, 29, 39.
Moquin-Tandon on sea-side plants, 132.
Morphology, 434.
Mozart, musical powers of, 209.
Mud, seeds in, 386.
Mules, striped, 165.
Muller, Dr. F., on Alpine Australian plants, 375.
Murchison, Sir R.: on the formations of Russia, 289.
on azoic formations, 307.
on extinction, 317.
Mustela vison, 179.
Myanthus, 424.
Myrmecocystus, 238.
Myrmica, eyes of, 240.
Nails, rudimentary, 453.
Natural history: future progress of, 484.
selection, 80.
system, 413.
Naturalisation: of forms distinct from the indigenous species, 115.
in New Zealand, 201.
Nautilus, Silurian, 306.
Nectar of plants, 92.
Nectaries, how formed, 92.
Nelumbium luteum, 387.
Nests, variation in, 212.
Neuter insects, 236.
Newman, Mr., on humble-bees, 74.
New Zealand: productions of, not perfect, 201.
naturalised products of, 337.
fossil birds of, 339.
glacial action in, 373, crustaceans of, 376.
algae of, 376.
number of plants of, 389.
flora of, 399.
Nicotiana: crossed varieties of, 271.
certain species very sterile, 257.
Noble, Mr., on fertility of Rhododendron, 251.
Nodules, phosphatic, in azoic rocks, 307, Oak, varieties of, 50.
Onites apelles, 135.
Orchis, pollen of, 193, Organs: of extreme perfection, 186, electric, of fishes, 192.
of little importance, 194.
homologous, 434.
rudiments of, 450.
Ornithorhynchus, 107, 416.
Ostrich: not capable of flight, 134.
habit of laying eggs together, 218.
American, two species of, 349.
Otter, habits of, how acquired, 179.
Ouzel, water, 185.
Owen, Professor: on birds not flying, 134.
on vegetative repetition, 149.
on variable length of arms in ourang-outang, 150.
on the swim-bladder of fishes, 191.
on electric organs, 192.
on fossil horse of La Plata, 319.
on relations of ruminants and pachyderms, 329.
on fossil birds of New Zealand, 339.
on succession of types, 339.
on affinities of the dugong, 414.
on homologous organs, 435.
on the metamorphosis of cephalopods and spiders, 442.
Pacific Ocean, faunas of, 348.
Paley on no organ formed to give pain, 201.
Pallas on the fertility of the wild stocks of domestic animals, 253.
Paraguay, cattle destroyed by flies, 72.
Parasites, 217.
Partridge, dirt on feet, 362.
Parts: greatly developed, variable, 150.
degrees of utility of, 201.
Parus major, 183.
Passiflora, 251.
Peaches in United States, 85.
Pear, grafts of, 261.
Pelargonium: flowers of, 145.
sterility of, 251.
Pelvis of women, 144, Peloria, 145.
Period, glacial, 365.
Petrels, habits of, 184.
Phasianus, fertility of hybrids, 253.
Pheasant, young, wild, 216.
Philippi on tertiary species in Sicily, 312.
Pictet, Professor: on groups of species suddenly appearing, 302, 305.
on rate of organic change, 313.
on continuous succession of genera, 316.
on close alliance of fossils in consecutive formations, 335.
on embryological succession, 338.
Pierce, Mr., on varieties of wolves, 91.
Pigeons: with feathered feet and skin between toes, 12.
breeds described, and origin of, 20.
breeds of, how produced, 39, 42.
tumbler, not being able to get out of egg, 87.
reverting to blue colour, 160.
instinct of tumbling, 214.
carriers, killed by hawks, 362.
young of, 445.
Pistil, rudimentary, 451.
Plants: poisonous, not affecting certain coloured animals, 12.
selection applied to, 32.
gradual improvement of, 37.
not improved in barbarous countries, 38.
destroyed by insects, 67.
in midst of range, have to struggle with other plants, 77.
nectar of, 92, fleshy, on sea-shores, 132.
fresh-water, distribution of, 386.
low in scale, widely distributed, 406.
Plumage, laws of change in sexes of birds, 89.
Plums in the United States, 85.
Pointer dog: origin of, 35.
habits of, 213.
Poison not affecting certain coloured animals, 12.
Poison, similar effect of, on animals and plants, 484.
Pollen of fir-trees, 203, Poole, Col.
, on striped hemionus, 163.
Potamogeton, 387.
Prestwich, Mr., on English and French eocene formations, 328.
Primrose, 49.
sterility of, 247.
Primula, varieties of, 49.
Proteolepas, 148.
Proteus, 139.
Psychology, future progress of, 488.
Quagga, striped, 165.
Quince, grafts of, 261.
Rabbit, disposition of young, 215.
Races, domestic, characters of, 16.
Race-horses: Arab, 35.
English, 356.
Ramond on plants of Pyrenees, 368.
Ramsay, Professor: on thickness of the British formations, 284.
on faults, 285.
Ratio of increase, 63.
Rats: supplanting each other, 76.
acclimatisation of, 141.
blind in cave, 137.
Rattle-snake, 201.
Reason and instinct, 208.
Recapitulation, general, 459.
Reciprocity of crosses, 258.
Record, geological, imperfect, 279.
Rengger on flies destroying cattle, 72.
Reproduction, rate of, 63.
Resemblance to parents in mongrels and hybrids, 273.
Reversion: law of inheritance, 14.
in pigeons to blue colour, 160.
Rhododendron, sterility of, 251.
Richard, Professor, on Aspicarpa, 417.
Richardson, Sir J.: on structure of squirrels, 180.
on fishes of the southern hemisphere, 376.
Robinia, grafts of, 262.
Rodents, blind, 137.
Rudimentary organs, 450.
Rudiments important for classification, 416.
Sageret on grafts, 262.
Salmons, males fighting, and hooked jaws of, 88.
Salt-water, how far injurious to seeds, 358.
Saurophagus sulphuratus, 183.
Schiodte on blind insects, 138.
Schlegel on snakes, 144 Sea-water, how far injurious to seeds, 358.
Sebright, Sir J.: on crossed animals, 20.
on selection of pigeons, 31.
Sedgwick, Professor, on groups of species suddenly appearing, 302.
Seedlings destroyed by insects, 67.
Seeds: nutriment in, 77.
winged, 146.
power of resisting salt-water, 358.
in crops and intestines of birds, 361.
eaten by fish, 362, 387.
in mud, 386.
hooked, on islands, 392.
Selection: of domestic products, 29.
principle not of recent origin, 33.
unconscious, 34.
natural, 80.
sexual, 87.
natural, circumstances favourable to, 101, Sexes, relations of, 87.
Sexual: characters variable, 156.
selection, 87.
Sheep: Merino, their selection, 31.
two sub-breeds unintentionally produced, 36.
mountain, varieties of, 76.
Shells: colours of, 132.
littoral, seldom embedded, 288.
fresh-water, dispersal of, 385.
of Madeira, 391, land, distribution of, 397.
Silene, fertility of crosses, 257.
Silliman, Professor, on blind rat, 137.
Skulls of young mammals, 197, 437.
Slave-making instinct, 219.
Smith, Col.
Hamilton, on striped horses, 164.
Smith, Mr. Fred.
: on slave-making ants, 219.
on neuter ants, 239.
Smith, Mr., of Jordan Hill, on the degradation of coast-rocks, 283.
Snap-dragon, 161.
Somerville, Lord, on selection of sheep, 31.
Sorbus, grafts of, 262.
Spaniel, King Charles's breed, 35.
Species: polymorphic, 46.
common, variable, 53.
in large genera variable, 54.
groups of, suddenly appearing, 302, 306.
beneath Silurian formations, 306.
successively appearing, 312.
changing simultaneously throughout the world, 322.
Spencer, Lord, on increase in size of cattle, 35.
Sphex, parasitic, 218.
Spiders, development of, 442.
Spitz-dog crossed with fox, 268.
Sports in plants, 9.
Sprengel, C. C.: on crossing, 98.
on ray-florets, 145.
Squirrels, gradations in structure, 180.
Staffordshire, heath, changes in, 72.
Stag-beetles, fighting, 88.
Sterility: from changed conditions of life, 9.
of hybrids, 246.
laws of, 254.
causes of, 263.
from unfavourable conditions, 265.
of certain varieties, 269.
St. Helena, productions of, 389.
St. Hilaire, Aug.
, on classification, 418.
St. John, Mr., on habits of cats, 91.
Sting of bee, 202.
Stocks, aboriginal, of domestic animals, 18, Strata, thickness of, in Britain, 284.
Stripes on horses, 163.
Structure, degrees of utility of, 201.
Struggle for existence, 60.
Succession, geological, 312.
Succession of types in same areas, 338.
Swallow, one species supplanting another, 76.
Swim-bladder, 190.
System, natural, 413.
Tail: of giraffe, 195.
of aquatic animals, 196.
rudimentary, 454.
Tarsi deficient, 135.
Tausch on umbelliferous flowers, 146.
Teeth and hair: correlated, 144.
embryonic, traces of, in birds, 451.
rudimentary, in embryonic calf, 450, 480.
Tegetmeier, Mr., on cells of bees, 228, 233.
Temminck on distribution aiding classification, 419.
Thouin on grafts, 262.
Thrush: aquatic species of, 185.
mocking, of the Galapagos, 402.
young of, spotted, 439.
nest of, 243.
Thuret, M., on crossed fuci, 258.
Thwaites, Mr., on acclimatisation, 140.
Tierra del Fuego: dogs of, 215.
plants of, 374, 378.
Timber-drift, 360.
Time, lapse of, 282.
Titmouse, 183.
Toads on islands, 393.
Tobacco, crossed varieties of, 271.
Tomes, Mr., on the distribution of bats, 394.
Transitions in varieties rare, 172.
Trees: on islands belong to peculiar orders, 392.
with separated sexes, 99.
Trifolium pratense, 73, 94.
Trifolium incarnatum, 94.
Trigonia, 321.
Trilobites, 306.
sudden extinction of, 321, Troglodytes, 243.
Tucutucu, blind, 137.
Tumbler pigeons: habits of, hereditary, 214.
young of, 446, Turkey-cock, brush of hair on breast, 90.
Turkey: naked skin on head, 197.
young, wild, 216.
Turnip and cabbage, analogous variations of, 159.
Type, unity of, 206.
Types, succession of, in same areas, 338.
Udders: enlarged by use, 11.
rudimentary, 451.
Ulex, young leaves of, 439.
Umbelliferae, outer and inner florets of, 144.
Unity of type, 206.
Use: effects of, under domestication, 11.
effects of, in a state of nature, 134.
Utility, how far important in the construction of each part, 199.
Valenciennes on fresh-water fish, 384.
Variability of mongrels and hybrids, 274.
Variation: under domestication, 7.
caused by reproductive system being affected by conditions of life, 8.
under nature, 44.
laws of, 131.
Variations: appear at corresponding ages, 14, 86.
analogous in distinct species, 159.
Varieties: natural, 44.
struggle between, 75.
domestic, extinction of, 111.
transitional, rarity of, 172.
when crossed, fertile, 267.
when crossed, sterile, 269.
classification of, 423.
Verbascum: sterility of, 251.
varieties of, crossed, 270.
Verneuil, M. de, on the succession of species, 325.
Viola tricolor, 73.
Volcanic islands, denudation of, 284.
Vulture, naked skin on head, 197.
Wading-birds, 386.
Wallace, Mr.: on origin of species, 2.
on law of geographical distribution, 355.
on the Malay Archipelago, 395.
Wasp, sting of, 202.
Water, fresh, productions of, 383.
Water-hen, 185.
Waterhouse, Mr.: on Australian marsupials, 116.
on greatly developed parts being variable, 150.
on the cells of bees, 225.
on general affinities, 429.
Water-ouzel, 185.
Watson, Mr. H. C.: on range of varieties of British plants, 58.
on acclimatisation, 140.
on flora of Azores, 363.
on Alpine plants, 367, 376.
on rarity of intermediate varieties, 176.
Weald, denudation of, 285.
Web of feet in water-birds, 185.
West Indian islands, mammals of, 395.
Westwood: on species in large genera being closely allied to others, 57.
on the tarsi of Engidae, 157.
on the antennae of hymenopterous insects, 416.
Whales, fossil, 303.
Wheat, varieties of, 113.
White Mountains, flora of, 365.
Wings, reduction of size, 134.
Wings: of insects homologous with branchiae, 191.
rudimentary, in insects, 451.
Wolf: crossed with dog, 214.
of Falkland Isles, 393.
Wollaston, Mr.: on varieties of insects, 48.
on fossil varieties of land-shells in Madeira, 52.
on colours of insects on sea-shore, 132.
on wingless beetles, 135.
on rarity of intermediate varieties, 176.
on insular insects, 389.
on land-shells of Madeira, naturalised, 402.
Wolves, varieties of, 90.
Woodpecker: habits of, 184.
green colour of, 197.
Woodward, Mr.: on the duration of specific forms, 293.
on the continuous succession of genera, 316.
on the succession of types, 339.
World, species changing simultaneously throughout, 322.
Wrens, nest of, 243.
Youatt, Mr.: on selection, 31.
on sub-breeds of sheep, 36.
on rudimentary horns in young cattle, 454.
Zebra, stripes on, 163.
THE END.Produced by Sue Asscher THE DESCENT OF MAN AND SELECTION IN RELATION TO SEX Works by Charles Darwin, F.R.S. Life and Letters of Charles Darwin.
With an Autobiographical Chapter.
Edited by Francis Darwin.
Portraits.
3 volumes 36s.
Popular Edition.
Condensed in 1 volume 7s 6d.
Naturalist's Journal of Researches into the Natural History and Geology of Countries Visited during a Voyage Round the World.
With 100 Illustrations by Pritchett.
21s.
Popular Edition.
Woodcuts.
3s 6d.
Cheaper Edition, 2s.
6d.
net.
Origin of Species by means of Natural Selection; or, The Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life.
Large Type Edition, 2 volumes 12s.
Popular Edition, 6s.
Cheaper Edition with Portrait, 2s.
6d.
Various Contrivances by which Orchids are Fertilized by Insects.
Woodcuts.
7s.
6d.
Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication.
Illustrations.
15s.
Descent of Man, and Selection in relation to Sex.
Illustrations.
Large Type Edition, 2 volumes 15s.
Popular Edition, 7s 6d.
Cheaper Edition, 2s.
6d.
net.
Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals.
Illustrations.
12s.
Insectivorous Plants.
Illustrations.
9s.
Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants.
Woodcuts.
6s.
Cross and Self-Fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom.
Illustrations.
9s.
Different Forms of Flowers on Plants of the Same Species.
Illustrations.
7s.
6d.
Formation of Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms.
Woodcuts.
6s.
The above works are Published by John Murray.
Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs.
Smith, Elder, & Co. Geological Observations on Volcanic Islands and Parts of South America.
Smith, Elder, & Co. Monograph of the Cirripedia.
Illustrations.
2 volumes.
8vo.
Ray Society.
Monograph of the Fossil Lepadidae, or Pedunculated Cirripedes of Great Britain.
Palaeontographical Society.
Monograph of the Fossil Balanidae and Verrucidae of Great Britain.
Palaeontographical Society.
THE DESCENT OF MAN AND SELECTION IN RELATION TO SEX BY CHARLES DARWIN, M.A., F.R.S. Uniform with this Volume The Origin of Species, by means of Natural Selection; or, The Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life.
Popular Edition, with a Photogravure Portrait.
Large Crown 8vo.
2s.
6d.
net.
A Naturalist's Voyage.
Journal of Researches into the Natural History and Geology of the Countries visited during the Voyage of H.M.S. "Beagle" round the World, under the Command of Capt.
Fitz Roy, R.N. Popular Edition, with many Illustrations.
Large Crown 8vo.
2s.
6d.
net.
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
During the successive reprints of the first edition of this work, published in 1871, I was able to introduce several important corrections; and now that more time has elapsed, I have endeavoured to profit by the fiery ordeal through which the book has
I am also greatly indebted to a large number of correspondents for the communication of a surprising number of new facts and remarks.
These have been so numerous, that I have been able to use only the more important ones; and of these, as well as of the more important corrections, I will append a list.
Some new illustrations have been introduced, and four of the old drawings have been replaced by better ones, done from life by Mr. T.W. Wood.
I must especially call attention to some observations which I owe to the kindness of Prof.
Huxley (given as a supplement at the end of Part I.), on the nature of the differences between the brains of man and the higher apes.
I have been particularly glad to give these observations, because during the last few years several memoirs on the subject have appeared on the Continent, and their importance has been, in some cases, greatly exaggerated by popular writers.
I may take this opportunity of remarking that my critics frequently assume that I attribute all changes of corporeal structure and mental power exclusively to the natural selection of such variations as are often called spontaneous; whereas, even in the
I also attributed some amount of modification to the direct and prolonged action of changed conditions of life.
Some allowance, too, must be made for occasional reversions of structure; nor must we forget what I have called "correlated" growth, meaning, thereby, that various parts of the organisation are in some unknown manner so connected, that when one part
Again, it has been said by several critics, that when I found that many details of structure in man could not be explained through natural selection, I invented sexual selection; I gave, however, a tolerably clear sketch of this principle in the first
This subject of sexual selection has been treated at full length in the present work, simply because an opportunity was here first afforded me.
I have been struck with the likeness of many of the half-favourable criticisms on sexual selection, with those which appeared at first on natural selection; such as, that it would explain some few details, but certainly was not applicable to the extent to
My conviction of the power of sexual selection remains unshaken; but it is probable, or almost certain, that several of my conclusions will hereafter be found erroneous; this can hardly fail to be the case in the first treatment of a subject.
When naturalists have become familiar with the idea of sexual selection, it will, as I believe, be much more largely accepted; and it has already been fully and favourably received by several capable judges.
DOWN, BECKENHAM, KENT, September, 1874.
First Edition February 24, 1871.
Second Edition September, 1874.
CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION.
PART I. THE DESCENT OR ORIGIN OF MAN.
CHAPTER I. The Evidence of the Descent of Man from some Lower Form.
Nature of the evidence bearing on the origin of man--Homologous structures in man and the lower animals--Miscellaneous points of correspondence-- Development--Rudimentary structures, muscles, sense-organs, hair, bones, reproductive organs, etc.
--The bearing of these three great classes of facts on the origin of man.
CHAPTER II.
On the Manner of Development of Man from some Lower Form.
Variability of body and mind in man--Inheritance--Causes of variability-- Laws of variation the same in man as in the lower animals--Direct action of the conditions of life--Effects of the increased use and disuse of parts-- Arrested
CHAPTER III.
Comparison of the Mental Powers of Man and the Lower Animals.
The difference in mental power between the highest ape and the lowest savage, immense--Certain instincts in common--The emotions--Curiosity-- Imitation--Attention--Memory--Imagination--Reason--Progressive improvement --Tools and weapons used by
CHAPTER IV.
Comparison of the Mental Powers of Man and the Lower Animals--continued.
The moral sense--Fundamental proposition--The qualities of social animals-- Origin of sociability--Struggle between opposed instincts--Man a social animal--The more enduring social instincts conquer other less persistent instincts--The social virtues alone
CHAPTER V. On the Development of the Intellectual and Moral Faculties during Primeval and Civilised times.
Advancement of the intellectual powers through natural selection-- Importance of imitation--Social and moral faculties--Their development within the limits of the same tribe--Natural selection as affecting civilised nations--Evidence that civilised nations
CHAPTER VI.
On the Affinities and Genealogy of Man.
Position of man in the animal series--The natural system genealogical-- Adaptive characters of slight value--Various small points of resemblance between man and the Quadrumana--Rank of man in the natural system-- Birthplace and antiquity of man--Absence of
CHAPTER VII.
On the Races of Man.
The nature and value of specific characters--Application to the races of man--Arguments in favour of, and opposed to, ranking the so-called races of man as distinct species--Sub-species--Monogenists and polygenists-- Convergence of character--Numerous
PART II.
SEXUAL SELECTION.
CHAPTER VIII.
Principles of Sexual Selection.
Secondary sexual characters--Sexual selection--Manner of action--Excess of males--Polygamy--The male alone generally modified through sexual selection--Eagerness of the male--Variability of the male--Choice exerted by the female--Sexual compared with
CHAPTER IX.
Secondary Sexual Characters in the Lower Classes of the Animal Kingdom.
These characters are absent in the lowest classes--Brilliant colours-- Mollusca--Annelids--Crustacea, secondary sexual characters strongly developed; dimorphism; colour; characters not acquired before maturity-- Spiders, sexual colours of; stridulation by
CHAPTER X. Secondary Sexual Characters of Insects.
Diversified structures possessed by the males for seizing the females-- Differences between the sexes, of which the meaning is not understood-- Difference in size between the sexes--Thysanura--Diptera--Hemiptera-- Homoptera, musical powers possessed by the
CHAPTER XI.
Insects, continued.
--Order Lepidoptera.
(Butterflies and Moths.
) Courtship of Butterflies--Battles--Ticking noise--Colours common to both sexes, or more brilliant in the males--Examples--Not due to the direct action of the conditions of life--Colours adapted for protection--Colours of moths--Display--Perceptive powers
CHAPTER XII.
Secondary Sexual Characters of Fishes, Amphibians, and Reptiles.
Fishes: Courtship and battles of the males--Larger size of the females-- Males, bright colours and ornamental appendages; other strange characters-- Colours and appendages acquired by the males during the breeding-season alone--Fishes with both sexes
AMPHIBIANS: Differences in structure and colour between the sexes--Vocal organs.
REPTILES: Chelonians--Crocodiles-- Snakes, colours in some cases protective--Lizards, battles of--Ornamental appendages--Strange differences in structure between the sexes--Colours-- Sexual differences almost as great as with birds.
CHAPTER XIII.
Secondary Sexual Characters of Birds.
Sexual differences--Law of battle--Special weapons--Vocal organs-- Instrumental music--Love-antics and dances--Decorations, permanent and seasonal--Double and single annual moults--Display of ornaments by the males.
CHAPTER XIV.
Birds--continued.
Choice exerted by the female--Length of courtship--Unpaired birds--Mental qualities and taste for the beautiful--Preference or antipathy shewn by the female for particular males--Variability of birds--Variations sometimes abrupt--Laws of
CHAPTER XV.
Birds--continued.
Discussion as to why the males alone of some species, and both sexes of others are brightly coloured--On sexually-limited inheritance, as applied to various structures and to brightly-coloured plumage--Nidification in relation to colour--Loss of nuptial
CHAPTER XVI.
Birds--concluded.
The immature plumage in relation to the character of the plumage in both sexes when adult--Six classes of cases--Sexual differences between the males of closely-allied or representative species--The female assuming the characters of the male--Plumage of
CHAPTER XVII.
Secondary Sexual Characters of Mammals.
The law of battle--Special weapons, confined to the males--Cause of absence of weapons in the female--Weapons common to both sexes, yet primarily acquired by the male--Other uses of such weapons--Their high importance-- Greater size of the male--Means of
CHAPTER XVIII.
Secondary Sexual Characters of Mammals--continued.
Voice--Remarkable sexual peculiarities in seals--Odour--Development of the hair--Colour of the hair and skin--Anomalous case of the female being more ornamented than the male--Colour and ornaments due to sexual selection-- Colour acquired for the sake of
PART III.
SEXUAL SELECTION IN RELATION TO MAN, AND CONCLUSION.
CHAPTER XIX.
Secondary Sexual Characters of Man.
Differences between man and woman--Causes of such differences, and of certain characters common to both sexes--Law of battle--Differences in mental powers, and voice--On the influence of beauty in determining the marriages of mankind--Attention paid by
CHAPTER XX.
Secondary Sexual Characters of Man--continued.
On the effects of the continued selection of women according to a different standard of beauty in each race--On the causes which interfere with sexual selection in civilised and savage nations--Conditions favourable to sexual selection during primeval
CHAPTER XXI.
General Summary and Conclusion.
Main conclusion that man is descended from some lower form--Manner of development--Genealogy of man--Intellectual and moral faculties--Sexual selection--Concluding remarks.
SUPPLEMENTAL NOTE.
INDEX.
THE DESCENT OF MAN; AND SELECTION IN RELATION TO SEX.
...
INTRODUCTION.
The nature of the following work will be best understood by a brief account of how it came to be written.
During many years I collected notes on the origin or descent of man, without any intention of publishing on the subject, but rather with the determination not to publish, as I thought that I should thus only add to the prejudices against my views.
It seemed to me sufficient to indicate, in the first edition of my 'Origin of Species,' that by this work "light would be thrown on the origin of man and his history;" and this implies that man must be included with other organic beings in any general
Now the case wears a wholly different aspect.
When a naturalist like Carl Vogt ventures to say in his address as President of the National Institution of Geneva (1869), "personne, en Europe au moins, n'ose plus soutenir la creation indpendante et de toutes pices, des espces," it is manifest that
The greater number accept the agency of natural selection; though some urge, whether with justice the future must decide, that I have greatly overrated its importance.
Of the older and honoured chiefs in natural science, many unfortunately are still opposed to evolution in every form.
In consequence of the views now adopted by most naturalists, and which will ultimately, as in every other case, be followed by others who are not scientific, I have been led to put together my notes, so as to see how far the general conclusions arrived at
This seemed all the more desirable, as I had never deliberately applied these views to a species taken singly.
When we confine our attention to any one form, we are deprived of the weighty arguments derived from the nature of the affinities which connect together whole groups of organisms--their geographical distribution in past and present times, and their
The homological structure, embryological development, and rudimentary organs of a species remain to be considered, whether it be man or any other animal, to which our attention may be directed; but these great classes of facts afford, as it appears to me,
The strong support derived from the other arguments should, however, always be kept before the mind.
The sole object of this work is to consider, firstly, whether man, like every other species, is descended from some pre-existing form; secondly, the manner of his development; and thirdly, the value of the differences between the so-called races of man.
As I shall confine myself to these points, it will not be necessary to describe in detail the differences between the several races--an enormous subject which has been fully described in many valuable works.
The high antiquity of man has recently been demonstrated by the labours of a host of eminent men, beginning with M. Boucher de Perthes; and this is the indispensable basis for understanding his origin.
I shall, therefore, take this conclusion for granted, and may refer my readers to the admirable treatises of Sir Charles Lyell, Sir John Lubbock, and others.
Nor shall I have occasion to do more than to allude to the amount of difference between man and the anthropomorphous apes; for Prof.
Huxley, in the opinion of most competent judges, has conclusively shewn that in every visible character man differs less from the higher apes, than these do from the lower members of the same order of Primates.
This work contains hardly any original facts in regard to man; but as the conclusions at which I arrived, after drawing up a rough draft, appeared to me interesting, I thought that they might interest others.
It has often and confidently been asserted, that man's origin can never be known: but ignorance more frequently begets confidence than does knowledge: it is those who know little, and not those who know much, who so positively assert that this or that
The conclusion that man is the co-descendant with other species of some ancient, lower, and extinct form, is not in any degree new.
Lamarck long ago came to this conclusion, which has lately been maintained by several eminent naturalists and philosophers; for instance, by Wallace, Huxley, Lyell, Vogt, Lubbock, Buchner, Rolle, etc.
(1.
As the works of the first- named authors are so well known, I need not give the titles; but as those of the latter are less well known in England, I will give them:--'Sechs Vorlesungen ber die Darwin'sche Theorie:' zweite Auflage, 1868, von Dr L.
'Der Mensch im Lichte der Darwin'sche Lehre,' 1865, von Dr. F. Rolle.
I will not attempt to give references to all the authors who have taken the same side of the question.
Thus G. Canestrini has published ('Annuario della Soc.
d.
Nat.
,' Modena, 1867, page 81) a very curious paper on rudimentary characters, as bearing on the origin of man.
Another work has (1869) been published by Dr. Francesco Barrago, bearing in Italian the title of "Man, made in the image of God, was also made in the image of the ape".
), and especially by Haeckel.
This last naturalist, besides his great work, 'Generelle Morphologie' (1866), has recently (1868, with a second edition in 1870), published his 'Natrliche Schpfungsgeschichte,' in which he fully discusses the genealogy of man.
If this work had appeared before my essay had been written, I should probably never have completed it.
Almost all the conclusions at which I have arrived I find confirmed by this naturalist, whose knowledge on many points is much fuller than mine.
Wherever I have added any fact or view from Prof.
Haeckel's writings, I give his authority in the text; other statements I leave as they originally stood in my manuscript, occasionally giving in the foot-notes references to his works, as a confirmation of the more doubtful or interesting points.
During many years it has seemed to me highly probable that sexual selection has played an important part in differentiating the races of man; but in my 'Origin of Species' (first edition, page 199) I contented myself by merely alluding to this belief.
When I came to apply this view to man, I found it indispensable to treat the whole subject in full detail.
(2.
Prof.
Haeckel was the only author who, at the time when this work first appeared, had discussed the subject of sexual selection, and had seen its full importance, since the publication of the 'Origin'; and this he did in a very able manner in his various works.
) Consequently the second part of the present work, treating of sexual selection, has extended to an inordinate length, compared with the first part; but this could not be avoided.
I had intended adding to the present volumes an essay on the expression of the various emotions by man and the lower animals.
My attention was called to this subject many years ago by Sir Charles Bell's admirable work.
This illustrious anatomist maintains that man is endowed with certain muscles solely for the sake of expressing his emotions.
As this view is obviously opposed to the belief that man is descended from some other and lower form, it was necessary for me to consider it.
I likewise wished to ascertain how far the emotions are expressed in the same manner by the different races of man.
But owing to the length of the present work, I have thought it better to reserve my essay for separate publication.
PART I. THE DESCENT OR ORIGIN OF MAN.
CHAPTER I. THE EVIDENCE OF THE DESCENT OF MAN FROM SOME LOWER FORM.
Nature of the evidence bearing on the origin of man--Homologous structures in man and the lower animals--Miscellaneous points of correspondence-- Development--Rudimentary structures, muscles, sense-organs, hair, bones, reproductive organs, etc.
--The bearing of these three great classes of facts on the origin of man.
He who wishes to decide whether man is the modified descendant of some pre- existing form, would probably first enquire whether man varies, however slightly, in bodily structure and in mental faculties; and if so, whether the variations are transmitted to
Again, are the variations the result, as far as our ignorance permits us to judge, of the same general causes, and are they governed by the same general laws, as in the case of other organisms; for instance, by correlation, the inherited effects of use and
?
Is man subject to similar malconformations, the result of arrested development, of reduplication of parts, etc.
, and does he display in any of his anomalies reversion to some former and ancient type of structure?
It might also naturally be enquired whether man, like so many other animals, has given rise to varieties and sub-races, differing but slightly from each other, or to races differing so much that they must be classed as doubtful species?
How are such races distributed over the world; and how, when crossed, do they react on each other in the first and succeeding generations?
And so with many other points.
The enquirer would next come to the important point, whether man tends to increase at so rapid a rate, as to lead to occasional severe struggles for existence; and consequently to beneficial variations, whether in body or mind, being preserved, and
Do the races or species of men, whichever term may be applied, encroach on and replace one another, so that some finally become extinct?
We shall see that all these questions, as indeed is obvious in respect to most of them, must be answered in the affirmative, in the same manner as with the lower animals.
But the several considerations just referred to may be conveniently deferred for a time: and we will first see how far the bodily structure of man shews traces, more or less plain, of his descent from some lower form.
In succeeding chapters the mental powers of man, in comparison with those of the lower animals, will be considered.
THE BODILY STRUCTURE OF MAN.
It is notorious that man is constructed on the same general type or model as other mammals.
All the bones in his skeleton can be compared with corresponding bones in a monkey, bat, or seal.
So it is with his muscles, nerves, blood-vessels and internal viscera.
The brain, the most important of all the organs, follows the same law, as shewn by Huxley and other anatomists.
Bischoff (1.
'Grosshirnwindungen des Menschen,' 1868, s.
96.
The conclusions of this author, as well as those of Gratiolet and Aeby, concerning the brain, will be discussed by Prof.
Huxley in the Appendix alluded to in the Preface to this edition.
), who is a hostile witness, admits that every chief fissure and fold in the brain of man has its analogy in that of the orang; but he adds that at no period of development do their brains perfectly agree; nor could perfect agreement be expected, for
Vulpian (2.
'Lec.
sur la Phys.
' 1866, page 890, as quoted by M. Dally, 'L'Ordre des Primates et le Transformisme,' 1868, page 29.
), remarks: "Les diffrences relles qui existent entre l'encephale de l'homme et celui des singes suprieurs, sont bien minimes.
Il ne faut pas se faire d'illusions a cet gard.
L'homme est bien plus prs des singes anthropomorphes par les caractres anatomiques de son cerveau que ceux-ci ne le sont non seulement des autres mammifres, mais mme de certains quadrumanes, des guenons et des macaques".
But it would be superfluous here to give further details on the correspondence between man and the higher mammals in the structure of the brain and all other parts of the body.
It may, however, be worth while to specify a few points, not directly or obviously connected with structure, by which this correspondence or relationship is well shewn.
Man is liable to receive from the lower animals, and to communicate to them, certain diseases, as hydrophobia, variola, the glanders, syphilis, cholera, herpes, etc.
(3.
Dr. W. Lauder Lindsay has treated this subject at some length in the 'Journal of Mental Science,' July 1871; and in the 'Edinburgh Veterinary Review,' July 1858.
); and this fact proves the close similarity (4.
A Reviewer has criticised ('British Quarterly Review,' Oct.
1st, 1871, page 472) what I have here said with much severity and contempt; but as I do not use the term identity, I cannot see that I am greatly in error.
There appears to me a strong analogy between the same infection or contagion producing the same result, or one closely similar, in two distinct animals, and the testing of two distinct fluids by the same chemical reagent.
) of their tissues and blood, both in minute structure and composition, far more plainly than does their comparison under the best microscope, or by the aid of the best chemical analysis.
Monkeys are liable to many of the same non-contagious diseases as we are; thus Rengger (5.
'Naturgeschichte der Sugethiere von Paraguay,' 1830, s.
50.
), who carefully observed for a long time the Cebus Azarae in its native land, found it liable to catarrh, with the usual symptoms, and which, when often recurrent, led to consumption.
These monkeys suffered also from apoplexy, inflammation of the bowels, and cataract in the eye.
The younger ones when shedding their milk-teeth often died from fever.
Medicines produced the same effect on them as on us.
Many kinds of monkeys have a strong taste for tea, coffee, and spiritous liquors: they will also, as I have myself seen, smoke tobacco with pleasure.
(6.
The same tastes are common to some animals much lower in the scale.
Mr. A. Nichols informs me that he kept in Queensland, in Australia, three individuals of the Phaseolarctus cinereus; and that, without having been taught in any way, they acquired a strong taste for rum, and for smoking tobacco.
) Brehm asserts that the natives of north-eastern Africa catch the wild baboons by exposing vessels with strong beer, by which they are made drunk.
He has seen some of these animals, which he kept in confinement, in this state; and he gives a laughable account of their behaviour and strange grimaces.
On the following morning they were very cross and dismal; they held their aching heads with both hands, and wore a most pitiable expression: when beer or wine was offered them, they turned away with disgust, but relished the juice of lemons.
(7.
Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. i.
1864, s.
75, 86.
On the Ateles, s.
105.
For other analogous statements, see s.
25, 107.
) An American monkey, an Ateles, after getting drunk on brandy, would never touch it again, and thus was wiser than many men.
These trifling facts prove how similar the nerves of taste must be in monkeys and man, and how similarly their whole nervous system is affected.
Man is infested with internal parasites, sometimes causing fatal effects; and is plagued by external parasites, all of which belong to the same genera or families as those infesting other mammals, and in the case of scabies to the same species.
(8.
Dr. W. Lauder Lindsay, 'Edinburgh Vet.
Review,' July 1858, page 13.
) Man is subject, like other mammals, birds, and even insects (9.
With respect to insects see Dr. Laycock, "On a General Law of Vital Periodicity," 'British Association,' 1842.
Dr. Macculloch, 'Silliman's North American Journal of Science,' vol.
XVII.
page 305, has seen a dog suffering from tertian ague.
Hereafter I shall return to this subject.
), to that mysterious law, which causes certain normal processes, such as gestation, as well as the maturation and duration of various diseases, to follow lunar periods.
His wounds are repaired by the same process of healing; and the stumps left after the amputation of his limbs, especially during an early embryonic period, occasionally possess some power of regeneration, as in the lowest animals.
(10.
I have given the evidence on this head in my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
page 15, and more could be added.
) The whole process of that most important function, the reproduction of the species, is strikingly the same in all mammals, from the first act of courtship by the male (11.
Mares e diversis generibus Quadrumanorum sine dubio dignoscunt feminas humanas a maribus.
Primum, credo, odoratu, postea aspectu.
Mr. Youatt, qui diu in Hortis Zoologicis (Bestiariis) medicus animalium erat, vir in rebus observandis cautus et sagax, hoc mihi certissime probavit, et curatores ejusdem loci et alii e ministris confirmaverunt.
Sir Andrew Smith et Brehm notabant idem in Cynocephalo.
Illustrissimus Cuvier etiam narrat multa de hac re, qua ut opinor, nihil turpius potest indicari inter omnia hominibus et Quadrumanis communia.
Narrat enim Cynocephalum quendam in furorem incidere aspectu feminarum aliquarem, sed nequaquam accendi tanto furore ab omnibus.
Semper eligebat juniores, et dignoscebat in turba, et advocabat voce gestuque.
), to the birth and nurturing of the young.
Monkeys are born in almost as helpless a condition as our own infants; and in certain genera the young differ fully as much in appearance from the adults, as do our children from their full-grown parents.
(12.
This remark is made with respect to Cynocephalus and the anthropomorphous apes by Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and F. Cuvier, 'Histoire Nat.
des Mammifres,' tom.
i.
1824.
) It has been urged by some writers, as an important distinction, that with man the young arrive at maturity at a much later age than with any other animal: but if we look to the races of mankind which inhabit tropical countries the difference is not
(13.
Huxley, 'Man's Place in Nature,' 1863, p.
34.
) Man differs from woman in size, bodily strength, hairiness, etc.
, as well as in mind, in the same manner as do the two sexes of many mammals.
So that the correspondence in general structure, in the minute structure of the tissues, in chemical composition and in constitution, between man and the higher animals, especially the anthropomorphous apes, is extremely close.
EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT.
[Fig.
1.
Shows a human embryo, from Ecker, and a dog embryo, from Bischoff.
Labelled in each are: a.
Fore-brain, cerebral hemispheres, etc.
b.
Mid-brain, corpora quadrigemina.
c.
Hind-brain, cerebellum, medulla oblongata.
d.
Eye.
e.
Ear.
f.
First visceral arch.
g.
Second visceral arch.
H. Vertebral columns and muscles in process of development.
i.
Anterior extremities.
K. Posterior extremities.
L. Tail or os coccyx.
] Man is developed from an ovule, about the 125th of an inch in diameter, which differs in no respect from the ovules of other animals.
The embryo itself at a very early period can hardly be distinguished from that of other members of the vertebrate kingdom.
At this period the arteries run in arch-like branches, as if to carry the blood to branchiae which are not present in the higher Vertebrata, though the slits on the sides of the neck still remain (see f, g, fig.
1), marking their former position.
At a somewhat later period, when the extremities are developed, "the feet of lizards and mammals," as the illustrious Von Baer remarks, "the wings and feet of birds, no less than the hands and feet of man, all arise from the same fundamental form".
It is, says Prof.
Huxley (14.
'Man's Place in Nature,' 1863, p.
67.
), "quite in the later stages of development that the young human being presents marked differences from the young ape, while the latter departs as much from the dog in its developments, as the man does.
Startling as this last assertion may appear to be, it is demonstrably true".
As some of my readers may never have seen a drawing of an embryo, I have given one of man and another of a dog, at about the same early stage of development, carefully copied from two works of undoubted accuracy.
(15.
The human embryo (upper fig.
) is from Ecker, 'Icones Phys.
,' 1851-1859, tab.
xxx.
fig.
2.
This embryo was ten lines in length, so that the drawing is much magnified.
The embryo of the dog is from Bischoff, 'Entwicklungsgeschichte des Hunde-Eies,' 1845, tab.
xi.
fig.
42B.
This drawing is five times magnified, the embryo being twenty-five days old.
The internal viscera have been omitted, and the uterine appendages in both drawings removed.
I was directed to these figures by Prof.
Huxley, from whose work, 'Man's Place in Nature,' the idea of giving them was taken.
Haeckel has also given analogous drawings in his 'Schopfungsgeschichte.
') After the foregoing statements made by such high authorities, it would be superfluous on my part to give a number of borrowed details, shewing that the embryo of man closely resembles that of other mammals.
It may, however, be added, that the human embryo likewise resembles certain low forms when adult in various points of structure.
For instance, the heart at first exists as a simple pulsating vessel; the excreta are voided through a cloacal passage; and the os coccyx projects like a true tail, "extending considerably beyond the rudimentary legs".
(16.
Prof.
Wyman in 'Proceedings of the American Academy of Sciences,' vol.
iv.
1860, p.
17.
) In the embryos of all air-breathing vertebrates, certain glands, called the corpora Wolffiana, correspond with, and act like the kidneys of mature fishes.
(17.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
i.
p.
533.
) Even at a later embryonic period, some striking resemblances between man and the lower animals may be observed.
Bischoff says that "the convolutions of the brain in a human foetus at the end of the seventh month reach about the same stage of development as in a baboon when adult".
(18.
'Die Grosshirnwindungen des Menschen,' 1868, s.
95.
) The great toe, as Professor Owen remarks (19.
'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
ii.
p.
553.
), "which forms the fulcrum when standing or walking, is perhaps the most characteristic peculiarity in the human structure;" but in an embryo, about an inch in length, Prof.
Wyman (20.
'Proc.
Soc.
Nat.
Hist.
' Boston, 1863, vol.
ix.
p.
185.
) found "that the great toe was shorter than the others; and, instead of being parallel to them, projected at an angle from the side of the foot, thus corresponding with the permanent condition of this part in the quadrumana".
I will conclude with a quotation from Huxley (21.
'Man's Place in Nature,' p.
65.
) who after asking, does man originate in a different way from a dog, bird, frog or fish?
says, "the reply is not doubtful for a moment; without question, the mode of origin, and the early stages of the development of man, are identical with those of the animals immediately below him in the scale: without a doubt in these respects, he is far
RUDIMENTS.
This subject, though not intrinsically more important than the two last, will for several reasons be treated here more fully.
(22.
I had written a rough copy of this chapter before reading a valuable paper, "Caratteri rudimentali in ordine all' origine dell' uomo" ('Annuario della Soc.
d.
Naturalisti,' Modena, 1867, p.
81), by G. Canestrini, to which paper I am considerably indebted.
Haeckel has given admirable discussions on this whole subject, under the title of Dysteleology, in his 'Generelle Morphologie' and 'Schpfungsgeschichte.
') Not one of the higher animals can be named which does not bear some part in a rudimentary condition; and man forms no exception to the rule.
Rudimentary organs must be distinguished from those that are nascent; though in some cases the distinction is not easy.
The former are either absolutely useless, such as the mammae of male quadrupeds, or the incisor teeth of ruminants which never cut through the gums; or they are of such slight service to their present possessors, that we can hardly suppose that they were
Organs in this latter state are not strictly rudimentary, but they are tending in this direction.
Nascent organs, on the other hand, though not fully developed, are of high service to their possessors, and are capable of further development.
Rudimentary organs are eminently variable; and this is partly intelligible, as they are useless, or nearly useless, and consequently are no longer subjected to natural selection.
They often become wholly suppressed.
When this occurs, they are nevertheless liable to occasional reappearance through reversion-- a circumstance well worthy of attention.
The chief agents in causing organs to become rudimentary seem to have been disuse at that period of life when the organ is chiefly used (and this is generally during maturity), and also inheritance at a corresponding period of life.
The term "disuse" does not relate merely to the lessened action of muscles, but includes a diminished flow of blood to a part or organ, from being subjected to fewer alternations of pressure, or from becoming in any way less habitually active.
Rudiments, however, may occur in one sex of those parts which are normally present in the other sex; and such rudiments, as we shall hereafter see, have often originated in a way distinct from those here referred to.
In some cases, organs have been reduced by means of natural selection, from having become injurious to the species under changed habits of life.
The process of reduction is probably often aided through the two principles of compensation and economy of growth; but the later stages of reduction, after disuse has done all that can fairly be attributed to it, and when the saving to be effected by the
Some good criticisms on this subject have been given by Messrs.
Murie and Mivart, in 'Transact.
Zoological Society,' 1869, vol.
vii.
p.
92.
), are difficult to understand.
The final and complete suppression of a part, already useless and much reduced in size, in which case neither compensation nor economy can come into play, is perhaps intelligible by the aid of the hypothesis of pangenesis.
But as the whole subject of rudimentary organs has been discussed and illustrated in my former works (24.
'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii pp.
317 and 397.
See also 'Origin of Species,' 5th Edition p.
535.
), I need here say no more on this head.
Rudiments of various muscles have been observed in many parts of the human body (25.
For instance, M. Richard ('Annales des Sciences Nat.
,' 3rd series, Zoolog.
1852, tom.
xviii.
p.
13) describes and figures rudiments of what he calls the "muscle pedieux de la main," which he says is sometimes "infiniment petit".
Another muscle, called "le tibial posterieur," is generally quite absent in the hand, but appears from time to time in a more or less rudimentary condition.
); and not a few muscles, which are regularly present in some of the lower animals can occasionally be detected in man in a greatly reduced condition.
Every one must have noticed the power which many animals, especially horses, possess of moving or twitching their skin; and this is effected by the panniculus carnosus.
Remnants of this muscle in an efficient state are found in various parts of our bodies; for instance, the muscle on the forehead, by which the eyebrows are raised.
The platysma myoides, which is well developed on the neck, belongs to this system.
Prof.
Turner, of Edinburgh, has occasionally detected, as he informs me, muscular fasciculi in five different situations, namely in the axillae, near the scapulae, etc.
, all of which must be referred to the system of the panniculus.
He has also shewn (26.
Prof.
W. Turner, 'Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,' 1866-67, p.
65.
) that the musculus sternalis or sternalis brutorum, which is not an extension of the rectus abdominalis, but is closely allied to the panniculus, occurred in the proportion of about three per cent.
in upwards of 600 bodies: he adds, that this muscle affords "an excellent illustration of the statement that occasional and rudimentary structures are especially liable to variation in arrangement".
Some few persons have the power of contracting the superficial muscles on their scalps; and these muscles are in a variable and partially rudimentary condition.
M. A. de Candolle has communicated to me a curious instance of the long-continued persistence or inheritance of this power, as well as of its unusual development.
He knows a family, in which one member, the present head of the family, could, when a youth, pitch several heavy books from his head by the movement of the scalp alone; and he won wagers by performing this feat.
His father, uncle, grandfather, and his three children possess the same power to the same unusual degree.
This family became divided eight generations ago into two branches; so that the head of the above-mentioned branch is cousin in the seventh degree to the head of the other branch.
This distant cousin resides in another part of France; and on being asked whether he possessed the same faculty, immediately exhibited his power.
This case offers a good illustration how persistent may be the transmission of an absolutely useless faculty, probably derived from our remote semi-human progenitors; since many monkeys have, and frequently use the power, of largely moving their scalps up
(27.
See my 'Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals,' 1872, p.
144.
) The extrinsic muscles which serve to move the external ear, and the intrinsic muscles which move the different parts, are in a rudimentary condition in man, and they all belong to the system of the panniculus; they are also variable in development, or at
I have seen one man who could draw the whole ear forwards; other men can draw it upwards; another who could draw it backwards (28.
Canestrini quotes Hyrtl.
('Annuario della Soc.
dei Naturalisti,' Modena, 1867, p.
97) to the same effect.
); and from what one of these persons told me, it is probable that most of us, by often touching our ears, and thus directing our attention towards them, could recover some power of movement by repeated trials.
The power of erecting and directing the shell of the ears to the various points of the compass, is no doubt of the highest service to many animals, as they thus perceive the direction of danger; but I have never heard, on sufficient evidence, of a man who
The whole external shell may be considered a rudiment, together with the various folds and prominences (helix and anti-helix, tragus and anti-tragus, etc.
) which in the lower animals strengthen and support the ear when erect, without adding much to its weight.
Some authors, however, suppose that the cartilage of the shell serves to transmit vibrations to the acoustic nerve; but Mr. Toynbee (29.
'The Diseases of the Ear,' by J. Toynbee, F.R.S., 1860, p.
12.
A distinguished physiologist, Prof.
Preyer, informs me that he had lately been experimenting on the function of the shell of the ear, and has come to nearly the same conclusion as that given here.
), after collecting all the known evidence on this head, concludes that the external shell is of no distinct use.
The ears of the chimpanzee and orang are curiously like those of man, and the proper muscles are likewise but very slightly developed.
(30.
Prof.
A. Macalister, 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
vii.
1871, p.
342.
) I am also assured by the keepers in the Zoological Gardens that these animals never move or erect their ears; so that they are in an equally rudimentary condition with those of man, as far as function is concerned.
Why these animals, as well as the progenitors of man, should have lost the power of erecting their ears, we cannot say.
It may be, though I am not satisfied with this view, that owing to their arboreal habits and great strength they were but little exposed to danger, and so during a lengthened period moved their ears but little, and thus gradually lost the power of moving
This would be a parallel case with that of those large and heavy birds, which, from ihabiting oceanic islands, have not been exposed to the attacks of beasts of prey, and have consequently lost the power of using their wings for flight.
The inability to move the ears in man and several apes is, however, partly compensated by the freedom with which they can move the head in a horizontal plane, so as to catch sounds from all directions.
It has been asserted that the ear of man alone possesses a lobule; but "a rudiment of it is found in the gorilla" (31.
Mr. St. George Mivart, 'Elementary Anatomy,' 1873, p.
396.
); and, as I hear from Prof.
Preyer, it is not rarely absent in the negro.
[Fig.
2.
Human Ear, modelled and drawn by Mr. Woolner.
The projecting point is labelled a.
] The celebrated sculptor, Mr. Woolner, informs me of one little peculiarity in the external ear, which he has often observed both in men and women, and of which he perceived the full significance.
His attention was first called to the subject whilst at work on his figure of Puck, to which he had given pointed ears.
He was thus led to examine the ears of various monkeys, and subsequently more carefully those of man.
The peculiarity consists in a little blunt point, projecting from the inwardly folded margin, or helix.
When present, it is developed at birth, and, according to Prof.
Ludwig Meyer, more frequently in man than in woman.
Mr. Woolner made an exact model of one such case, and sent me the accompanying drawing.
(Fig.
2).
These points not only project inwards towards the centre of the ear, but often a little outwards from its plane, so as to be visible when the head is viewed from directly in front or behind.
They are variable in size, and somewhat in position, standing either a little higher or lower; and they sometimes occur on one ear and not on the other.
They are not confined to mankind, for I observed a case in one of the spider-monkeys (Ateles beelzebuth) in our Zoological Gardens; and Mr. E. Ray Lankester informs me of another case in a chimpanzee in the gardens at Hamburg.
The helix obviously consists of the extreme margin of the ear folded inwards; and this folding appears to be in some manner connected with the whole external ear being permanently pressed backwards.
In many monkeys, which do not stand high in the order, as baboons and some species of macacus (32.
See also some remarks, and the drawings of the ears of the Lemuroidea, in Messrs.
Murie and Mivart's excellent paper in 'Transactions of the Zoological Society,' vol.
vii.
1869, pp.
6 and 90.
), the upper portion of the ear is slightly pointed, and the margin is not at all folded inwards; but if the margin were to be thus folded, a slight point would necessarily project inwards towards the centre, and probably a little outwards from the plane
On the other hand, Prof.
L. Meyer, in an able paper recently published (33.
'ber das Darwin'sche Spitzohr,' Archiv fur Path.
Anat.
und Phys.
, 1871, p.
485.
), maintains that the whole case is one of mere variability; and that the projections are not real ones, but are due to the internal cartilage on each side of the points not having been fully developed.
I am quite ready to admit that this is the correct explanation in many instances, as in those figured by Prof.
Meyer, in which there are several minute points, or the whole margin is sinuous.
I have myself seen, through the kindness of Dr. L. Down, the ear of a microcephalous idiot, on which there is a projection on the outside of the helix, and not on the inward folded edge, so that this point can have no relation to a former apex of the ear.
Nevertheless in some cases, my original view, that the points are vestiges of the tips of formerly erect and pointed ears, still seems to me probable.
I think so from the frequency of their occurrence, and from the general correspondence in position with that of the tip of a pointed ear.
In one case, of which a photograph has been sent me, the projection is so large, that supposing, in accordance with Prof.
Meyer's view, the ear to be made perfect by the equal development of the cartilage throughout the whole extent of the margin, it would have covered fully one-third of the whole ear.
Two cases have been communicated to me, one in North America, and the other in England, in which the upper margin is not at all folded inwards, but is pointed, so that it closely resembles the pointed ear of an ordinary quadruped in outline.
In one of these cases, which was that of a young child, the father compared the ear with the drawing which I have given (34.
'The Expression of the Emotions,' p.
136.
) of the ear of a monkey, the Cynopithecus niger, and says that their outlines are closely similar.
If, in these two cases, the margin had been folded inwards in the normal manner, an inward projection must have been formed.
I may add that in two other cases the outline still remains somewhat pointed, although the margin of the upper part of the ear is normally folded inwards--in one of them, however, very narrowly.
[Fig.
3.
Foetus of an Orang(?
).
Exact copy of a photograph, shewing the form of the ear at this early age.
] The following woodcut (No.
3) is an accurate copy of a photograph of the foetus of an orang (kindly sent me by Dr. Nitsche), in which it may be seen how different the pointed outline of the ear is at this period from its adult condition, when it bears a close general resemblance to
It is evident that the folding over of the tip of such an ear, unless it changed greatly during its further development, would give rise to a point projecting inwards.
On the whole, it still seems to me probable that the points in question are in some cases, both in man and apes, vestiges of a former condition.
The nictitating membrane, or third eyelid, with its accessory muscles and other structures, is especially well developed in birds, and is of much functional importance to them, as it can be rapidly drawn across the whole eye-ball.
It is found in some reptiles and amphibians, and in certain fishes, as in sharks.
It is fairly well developed in the two lower divisions of the mammalian series, namely, in the monotremata and marsupials, and in some few of the higher mammals, as in the walrus.
But in man, the quadrumana, and most other mammals, it exists, as is admitted by all anatomists, as a mere rudiment, called the semilunar fold.
(35.
Muller's 'Elements of Physiology,' Eng.
translat.
1842, vol.
ii.
p.
1117.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
260; ibid.
on the Walrus, 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' November 8, 1854.
See also R. Knox, 'Great Artists and Anatomists,' p.
106.
This rudiment apparently is somewhat larger in Negroes and Australians than in Europeans, see Carl Vogt, 'Lectures on Man,' Eng.
translat.
p.
129.
) The sense of smell is of the highest importance to the greater number of mammals--to some, as the ruminants, in warning them of danger; to others, as the Carnivora, in finding their prey; to others, again, as the wild boar, for both purposes combined.
But the sense of smell is of extremely slight service, if any, even to the dark coloured races of men, in whom it is much more highly developed than in the white and civilised races.
(36.
The account given by Humboldt of the power of smell possessed by the natives of South America is well known, and has been confirmed by others.
M. Houzeau ('tudes sur les Facults Mentales,' etc.
, tom.
i.
1872, p.
91) asserts that he repeatedly made experiments, and proved that Negroes and Indians could recognise persons in the dark by their odour.
Dr. W. Ogle has made some curious observations on the connection between the power of smell and the colouring matter of the mucous membrane of the olfactory region as well as of the skin of the body.
I have, therefore, spoken in the text of the dark-coloured races having a finer sense of smell than the white races.
See his paper, 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions,' London, vol.
liii.
1870, p.
276.
) Nevertheless it does not warn them of danger, nor guide them to their food; nor does it prevent the Esquimaux from sleeping in the most fetid atmosphere, nor many savages from eating half-putrid meat.
In Europeans the power differs greatly in different individuals, as I am assured by an eminent naturalist who possesses this sense highly developed, and who has attended to the subject.
Those who believe in the principle of gradual evolution, will not readily admit that the sense of smell in its present state was originally acquired by man, as he now exists.
He inherits the power in an enfeebled and so far rudimentary condition, from some early progenitor, to whom it was highly serviceable, and by whom it was continually used.
In those animals which have this sense highly developed, such as dogs and horses, the recollection of persons and of places is strongly associated with their odour; and we can thus perhaps understand how it is, as Dr. Maudsley has truly remarked (37.
'The Physiology and Pathology of Mind,' 2nd ed.
1868, p.
134.
), that the sense of smell in man "is singularly effective in recalling vividly the ideas and images of forgotten scenes and places".
Man differs conspicuously from all the other primates in being almost naked.
But a few short straggling hairs are found over the greater part of the body in the man, and fine down on that of the woman.
The different races differ much in hairiness; and in the individuals of the same race the hairs are highly variable, not only in abundance, but likewise in position: thus in some Europeans the shoulders are quite naked, whilst in others they bear thick
(38.
Eschricht, ber die Richtung der Haare am menschlichen Krper, Muller's 'Archiv fur Anat.
und Phys.
' 1837, s.
47.
I shall often have to refer to this very curious paper.
) There can be little doubt that the hairs thus scattered over the body are the rudiments of the uniform hairy coat of the lower animals.
This view is rendered all the more probable, as it is known that fine, short, and pale-coloured hairs on the limbs and other parts of the body, occasionally become developed into "thickset, long, and rather coarse dark hairs," when abnormally nourished
(39.
Paget, 'Lectures on Surgical Pathology,' 1853, vol.
i.
p.
71.
) I am informed by Sir James Paget that often several members of a family have a few hairs in their eyebrows much longer than the others; so that even this slight peculiarity seems to be inherited.
These hairs, too, seem to have their representatives; for in the chimpanzee, and in certain species of Macacus, there are scattered hairs of considerable length rising from the naked skin above the eyes, and corresponding to our eyebrows; similar long
The fine wool-like hair, or so-called lanugo, with which the human foetus during the sixth month is thickly covered, offers a more curious case.
It is first developed, during the fifth month, on the eyebrows and face, and especially round the mouth, where it is much longer than that on the head.
A moustache of this kind was observed by Eschricht (40.
Eschricht, ibid.
s.
40, 47.
) on a female foetus; but this is not so surprising a circumstance as it may at first appear, for the two sexes generally resemble each other in all external characters during an early period of growth.
The direction and arrangement of the hairs on all parts of the foetal body are the same as in the adult, but are subject to much variability.
The whole surface, including even the forehead and ears, is thus thickly clothed; but it is a significant fact that the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet are quite naked, like the inferior surfaces of all four extremities in most of the lower
As this can hardly be an accidental coincidence, the woolly covering of the foetus probably represents the first permanent coat of hair in those mammals which are born hairy.
Three or four cases have been recorded of persons born with their whole bodies and faces thickly covered with fine long hairs; and this strange condition is strongly inherited, and is correlated with an abnormal condition of the teeth.
(41.
See my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
p.
327.
Prof.
Alex.
Brandt has recently sent me an additional case of a father and son, born in Russia, with these peculiarities.
I have received drawings of both from Paris.
) Prof.
Alex.
Brandt informs me that he has compared the hair from the face of a man thus characterised, aged thirty-five, with the lanugo of a foetus, and finds it quite similar in texture; therefore, as he remarks, the case may be attributed to an arrest of
Many delicate children, as I have been assured by a surgeon to a hospital for children, have their backs covered by rather long silky hairs; and such cases probably come under the same head.
It appears as if the posterior molar or wisdom-teeth were tending to become rudimentary in the more civilised races of man.
These teeth are rather smaller than the other molars, as is likewise the case with the corresponding teeth in the chimpanzee and orang; and they have only two separate fangs.
They do not cut through the gums till about the seventeenth year, and I have been assured that they are much more liable to decay, and are earlier lost than the other teeth; but this is denied by some eminent dentists.
They are also much more liable to vary, both in structure and in the period of their development, than the other teeth.
(42.
Dr. Webb, 'Teeth in Man and the Anthropoid Apes,' as quoted by Dr. C. Carter Blake in Anthropological Review, July 1867, p.
299.
) In the Melanian races, on the other hand, the wisdom-teeth are usually furnished with three separate fangs, and are generally sound; they also differ from the other molars in size, less than in the Caucasian races.
(43.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
pp.
320, 321, and 325.
) Prof.
Schaaffhausen accounts for this difference between the races by "the posterior dental portion of the jaw being always shortened" in those that are civilised (44.
'On the Primitive Form of the Skull,' Eng.
translat.
, in 'Anthropological Review,' Oct.
1868, p.
426), and this shortening may, I presume, be attributed to civilised men habitually feeding on soft, cooked food, and thus using their jaws less.
I am informed by Mr. Brace that it is becoming quite a common practice in the United States to remove some of the molar teeth of children, as the jaw does not grow large enough for the perfect development of the normal number.
(45.
Prof.
Montegazza writes to me from Florence, that he has lately been studying the last molar teeth in the different races of man, and has come to the same conclusion as that given in my text, viz.
, that in the higher or civilised races they are on the road towards atrophy or elimination.
) With respect to the alimentary canal, I have met with an account of only a single rudiment, namely the vermiform appendage of the caecum.
The caecum is a branch or diverticulum of the intestine, ending in a cul-de-sac, and is extremely long in many of the lower vegetable-feeding mammals.
In the marsupial koala it is actually more than thrice as long as the whole body.
(46.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
pp.
416, 434, 441.
) It is sometimes produced into a long gradually-tapering point, and is sometimes constricted in parts.
It appears as if, in consequence of changed diet or habits, the caecum had become much shortened in various animals, the vermiform appendage being left as a rudiment of the shortened part.
That this appendage is a rudiment, we may infer from its small size, and from the evidence which Prof.
Canestrini (47.
'Annuario della Soc.
d.
Nat.
' Modena, 1867, p.
94.
) has collected of its variability in man.
It is occasionally quite absent, or again is largely developed.
The passage is sometimes completely closed for half or two-thirds of its length, with the terminal part consisting of a flattened solid expansion.
In the orang this appendage is long and convoluted: in man it arises from the end of the short caecum, and is commonly from four to five inches in length, being only about the third of an inch in diameter.
Not only is it useless, but it is sometimes the cause of death, of which fact I have lately heard two instances: this is due to small hard bodies, such as seeds, entering the passage, and causing inflammation.
(48.
M. C. Martins ("De l'Unit Organique," in 'Revue des Deux Mondes,' June 15, 1862, p.
16) and Haeckel ('Generelle Morphologie,' B. ii.
s.
278), have both remarked on the singular fact of this rudiment sometimes causing death.
) In some of the lower Quadrumana, in the Lemuridae and Carnivora, as well as in many marsupials, there is a passage near the lower end of the humerus, called the supra-condyloid foramen, through which the great nerve of the fore limb and often the great
Now in the humerus of man, there is generally a trace of this passage, which is sometimes fairly well developed, being formed by a depending hook-like process of bone, completed by a band of ligament.
Dr. Struthers (49.
With respect to inheritance, see Dr. Struthers in the 'Lancet,' Feb.
15, 1873, and another important paper, ibid.
Jan.
24, 1863, p.
83.
Dr. Knox, as I am informed, was the first anatomist who drew attention to this peculiar structure in man; see his 'Great Artists and Anatomists,' p.
63.
See also an important memoir on this process by Dr. Gruber, in the 'Bulletin de l'Acad.
Imp.
de St. Petersbourg,' tom.
xii.
1867, p.
448.
), who has closely attended to the subject, has now shewn that this peculiarity is sometimes inherited, as it has occurred in a father, and in no less than four out of his seven children.
When present, the great nerve invariably passes through it; and this clearly indicates that it is the homologue and rudiment of the supra-condyloid foramen of the lower animals.
Prof.
Turner estimates, as he informs me, that it occurs in about one per cent.
of recent skeletons.
But if the occasional development of this structure in man is, as seems probable, due to reversion, it is a return to a very ancient state of things, because in the higher Quadrumana it is absent.
There is another foramen or perforation in the humerus, occasionally present in man, which may be called the inter-condyloid.
This occurs, but not constantly, in various anthropoid and other apes (50.
Mr. St. George Mivart, 'Transactions Phil.
Soc.
' 1867, p.
310.
), and likewise in many of the lower animals.
It is remarkable that this perforation seems to have been present in man much more frequently during ancient times than recently.
Mr. Busk (51.
"On the Caves of Gibraltar," 'Transactions of the International Congress of Prehistoric Archaeology,' Third Session, 1869, p.
159.
Prof.
Wyman has lately shewn (Fourth Annual Report, Peabody Museum, 1871, p.
20), that this perforation is present in thirty-one per cent.
of some human remains from ancient mounds in the Western United States, and in Florida.
It frequently occurs in the negro.
) has collected the following evidence on this head: Prof.
Broca "noticed the perforation in four and a half per cent.
of the arm-bones collected in the 'Cimetire du Sud,' at Paris; and in the Grotto of Orrony, the contents of which are referred to the Bronze period, as many as eight humeri out of thirty-two were perforated; but this extraordinary proportion, he thinks,
' Again, M. Dupont found thirty per cent.
of perforated bones in the caves of the Valley of the Lesse, belonging to the Reindeer period; whilst M. Leguay, in a sort of dolmen at Argenteuil, observed twenty-five per cent.
to be perforated; and M. Pruner-Bey found twenty-six per cent.
in the same condition in bones from Vaureal.
Nor should it be left unnoticed that M. Pruner-Bey states that this condition is common in Guanche skeletons".
It is an interesting fact that ancient races, in this and several other cases, more frequently present structures which resemble those of the lower animals than do the modern.
One chief cause seems to be that the ancient races stand somewhat nearer in the long line of descent to their remote animal-like progenitors.
In man, the os coccyx, together with certain other vertebrae hereafter to be described, though functionless as a tail, plainly represent this part in other vertebrate animals.
At an early embryonic period it is free, and projects beyond the lower extremities; as may be seen in the drawing (Fig.
1.
) of a human embryo.
Even after birth it has been known, in certain rare and anomalous cases (52.
Quatrefages has lately collected the evidence on this subject.
'Revue des Cours Scientifiques,' 1867-1868, p.
625.
In 1840 Fleischmann exhibited a human foetus bearing a free tail, which, as is not always the case, included vertebral bodies; and this tail was critically examined by the many anatomists present at the meeting of naturalists at Erlangen (see Marshall in
), to form a small external rudiment of a tail.
The os coccyx is short, usually including only four vertebrae, all anchylosed together: and these are in a rudimentary condition, for they consist, with the exception of the basal one, of the centrum alone.
(53.
Owen, 'On the Nature of Limbs,' 1849, p.
114.
) They are furnished with some small muscles; one of which, as I am informed by Prof.
Turner, has been expressly described by Theile as a rudimentary repetition of the extensor of the tail, a muscle which is so largely developed in many mammals.
The spinal cord in man extends only as far downwards as the last dorsal or first lumbar vertebra; but a thread-like structure (the filum terminale) runs down the axis of the sacral part of the spinal canal, and even along the back of the coccygeal bones.
The upper part of this filament, as Prof.
Turner informs me, is undoubtedly homologous with the spinal cord; but the lower part apparently consists merely of the pia mater, or vascular investing membrane.
Even in this case the os coccyx may be said to possess a vestige of so important a structure as the spinal cord, though no longer enclosed within a bony canal.
The following fact, for which I am also indebted to Prof.
Turner, shews how closely the os coccyx corresponds with the true tail in the lower animals: Luschka has recently discovered at the extremity of the coccygeal bones a very peculiar convoluted body, which is continuous with the middle sacral artery; and
The reproductive system offers various rudimentary structures; but these differ in one important respect from the foregoing cases.
Here we are not concerned with the vestige of a part which does not belong to the species in an efficient state, but with a part efficient in the one sex, and represented in the other by a mere rudiment.
Nevertheless, the occurrence of such rudiments is as difficult to explain, on the belief of the separate creation of each species, as in the foregoing cases.
Hereafter I shall have to recur to these rudiments, and shall shew that their presence generally depends merely on inheritance, that is, on parts acquired by one sex having been partially transmitted to the other.
I will in this place only give some instances of such rudiments.
It is well known that in the males of all mammals, including man, rudimentary mammae exist.
These in several instances have become well developed, and have yielded a copious supply of milk.
Their essential identity in the two sexes is likewise shewn by their occasional sympathetic enlargement in both during an attack of the measles.
The vesicula prostatica, which has been observed in many male mammals, is now universally acknowledged to be the homologue of the female uterus, together with the connected passage.
It is impossible to read Leuckart's able description of this organ, and his reasoning, without admitting the justness of his conclusion.
This is especially clear in the case of those mammals in which the true female uterus bifurcates, for in the males of these the vesicula likewise bifurcates.
(54.
Leuckart, in Todd's 'Cyclopaedia of Anatomy' 1849-52, vol.
iv.
p.
1415.
In man this organ is only from three to six lines in length, but, like so many other rudimentary parts, it is variable in development as well as in other characters.
) Some other rudimentary structures belonging to the reproductive system might have been here adduced.
(55.
See, on this subject, Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
pp.
675, 676, 706.
) The bearing of the three great classes of facts now given is unmistakeable.
But it would be superfluous fully to recapitulate the line of argument given in detail in my 'Origin of Species.
' The homological construction of the whole frame in the members of the same class is intelligible, if we admit their descent from a common progenitor, together with their subsequent adaptation to diversified conditions.
On any other view, the similarity of pattern between the hand of a man or monkey, the foot of a horse, the flipper of a seal, the wing of a bat, etc.
, is utterly inexplicable.
(56.
Prof.
Bianconi, in a recently published work, illustrated by admirable engravings ('La Thorie Darwinienne et la cration dite indpendante,' 1874), endeavours to shew that homological structures, in the above and other cases, can be fully explained on
No one has shewn so well, how admirably such structures are adapted for their final purpose; and this adaptation can, as I believe, be explained through natural selection.
In considering the wing of a bat, he brings forward (p.
218) what appears to me (to use Auguste Comte's words) a mere metaphysical principle, namely, the preservation "in its integrity of the mammalian nature of the animal".
In only a few cases does he discuss rudiments, and then only those parts which are partially rudimentary, such as the little hoofs of the pig and ox, which do not touch the ground; these he shews clearly to be of service to the animal.
It is unfortunate that he did not consider such cases as the minute teeth, which never cut through the jaw in the ox, or the mammae of male quadrupeds, or the wings of certain beetles, existing under the soldered wing-covers, or the vestiges of the pistil
Although I greatly admire Prof.
Bianconi's work, yet the belief now held by most naturalists seems to me left unshaken, that homological structures are inexplicable on the principle of mere adaptation.
) It is no scientific explanation to assert that they have all been formed on the same ideal plan.
With respect to development, we can clearly understand, on the principle of variations supervening at a rather late embryonic period, and being inherited at a corresponding period, how it is that the embryos of wonderfully different forms should still
No other explanation has ever been given of the marvellous fact that the embryos of a man, dog, seal, bat, reptile, etc.
, can at first hardly be distinguished from each other.
In order to understand the existence of rudimentary organs, we have only to suppose that a former progenitor possessed the parts in question in a perfect state, and that under changed habits of life they became greatly reduced, either from simple disuse,
Thus we can understand how it has come to pass that man and all other vertebrate animals have been constructed on the same general model, why they pass through the same early stages of development, and why they retain certain rudiments in common.
Consequently we ought frankly to admit their community of descent: to take any other view, is to admit that our own structure, and that of all the animals around us, is a mere snare laid to entrap our judgment.
This conclusion is greatly strengthened, if we look to the members of the whole animal series, and consider the evidence derived from their affinities or classification, their geographical distribution and geological succession.
It is only our natural prejudice, and that arrogance which made our forefathers declare that they were descended from demi-gods, which leads us to demur to this conclusion.
But the time will before long come, when it will be thought wonderful that naturalists, who were well acquainted with the comparative structure and development of man, and other mammals, should have believed that each was the work of a separate act of
CHAPTER II.
ON THE MANNER OF DEVELOPMENT OF MAN FROM SOME LOWER FORM.
Variability of body and mind in man--Inheritance--Causes of variability-- Laws of variation the same in man as in the lower animals--Direct action of the conditions of life--Effects of the increased use and disuse of parts-- Arrested
It is manifest that man is now subject to much variability.
No two individuals of the same race are quite alike.
We may compare millions of faces, and each will be distinct.
There is an equally great amount of diversity in the proportions and dimensions of the various parts of the body; the length of the legs being one of the most variable points.
(1.
'Investigations in Military and Anthropological Statistics of American Soldiers,' by B.A. Gould, 1869, p.
256.
) Although in some quarters of the world an elongated skull, and in other quarters a short skull prevails, yet there is great diversity of shape even within the limits of the same race, as with the aborigines of America and South Australia--the latter a
(2.
With respect to the "Cranial forms of the American aborigines," see Dr. Aitken Meigs in 'Proc.
Acad.
Nat.
Sci.
' Philadelphia, May 1868.
On the Australians, see Huxley, in Lyell's 'Antiquity of Man,' 1863, p.
87.
On the Sandwich Islanders, Prof.
J. Wyman, 'Observations on Crania,' Boston, 1868, p.
18.
) An eminent dentist assures me that there is nearly as much diversity in the teeth as in the features.
The chief arteries so frequently run in abnormal courses, that it has been found useful for surgical purposes to calculate from 1040 corpses how often each course prevails.
(3.
'Anatomy of the Arteries,' by R. Quain.
Preface, vol.
i.
1844.
) The muscles are eminently variable: thus those of the foot were found by Prof.
Turner (4.
'Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,' vol.
xxiv.
pp.
175, 189.
) not to be strictly alike in any two out of fifty bodies; and in some the deviations were considerable.
He adds, that the power of performing the appropriate movements must have been modified in accordance with the several deviations.
Mr. J. Wood has recorded (5.
'Proceedings Royal Society,' 1867, p.
544; also 1868, pp.
483, 524.
There is a previous paper, 1866, p.
229.
) the occurrence of 295 muscular variations in thirty-six subjects, and in another set of the same number no less than 558 variations, those occurring on both sides of the body being only reckoned as one.
In the last set, not one body out of the thirty-six was "found totally wanting in departures from the standard descriptions of the muscular system given in anatomical text books".
A single body presented the extraordinary number of twenty-five distinct abnormalities.
The same muscle sometimes varies in many ways: thus Prof.
Macalister describes (6.
'Proc.
R. Irish Academy,' vol.
x.
1868, p.
141.
) no less than twenty distinct variations in the palmaris accessorius.
The famous old anatomist, Wolff (7.
'Act.
Acad.
St. Petersburg,' 1778, part ii.
p.
217.
), insists that the internal viscera are more variable than the external parts: Nulla particula est quae non aliter et aliter in aliis se habeat hominibus.
He has even written a treatise on the choice of typical examples of the viscera for representation.
A discussion on the beau-ideal of the liver, lungs, kidneys, etc.
, as of the human face divine, sounds strange in our ears.
The variability or diversity of the mental faculties in men of the same race, not to mention the greater differences between the men of distinct races, is so notorious that not a word need here be said.
So it is with the lower animals.
All who have had charge of menageries admit this fact, and we see it plainly in our dogs and other domestic animals.
Brehm especially insists that each individual monkey of those which he kept tame in Africa had its own peculiar disposition and temper: he mentions one baboon remarkable for its high intelligence; and the keepers in the Zoological Gardens pointed out to me
Rengger, also, insists on the diversity in the various mental characters of the monkeys of the same species which he kept in Paraguay; and this diversity, as he adds, is partly innate, and partly the result of the manner in which they have been treated or
(8.
Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. i.
ss.
58, 87.
Rengger, 'Sugethiere von Paraguay,' s.
57.
) I have elsewhere (9.
'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
chap.
xii.
) so fully discussed the subject of Inheritance, that I need here add hardly anything.
A greater number of facts have been collected with respect to the transmission of the most trifling, as well as of the most important characters in man, than in any of the lower animals; though the facts are copious enough with respect to the latter.
So in regard to mental qualities, their transmission is manifest in our dogs, horses, and other domestic animals.
Besides special tastes and habits, general intelligence, courage, bad and good temper, etc.
, are certainly transmitted.
With man we see similar facts in almost every family; and we now know, through the admirable labours of Mr. Galton (10.
'Hereditary Genius: an Inquiry into its Laws and Consequences,' 1869.
), that genius which implies a wonderfully complex combination of high faculties, tends to be inherited; and, on the other hand, it is too certain that insanity and deteriorated mental powers likewise run in families.
With respect to the causes of variability, we are in all cases very ignorant; but we can see that in man as in the lower animals, they stand in some relation to the conditions to which each species has been exposed, during several generations.
Domesticated animals vary more than those in a state of nature; and this is apparently due to the diversified and changing nature of the conditions to which they have been subjected.
In this respect the different races of man resemble domesticated animals, and so do the individuals of the same race, when inhabiting a very wide area, like that of America.
We see the influence of diversified conditions in the more civilised nations; for the members belonging to different grades of rank, and following different occupations, present a greater range of character than do the members of barbarous nations.
But the uniformity of savages has often been exaggerated, and in some cases can hardly be said to exist.
(11.
Mr. Bates remarks ('The Naturalist on the Amazons,' 1863, vol.
ii p.
159), with respect to the Indians of the same South American tribe, "no two of them were at all similar in the shape of the head; one man had an oval visage with fine features, and another was quite Mongolian in breadth and prominence of cheek, spread of
) It is, nevertheless, an error to speak of man, even if we look only to the conditions to which he has been exposed, as "far more domesticated" (12.
Blumenbach, 'Treatises on Anthropology.
' Eng.
translat.
, 1865, p.
205.
) than any other animal.
Some savage races, such as the Australians, are not exposed to more diversified conditions than are many species which have a wide range.
In another and much more important respect, man differs widely from any strictly domesticated animal; for his breeding has never long been controlled, either by methodical or unconscious selection.
No race or body of men has been so completely subjugated by other men, as that certain individuals should be preserved, and thus unconsciously selected, from somehow excelling in utility to their masters.
Nor have certain male and female individuals been intentionally picked out and matched, except in the well-known case of the Prussian grenadiers; and in this case man obeyed, as might have been expected, the law of methodical selection; for it is asserted
In Sparta, also, a form of selection was followed, for it was enacted that all children should be examined shortly after birth; the well-formed and vigorous being preserved, the others left to perish.
(13.
Mitford's 'History of Greece,' vol.
i.
p.
282.
It appears also from a passage in Xenophon's 'Memorabilia,' B. ii.
4 (to which my attention has been called by the Rev.
J.N. Hoare), that it was a well recognised principle with the Greeks, that men ought to select their wives with a view to the health and vigour of their children.
The Grecian poet, Theognis, who lived 550 B.C., clearly saw how important selection, if carefully applied, would be for the improvement of mankind.
He saw, likewise, that wealth often checks the proper action of sexual selection.
He thus writes: "With kine and horses, Kurnus!
we proceed By reasonable rules, and choose a breed For profit and increase, at any price: Of a sound stock, without defect or vice.
But, in the daily matches that we make, The price is everything: for money's sake, Men marry: women are in marriage given The churl or ruffian, that in wealth has thriven, May match his offspring with the proudest race: Thus everything is mix'd, noble and
If then in outward manner, form, and mind, You find us a degraded, motley kind, Wonder no more, my friend!
the cause is plain, And to lament the consequence is vain".
(The Works of J. Hookham Frere, vol.
ii.
1872, p.
334.
)) If we consider all the races of man as forming a single species, his range is enormous; but some separate races, as the Americans and Polynesians, have very wide ranges.
It is a well-known law that widely-ranging species are much more variable than species with restricted ranges; and the variability of man may with more truth be compared with that of widely- ranging species, than with that of domesticated animals.
Not only does variability appear to be induced in man and the lower animals by the same general causes, but in both the same parts of the body are affected in a closely analogous manner.
This has been proved in such full detail by Godron and Quatrefages, that I need here only refer to their works.
(14.
Godron, 'De l'Espce,' 1859, tom.
ii.
livre 3.
Quatrefages, 'Unit de l'Espce Humaine,' 1861.
Also Lectures on Anthropology, given in the 'Revue des Cours Scientifiques,' 1866-1868.
) Monstrosities, which graduate into slight variations, are likewise so similar in man and the lower animals, that the same classification and the same terms can be used for both, as has been shewn by Isidore Geoffroy St.-Hilaire.
(15.
'Hist.
Gen.
et Part.
des Anomalies de l'Organisation,' in three volumes, tom.
i.
1832.
) In my work on the variation of domestic animals, I have attempted to arrange in a rude fashion the laws of variation under the following heads:--The direct and definite action of changed conditions, as exhibited by all or nearly all the individuals of
The effects of the long- continued use or disuse of parts.
The cohesion of homologous parts.
The variability of multiple parts.
Compensation of growth; but of this law I have found no good instance in the case of man.
The effects of the mechanical pressure of one part on another; as of the pelvis on the cranium of the infant in the womb.
Arrests of development, leading to the diminution or suppression of parts.
The reappearance of long-lost characters through reversion.
And lastly, correlated variation.
All these so-called laws apply equally to man and the lower animals; and most of them even to plants.
It would be superfluous here to discuss all of them (16.
I have fully discussed these laws in my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
chap.
xxii.
and xxiii.
M. J.P. Durand has lately (1868) published a valuable essay, 'De l'Influence des Milieux,' etc.
He lays much stress, in the case of plants, on the nature of the soil.
); but several are so important, that they must be treated at considerable length.
THE DIRECT AND DEFINITE ACTION OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
This is a most perplexing subject.
It cannot be denied that changed conditions produce some, and occasionally a considerable effect, on organisms of all kinds; and it seems at first probable that if sufficient time were allowed this would be the invariable result.
But I have failed to obtain clear evidence in favour of this conclusion; and valid reasons may be urged on the other side, at least as far as the innumerable structures are concerned, which are adapted for special ends.
There can, however, be no doubt that changed conditions induce an almost indefinite amount of fluctuating variability, by which the whole organisation is rendered in some degree plastic.
In the United States, above 1,000,000 soldiers, who served in the late war, were measured, and the States in which they were born and reared were recorded.
(17.
'Investigations in Military and Anthrop.
Statistics,' etc.
, 1869, by B.A. Gould, pp.
93, 107, 126, 131, 134.
) From this astonishing number of observations it is proved that local influences of some kind act directly on stature; and we further learn that "the State where the physical growth has in great measure taken place, and the State of birth, which indicates
For instance, it is established, "that residence in the Western States, during the years of growth, tends to produce increase of stature".
On the other hand, it is certain that with sailors, their life delays growth, as shewn "by the great difference between the statures of soldiers and sailors at the ages of seventeen and eighteen years".
Mr. B.A. Gould endeavoured to ascertain the nature of the influences which thus act on stature; but he arrived only at negative results, namely that they did not relate to climate, the elevation of the land, soil, nor even "in any controlling degree" to
This latter conclusion is directly opposed to that arrived at by Villerme, from the statistics of the height of the conscripts in different parts of France.
When we compare the differences in stature between the Polynesian chiefs and the lower orders within the same islands, or between the inhabitants of the fertile volcanic and low barren coral islands of the same ocean (18.
For the Polynesians, see Prichard's 'Physical History of Mankind,' vol.
v.
1847, pp.
145, 283.
Also Godron, 'De l'Espce,' tom.
ii.
p.
289.
There is also a remarkable difference in appearance between the closely-allied Hindoos inhabiting the Upper Ganges and Bengal; see Elphinstone's 'History of India,' vol.
i.
p.
324.
) or again between the Fuegians on the eastern and western shores of their country, where the means of subsistence are very different, it is scarcely possible to avoid the conclusion that better food and greater comfort do influence stature.
But the preceding statements shew how difficult it is to arrive at any precise result.
Dr. Beddoe has lately proved that, with the inhabitants of Britain, residence in towns and certain occupations have a deteriorating influence on height; and he infers that the result is to a certain extent inherited, as is likewise the case in the United
Dr. Beddoe further believes that wherever a "race attains its maximum of physical development, it rises highest in energy and moral vigour".
(19.
'Memoirs, Anthropological Society,' vol.
iii.
1867-69, pp.
561, 565, 567.
) Whether external conditions produce any other direct effect on man is not known.
It might have been expected that differences of climate would have had a marked influence, inasmuch as the lungs and kidneys are brought into activity under a low temperature, and the liver and skin under a high one.
(20.
Dr. Brakenridge, 'Theory of Diathesis,' 'Medical Times,' June 19 and July 17, 1869.
) It was formerly thought that the colour of the skin and the character of the hair were determined by light or heat; and although it can hardly be denied that some effect is thus produced, almost all observers now agree that the effect has been very
But this subject will be more properly discussed when we treat of the different races of mankind.
With our domestic animals there are grounds for believing that cold and damp directly affect the growth of the hair; but I have not met with any evidence on this head in the case of man.
EFFECTS OF THE INCREASED USE AND DISUSE OF PARTS.
It is well known that use strengthens the muscles in the individual, and complete disuse, or the destruction of the proper nerve, weakens them.
When the eye is destroyed, the optic nerve often becomes atrophied.
When an artery is tied, the lateral channels increase not only in diameter, but in the thickness and strength of their coats.
When one kidney ceases to act from disease, the other increases in size, and does double work.
Bones increase not only in thickness, but in length, from carrying a greater weight.
(21.
I have given authorities for these several statements in my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
pp.
297- 300.
Dr. Jaeger, "ber das Langenwachsthum der Knochen," 'Jenischen Zeitschrift,' B. v.
Heft.
i.
) Different occupations, habitually followed, lead to changed proportions in various parts of the body.
Thus it was ascertained by the United States Commission (22.
'Investigations,' etc.
, by B.A. Gould, 1869, p.
288.
) that the legs of the sailors employed in the late war were longer by 0.
217 of an inch than those of the soldiers, though the sailors were on an average shorter men; whilst their arms were shorter by 1.
09 of an inch, and therefore, out of proportion, shorter in relation to their lesser height.
This shortness of the arms is apparently due to their greater use, and is an unexpected result: but sailors chiefly use their arms in pulling, and not in supporting weights.
With sailors, the girth of the neck and the depth of the instep are greater, whilst the circumference of the chest, waist, and hips is less, than in soldiers.
Whether the several foregoing modifications would become hereditary, if the same habits of life were followed during many generations, is not known, but it is probable.
Rengger (23.
'Sugethiere von Paraguay,' 1830, s.
4.
) attributes the thin legs and thick arms of the Payaguas Indians to successive generations having passed nearly their whole lives in canoes, with their lower extremities motionless.
Other writers have come to a similar conclusion in analogous cases.
According to Cranz (24.
'History of Greenland,' Eng.
translat.
, 1767, vol.
i.
p.
230.
), who lived for a long time with the Esquimaux, "the natives believe that ingenuity and dexterity in seal-catching (their highest art and virtue) is hereditary; there is really something in it, for the son of a celebrated seal-catcher will distinguish
But in this case it is mental aptitude, quite as much as bodily structure, which appears to be inherited.
It is asserted that the hands of English labourers are at birth larger than those of the gentry.
(25.
'Intermarriage,' by Alex.
Walker, 1838, p.
377.
) From the correlation which exists, at least in some cases (26.
'The Variation of Animals under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
173.
), between the development of the extremities and of the jaws, it is possible that in those classes which do not labour much with their hands and feet, the jaws would be reduced in size from this cause.
That they are generally smaller in refined and civilised men than in hard-working men or savages, is certain.
But with savages, as Mr. Herbert Spencer (27.
'Principles of Biology,' vol.
i.
p.
455.
) has remarked, the greater use of the jaws in chewing coarse, uncooked food, would act in a direct manner on the masticatory muscles, and on the bones to which they are attached.
In infants, long before birth, the skin on the soles of the feet is thicker than on any other part of the body; (28.
Paget, 'Lectures on Surgical Pathology,' vol.
ii, 1853, p.
209.
) and it can hardly be doubted that this is due to the inherited effects of pressure during a long series of generations.
It is familiar to every one that watchmakers and engravers are liable to be short-sighted, whilst men living much out of doors, and especially savages, are generally long-sighted.
(29.
It is a singular and unexpected fact that sailors are inferior to landsmen in their mean distance of distinct vision.
Dr. B.A. Gould ('Sanitary Memoirs of the War of the Rebellion,' 1869, p.
530), has proved this to be the case; and he accounts for it by the ordinary range of vision in sailors being "restricted to the length of the vessel and the height of the masts".
) Short-sight and long-sight certainly tend to be inherited.
(30.
'The Variation of Animals under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
8.
) The inferiority of Europeans, in comparison with savages, in eyesight and in the other senses, is no doubt the accumulated and transmitted effect of lessened use during many generations; for Rengger (31.
'Sugethiere von Paraguay,' s.
8, 10.
I have had good opportunities for observing the extraordinary power of eyesight in the Fuegians.
See also Lawrence ('Lectures on Physiology,' etc.
, 1822, p.
404) on this same subject.
M. Giraud-Teulon has recently collected ('Revue des Cours Scientifiques,' 1870, p.
625) a large and valuable body of evidence proving that the cause of short-sight, "C'est le travail assidu, de prs".
) states that he has repeatedly observed Europeans, who had been brought up and spent their whole lives with the wild Indians, who nevertheless did not equal them in the sharpness of their senses.
The same naturalist observes that the cavities in the skull for the reception of the several sense- organs are larger in the American aborigines than in Europeans; and this probably indicates a corresponding difference in the dimensions of the organs
Blumenbach has also remarked on the large size of the nasal cavities in the skulls of the American aborigines, and connects this fact with their remarkably acute power of smell.
The Mongolians of the plains of northern Asia, according to Pallas, have wonderfully perfect senses; and Prichard believes that the great breadth of their skulls across the zygomas follows from their highly-developed sense organs.
(32.
Prichard, 'Physical History of Mankind,' on the authority of Blumenbach, vol.
i.
1851, p.
311; for the statement by Pallas, vol.
iv.
1844, p.
407.
) The Quechua Indians inhabit the lofty plateaux of Peru; and Alcide d'Orbigny states (33.
Quoted by Prichard, 'Researches into the Physical History of Mankind,' vol.
v.
p.
463.
) that, from continually breathing a highly rarefied atmosphere, they have acquired chests and lungs of extraordinary dimensions.
The cells, also, of the lungs are larger and more numerous than in Europeans.
These observations have been doubted, but Mr. D. Forbes carefully measured many Aymaras, an allied race, living at the height of between 10,000 and 15,000 feet; and he informs me (34.
Mr. Forbes' valuable paper is now published in the 'Journal of the Ethnological Society of London,' new series, vol.
ii.
1870, p.
193.
) that they differ conspicuously from the men of all other races seen by him in the circumference and length of their bodies.
In his table of measurements, the stature of each man is taken at 1000, and the other measurements are reduced to this standard.
It is here seen that the extended arms of the Aymaras are shorter than those of Europeans, and much shorter than those of Negroes.
The legs are likewise shorter; and they present this remarkable peculiarity, that in every Aymara measured, the femur is actually shorter than the tibia.
On an average, the length of the femur to that of the tibia is as 211 to 252; whilst in two Europeans, measured at the same time, the femora to the tibiae were as 244 to 230; and in three Negroes as 258 to 241.
The humerus is likewise shorter relatively to the forearm.
This shortening of that part of the limb which is nearest to the body, appears to be, as suggested to me by Mr. Forbes, a case of compensation in relation with the greatly increased length of the trunk.
The Aymaras present some other singular points of structure, for instance, the very small projection of the heel.
These men are so thoroughly acclimatised to their cold and lofty abode, that when formerly carried down by the Spaniards to the low eastern plains, and when now tempted down by high wages to the gold-washings, they suffer a frightful rate of mortality.
Nevertheless Mr. Forbes found a few pure families which had survived during two generations: and he observed that they still inherited their characteristic peculiarities.
But it was manifest, even without measurement, that these peculiarities had all decreased; and on measurement, their bodies were found not to be so much elongated as those of the men on the high plateau; whilst their femora had become somewhat lengthened,
The actual measurements may be seen by consulting Mr. Forbes's memoir.
From these observations, there can, I think, be no doubt that residence during many generations at a great elevation tends, both directly and indirectly, to induce inherited modifications in the proportions of the body.
(35.
Dr. Wilckens ('Landwirthschaft.
Wochenblatt,' No.
10, 1869) has lately published an interesting essay shewing how domestic animals, which live in mountainous regions, have their frames modified.
) Although man may not have been much modified during the latter stages of his existence through the increased or decreased use of parts, the facts now given shew that his liability in this respect has not been lost; and we positively know that the same
Consequently we may infer that when at a remote epoch the progenitors of man were in a transitional state, and were changing from quadrupeds into bipeds, natural selection would probably have been greatly aided by the inherited effects of the increased or
ARRESTS OF DEVELOPMENT.
There is a difference between arrested development and arrested growth, for parts in the former state continue to grow whilst still retaining their early condition.
Various monstrosities come under this head; and some, as a cleft palate, are known to be occasionally inherited.
It will suffice for our purpose to refer to the arrested brain-development of microcephalous idiots, as described in Vogt's memoir.
(36.
'Mmoire sur les Microcephales,' 1867, pp.
50, 125, 169, 171, 184-198.
) Their skulls are smaller, and the convolutions of the brain are less complex than in normal men.
The frontal sinus, or the projection over the eye-brows, is largely developed, and the jaws are prognathous to an "effrayant" degree; so that these idiots somewhat resemble the lower types of mankind.
Their intelligence, and most of their mental faculties, are extremely feeble.
They cannot acquire the power of speech, and are wholly incapable of prolonged attention, but are much given to imitation.
They are strong and remarkably active, continually gambolling and jumping about, and making grimaces.
They often ascend stairs on all-fours; and are curiously fond of climbing up furniture or trees.
We are thus reminded of the delight shewn by almost all boys in climbing trees; and this again reminds us how lambs and kids, originally alpine animals, delight to frisk on any hillock, however small.
Idiots also resemble the lower animals in some other respects; thus several cases are recorded of their carefully smelling every mouthful of food before eating it.
One idiot is described as often using his mouth in aid of his hands, whilst hunting for lice.
They are often filthy in their habits, and have no sense of decency; and several cases have been published of their bodies being remarkably hairy.
(37.
Prof.
Laycock sums up the character of brute-like idiots by calling them "theroid;" 'Journal of Mental Science,' July 1863.
Dr. Scott ('The Deaf and Dumb,' 2nd ed.
1870, p.
10) has often observed the imbecile smelling their food.
See, on this same subject, and on the hairiness of idiots, Dr. Maudsley, 'Body and Mind,' 1870, pp.
46-51.
Pinel has also given a striking case of hairiness in an idiot.
) REVERSION.
Many of the cases to be here given, might have been introduced under the last heading.
When a structure is arrested in its development, but still continues growing, until it closely resembles a corresponding structure in some lower and adult member of the same group, it may in one sense be considered as a case of reversion.
The lower members in a group give us some idea how the common progenitor was probably constructed; and it is hardly credible that a complex part, arrested at an early phase of embryonic development, should go on growing so as ultimately to perform its
The simple brain of a microcephalous idiot, in as far as it resembles that of an ape, may in this sense be said to offer a case of reversion.
(38.
In my 'Variation of Animals under Domestication' (vol.
ii.
p.
57), I attributed the not very rare cases of supernumerary mammae in women to reversion.
I was led to this as a probable conclusion, by the additional mammae being generally placed symmetrically on the breast; and more especially from one case, in which a single efficient mamma occurred in the inguinal region of a woman, the daughter of
But I now find (see, for instance, Prof.
Preyer, 'Der Kampf um das Dasein,' 1869, s.
45) that mammae erraticae, occur in other situations, as on the back, in the armpit, and on the thigh; the mammae in this latter instance having given so much milk that the child was thus nourished.
The probability that the additional mammae are due to reversion is thus much weakened; nevertheless, it still seems to me probable, because two pairs are often found symmetrically on the breast; and of this I myself have received information in several
It is well known that some Lemurs normally have two pairs of mammae on the breast.
Five cases have been recorded of the presence of more than a pair of mammae (of course rudimentary) in the male sex of mankind; see 'Journal of Anat.
and Physiology,' 1872, p.
56, for a case given by Dr. Handyside, in which two brothers exhibited this peculiarity; see also a paper by Dr. Bartels, in 'Reichert's and du Bois-Reymond's Archiv.
,' 1872, p.
304.
In one of the cases alluded to by Dr. Bartels, a man bore five mammae, one being medial and placed above the navel; Meckel von Hemsbach thinks that this latter case is illustrated by a medial mamma occurring in certain Cheiroptera.
On the whole, we may well doubt if additional mammae would ever have been developed in both sexes of mankind, had not his early progenitors been provided with more than a single pair.
In the above work (vol.
ii.
p.
12), I also attributed, though with much hesitation, the frequent cases of polydactylism in men and various animals to reversion.
I was partly led to this through Prof.
Owen's statement, that some of the Ichthyopterygia possess more than five digits, and therefore, as I supposed, had retained a primordial condition; but Prof.
Gegenbaur ('Jenaischen Zeitschrift,' B. v.
Heft 3, s.
341), disputes Owen's conclusion.
On the other hand, according to the opinion lately advanced by Dr. Gunther, on the paddle of Ceratodus, which is provided with articulated bony rays on both sides of a central chain of bones, there seems no great difficulty in admitting that six or more
I am informed by Dr. Zouteveen that there is a case on record of a man having twenty-four fingers and twenty-four toes!
I was chiefly led to the conclusion that the presence of supernumerary digits might be due to reversion from the fact that such digits, not only are strongly inherited, but, as I then believed, had the power of regrowth after amputation, like the normal
But I have explained in the second edition of my Variation under Domestication why I now place little reliance on the recorded cases of such regrowth.
Nevertheless it deserves notice, inasmuch as arrested development and reversion are intimately related processes; that various structures in an embryonic or arrested condition, such as a cleft palate, bifid uterus, etc.
, are frequently accompanied by polydactylism.
This has been strongly insisted on by Meckel and Isidore Geoffroy St.-Hilaire.
But at present it is the safest course to give up altogether the idea that there is any relation between the development of supernumerary digits and reversion to some lowly organised progenitor of man.
) There are other cases which come more strictly under our present head of reversion.
Certain structures, regularly occurring in the lower members of the group to which man belongs, occasionally make their appearance in him, though not found in the normal human embryo; or, if normally present in the human embryo, they become abnormally
These remarks will be rendered clearer by the following illustrations.
In various mammals the uterus graduates from a double organ with two distinct orifices and two passages, as in the marsupials, into a single organ, which is in no way double except from having a slight internal fold, as in the higher apes and man.
The rodents exhibit a perfect series of gradations between these two extreme states.
In all mammals the uterus is developed from two simple primitive tubes, the inferior portions of which form the cornua; and it is in the words of Dr. Farre, "by the coalescence of the two cornua at their lower extremities that the body of the uterus is
As the development of the uterus proceeds, the two cornua become gradually shorter, until at length they are lost, or, as it were, absorbed into the body of the uterus".
The angles of the uterus are still produced into cornua, even in animals as high up in the scale as the lower apes and lemurs.
Now in women, anomalous cases are not very infrequent, in which the mature uterus is furnished with cornua, or is partially divided into two organs; and such cases, according to Owen, repeat "the grade of concentrative development," attained by certain
Here perhaps we have an instance of a simple arrest of embryonic development, with subsequent growth and perfect functional development; for either side of the partially double uterus is capable of performing the proper office of gestation.
In other and rarer cases, two distinct uterine cavities are formed, each having its proper orifice and passage.
(39.
See Dr. A. Farre's well-known article in the 'Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology,' vol.
v.
1859, p.
642.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
1868, p.
687.
Professor Turner, in 'Edinburgh Medical Journal,' February, 1865.
) No such stage is passed through during the ordinary development of the embryo; and it is difficult to believe, though perhaps not impossible, that the two simple, minute, primitive tubes should know how (if such an expression may be used) to grow into
No one will pretend that so perfect a structure as the abnormal double uterus in woman could be the result of mere chance.
But the principle of reversion, by which a long-lost structure is called back into existence, might serve as the guide for its full development, even after the lapse of an enormous interval of time.
Professor Canestrini, after discussing the foregoing and various analogous cases, arrives at the same conclusion as that just given.
He adduces another instance, in the case of the malar bone (40.
'Annuario della Soc.
dei Naturalisti,' Modena, 1867, p.
83.
Prof.
Canestrini gives extracts on this subject from various authorities.
Laurillard remarks, that as he has found a complete similarity in the form, proportions, and connection of the two malar bones in several human subjects and in certain apes, he cannot consider this disposition of the parts as simply accidental.
Another paper on this same anomaly has been published by Dr. Saviotti in the 'Gazzetta delle Cliniche,' Turin, 1871, where he says that traces of the division may be detected in about two per cent.
of adult skulls; he also remarks that it more frequently occurs in prognathous skulls, not of the Aryan race, than in others.
See also G. Delorenzi on the same subject; 'Tre nuovi casi d'anomalia dell' osso malare,' Torino, 1872.
Also, E. Morselli, 'Sopra una rara anomalia dell' osso malare,' Modena, 1872.
Still more recently Gruber has written a pamphlet on the division of this bone.
I give these references because a reviewer, without any grounds or scruples, has thrown doubts on my statements.
), which, in some of the Quadrumana and other mammals, normally consists of two portions.
This is its condition in the human foetus when two months old; and through arrested development, it sometimes remains thus in man when adult, more especially in the lower prognathous races.
Hence Canestrini concludes that some ancient progenitor of man must have had this bone normally divided into two portions, which afterwards became fused together.
In man the frontal bone consists of a single piece, but in the embryo, and in children, and in almost all the lower mammals, it consists of two pieces separated by a distinct suture.
This suture occasionally persists more or less distinctly in man after maturity; and more frequently in ancient than in recent crania, especially, as Canestrini has observed, in those exhumed from the Drift, and belonging to the brachycephalic type.
Here again he comes to the same conclusion as in the analogous case of the malar bones.
In this, and other instances presently to be given, the cause of ancient races approaching the lower animals in certain characters more frequently than do the modern races, appears to be, that the latter stand at a somewhat greater distance in the long
Various other anomalies in man, more or less analogous to the foregoing, have been advanced by different authors, as cases of reversion; but these seem not a little doubtful, for we have to descend extremely low in the mammalian series, before we find such
(41.
A whole series of cases is given by Isidore Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, 'Hist.
des Anomalies,' tom, iii, p.
437.
A reviewer ('Journal of Anatomy and Physiology,' 1871, p.
366) blames me much for not having discussed the numerous cases, which have been recorded, of various parts arrested in their development.
He says that, according to my theory, "every transient condition of an organ, during its development, is not only a means to an end, but once was an end in itself".
This does not seem to me necessarily to hold good.
Why should not variations occur during an early period of development, having no relation to reversion; yet such variations might be preserved and accumulated, if in any way serviceable, for instance, in shortening and simplifying the course of
And again, why should not injurious abnormalities, such as atrophied or hypertrophied parts, which have no relation to a former state of existence, occur at an early period, as well as during maturity?
) In man, the canine teeth are perfectly efficient instruments for mastication.
But their true canine character, as Owen (42.
'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
1868, p.
323.
) remarks, "is indicated by the conical form of the crown, which terminates in an obtuse point, is convex outward and flat or sub-concave within, at the base of which surface there is a feeble prominence.
The conical form is best expressed in the Melanian races, especially the Australian.
The canine is more deeply implanted, and by a stronger fang than the incisors".
Nevertheless, this tooth no longer serves man as a special weapon for tearing his enemies or prey; it may, therefore, as far as its proper function is concerned, be considered as rudimentary.
In every large collection of human skulls some may be found, as Haeckel (43.
'Generelle Morphologie,' 1866, B. ii.
s.
clv.
) observes, with the canine teeth projecting considerably beyond the others in the same manner as in the anthropomorphous apes, but in a less degree.
In these cases, open spaces between the teeth in the one jaw are left for the reception of the canines of the opposite jaw.
An inter-space of this kind in a Kaffir skull, figured by Wagner, is surprisingly wide.
(44.
Carl Vogt's 'Lectures on Man,' Eng.
translat.
, 1864, p.
151.
) Considering how few are the ancient skulls which have been examined, compared to recent skulls, it is an interesting fact that in at least three cases the canines project largely; and in the Naulette jaw they are spoken of as enormous.
(45.
C. Carter Blake, on a jaw from La Naulette, 'Anthropological Review,' 1867, p.
295.
Schaaffhausen, ibid.
1868, p.
426.
) Of the anthropomorphous apes the males alone have their canines fully developed; but in the female gorilla, and in a less degree in the female orang, these teeth project considerably beyond the others; therefore the fact, of which I have been assured,
He who rejects with scorn the belief that the shape of his own canines, and their occasional great development in other men, are due to our early forefathers having been provided with these formidable weapons, will probably reveal, by sneering, the line of
For though he no longer intends, nor has the power, to use these teeth as weapons, he will unconsciously retract his "snarling muscles" (thus named by Sir C. Bell) (46.
The Anatomy of Expression, 1844, pp.
110, 131.
), so as to expose them ready for action, like a dog prepared to fight.
Many muscles are occasionally developed in man, which are proper to the Quadrumana or other mammals.
Professor Vlacovich (47.
Quoted by Prof.
Canestrini in the 'Annuario della Soc.
dei Naturalisti,' 1867, p.
90.
) examined forty male subjects, and found a muscle, called by him the ischio- pubic, in nineteen of them; in three others there was a ligament which represented this muscle; and in the remaining eighteen no trace of it.
In only two out of thirty female subjects was this muscle developed on both sides, but in three others the rudimentary ligament was present.
This muscle, therefore, appears to be much more common in the male than in the female sex; and on the belief in the descent of man from some lower form, the fact is intelligible; for it has been detected in several of the lower animals, and in all of these
Mr. J. Wood, in his valuable series of papers (48.
These papers deserve careful study by any one who desires to learn how frequently our muscles vary, and in varying come to resemble those of the Quadrumana.
The following references relate to the few points touched on in my text: 'Proc.
Royal Soc.
' vol.
xiv.
1865, pp.
379-384; vol.
xv.
1866, pp.
241, 242; vol.
xv.
1867, p.
544; vol.
xvi.
1868, p.
524.
I may here add that Dr. Murie and Mr. St. George Mivart have shewn in their Memoir on the Lemuroidea ('Transactions, Zoological Society,' vol.
vii.
1869, p.
96), how extraordinarily variable some of the muscles are in these animals, the lowest members of the Primates.
Gradations, also, in the muscles leading to structures found in animals still lower in the scale, are numerous in the Lemuroidea.
), has minutely described a vast number of muscular variations in man, which resemble normal structures in the lower animals.
The muscles which closely resemble those regularly present in our nearest allies, the Quadrumana, are too numerous to be here even specified.
In a single male subject, having a strong bodily frame, and well-formed skull, no less than seven muscular variations were observed, all of which plainly represented muscles proper to various kinds of apes.
This man, for instance, had on both sides of his neck a true and powerful "levator claviculae," such as is found in all kinds of apes, and which is said to occur in about one out of sixty human subjects.
(49.
See also Prof.
Macalister in 'Proceedings, Royal Irish Academy,' vol.
x.
1868, p.
124.
) Again, this man had "a special abductor of the metatarsal bone of the fifth digit, such as Professor Huxley and Mr. Flower have shewn to exist uniformly in the higher and lower apes".
I will give only two additional cases; the acromio-basilar muscle is found in all mammals below man, and seems to be correlated with a quadrupedal gait, (50.
Mr. Champneys in 'Journal of Anatomy and Physiology,' Nov.
1871, p.
178.
) and it occurs in about one out of sixty human subjects.
In the lower extremities Mr. Bradley (51.
Ibid.
May 1872, p.
421.
) found an abductor ossis metatarsi quinti in both feet of man; this muscle had not up to that time been recorded in mankind, but is always present in the anthropomorphous apes.
The muscles of the hands and arms--parts which are so eminently characteristic of man--are extremely liable to vary, so as to resemble the corresponding muscles in the lower animals.
(52.
Prof.
Macalister (ibid.
p.
121) has tabulated his observations, and finds that muscular abnormalities are most frequent in the fore-arms, secondly, in the face, thirdly, in the foot, etc.
) Such resemblances are either perfect or imperfect; yet in the latter case they are manifestly of a transitional nature.
Certain variations are more common in man, and others in woman, without our being able to assign any reason.
Mr. Wood, after describing numerous variations, makes the following pregnant remark.
"Notable departures from the ordinary type of the muscular structures run in grooves or directions, which must be taken to indicate some unknown factor, of much importance to a comprehensive knowledge of general and scientific anatomy".
(53.
The Rev.
Dr. Haughton, after giving ('Proc.
R. Irish Academy,' June 27, 1864, p.
715) a remarkable case of variation in the human flexor pollicis longus, adds, "This remarkable example shews that man may sometimes possess the arrangement of tendons of thumb and fingers characteristic of the macaque; but whether such a case should be
It is satisfactory to hear so capable an anatomist, and so embittered an opponent of evolutionism, admitting even the possibility of either of his first propositions.
Prof.
Macalister has also described ('Proceedings Royal Irish Academy,' vol.
x.
1864, p.
138) variations in the flexor pollicis longus, remarkable from their relations to the same muscle in the Quadrumana.
) That this unknown factor is reversion to a former state of existence may be admitted as in the highest degree probable.
(54.
Since the first edition of this book appeared, Mr. Wood has published another memoir in the Philosophical Transactions, 1870, p.
83, on the varieties of the muscles of the human neck, shoulder, and chest.
He here shews how extremely variable these muscles are, and how often and how closely the variations resemble the normal muscles of the lower animals.
He sums up by remarking, "It will be enough for my purpose if I have succeeded in shewing the more important forms which, when occurring as varieties in the human subject, tend to exhibit in a sufficiently marked manner what may be considered as proofs and
) It is quite incredible that a man should through mere accident abnormally resemble certain apes in no less than seven of his muscles, if there had been no genetic connection between them.
On the other hand, if man is descended from some ape-like creature, no valid reason can be assigned why certain muscles should not suddenly reappear after an interval of many thousand generations, in the same manner as with horses, asses, and mules, dark-
These various cases of reversion are so closely related to those of rudimentary organs given in the first chapter, that many of them might have been indifferently introduced either there or here.
Thus a human uterus furnished with cornua may be said to represent, in a rudimentary condition, the same organ in its normal state in certain mammals.
Some parts which are rudimentary in man, as the os coccyx in both sexes, and the mammae in the male sex, are always present; whilst others, such as the supracondyloid foramen, only occasionally appear, and therefore might have been introduced under the
These several reversionary structures, as well as the strictly rudimentary ones, reveal the descent of man from some lower form in an unmistakable manner.
CORRELATED VARIATION.
In man, as in the lower animals, many structures are so intimately related, that when one part varies so does another, without our being able, in most cases, to assign any reason.
We cannot say whether the one part governs the other, or whether both are governed by some earlier developed part.
Various monstrosities, as I. Geoffroy repeatedly insists, are thus intimately connected.
Homologous structures are particularly liable to change together, as we see on the opposite sides of the body, and in the upper and lower extremities.
Meckel long ago remarked, that when the muscles of the arm depart from their proper type, they almost always imitate those of the leg; and so, conversely, with the muscles of the legs.
The organs of sight and hearing, the teeth and hair, the colour of the skin and of the hair, colour and constitution, are more or less correlated.
(55.
The authorities for these several statements are given in my 'Variation of Animals under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
pp.
320-335.
) Professor Schaaffhausen first drew attention to the relation apparently existing between a muscular frame and the strongly-pronounced supra-orbital ridges, which are so characteristic of the lower races of man.
Besides the variations which can be grouped with more or less probability under the foregoing heads, there is a large class of variations which may be provisionally called spontaneous, for to our ignorance they appear to arise without any exciting cause.
It can, however, be shewn that such variations, whether consisting of slight individual differences, or of strongly-marked and abrupt deviations of structure, depend much more on the constitution of the organism than on the nature of the conditions to
(56.
This whole subject has been discussed in chap.
xxiii.
vol.
ii.
of my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication.
') RATE OF INCREASE.
Civilised populations have been known under favourable conditions, as in the United States, to double their numbers in twenty-five years; and, according to a calculation, by Euler, this might occur in a little over twelve years.
(57.
See the ever memorable 'Essay on the Principle of Population,' by the Rev.
T. Malthus, vol.
i.
1826.
pp.
6, 517.
) At the former rate, the present population of the United States (thirty millions), would in 657 years cover the whole terraqueous globe so thickly, that four men would have to stand on each square yard of surface.
The primary or fundamental check to the continued increase of man is the difficulty of gaining subsistence, and of living in comfort.
We may infer that this is the case from what we see, for instance, in the United States, where subsistence is easy, and there is plenty of room.
If such means were suddenly doubled in Great Britain, our number would be quickly doubled.
With civilised nations this primary check acts chiefly by restraining marriages.
The greater death-rate of infants in the poorest classes is also very important; as well as the greater mortality, from various diseases, of the inhabitants of crowded and miserable houses, at all ages.
The effects of severe epidemics and wars are soon counterbalanced, and more than counterbalanced, in nations placed under favourable conditions.
Emigration also comes in aid as a temporary check, but, with the extremely poor classes, not to any great extent.
There is reason to suspect, as Malthus has remarked, that the reproductive power is actually less in barbarous, than in civilised races.
We know nothing positively on this head, for with savages no census has been taken; but from the concurrent testimony of missionaries, and of others who have long resided with such people, it appears that their families are usually small, and large ones
This may be partly accounted for, as it is believed, by the women suckling their infants during a long time; but it is highly probable that savages, who often suffer much hardship, and who do not obtain so much nutritious food as civilised men, would be
I have shewn in a former work (58.
'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol ii.
pp.
111-113, 163.
), that all our domesticated quadrupeds and birds, and all our cultivated plants, are more fertile than the corresponding species in a state of nature.
It is no valid objection to this conclusion that animals suddenly supplied with an excess of food, or when grown very fat; and that most plants on sudden removal from very poor to very rich soil, are rendered more or less sterile.
We might, therefore, expect that civilised men, who in one sense are highly domesticated, would be more prolific than wild men.
It is also probable that the increased fertility of civilised nations would become, as with our domestic animals, an inherited character: it is at least known that with mankind a tendency to produce twins runs in families.
(59.
Mr. Sedgwick, 'British and Foreign Medico-Chirurgical Review,' July 1863, p.
170.
) Notwithstanding that savages appear to be less prolific than civilised people, they would no doubt rapidly increase if their numbers were not by some means rigidly kept down.
The Santali, or hill-tribes of India, have recently afforded a good illustration of this fact; for, as shewn by Mr. Hunter (60.
'The Annals of Rural Bengal,' by W.W. Hunter, 1868, p.
259.
), they have increased at an extraordinary rate since vaccination has been introduced, other pestilences mitigated, and war sternly repressed.
This increase, however, would not have been possible had not these rude people spread into the adjoining districts, and worked for hire.
Savages almost always marry; yet there is some prudential restraint, for they do not commonly marry at the earliest possible age.
The young men are often required to shew that they can support a wife; and they generally have first to earn the price with which to purchase her from her parents.
With savages the difficulty of obtaining subsistence occasionally limits their number in a much more direct manner than with civilised people, for all tribes periodically suffer from severe famines.
At such times savages are forced to devour much bad food, and their health can hardly fail to be injured.
Many accounts have been published of their protruding stomachs and emaciated limbs after and during famines.
They are then, also, compelled to wander much, and, as I was assured in Australia, their infants perish in large numbers.
As famines are periodical, depending chiefly on extreme seasons, all tribes must fluctuate in number.
They cannot steadily and regularly increase, as there is no artificial increase in the supply of food.
Savages, when hard pressed, encroach on each other's territories, and war is the result; but they are indeed almost always at war with their neighbours.
They are liable to many accidents on land and water in their search for food; and in some countries they suffer much from the larger beasts of prey.
Even in India, districts have been depopulated by the ravages of tigers.
Malthus has discussed these several checks, but he does not lay stress enough on what is probably the most important of all, namely infanticide, especially of female infants, and the habit of procuring abortion.
These practices now prevail in many quarters of the world; and infanticide seems formerly to have prevailed, as Mr. M'Lennan (61.
'Primitive Marriage,' 1865.
) has shewn, on a still more extensive scale.
These practices appear to have originated in savages recognising the difficulty, or rather the impossibility of supporting all the infants that are born.
Licentiousness may also be added to the foregoing checks; but this does not follow from failing means of subsistence; though there is reason to believe that in some cases (as in Japan) it has been intentionally encouraged as a means of keeping down the
If we look back to an extremely remote epoch, before man had arrived at the dignity of manhood, he would have been guided more by instinct and less by reason than are the lowest savages at the present time.
Our early semi- human progenitors would not have practised infanticide or polyandry; for the instincts of the lower animals are never so perverted (62.
A writer in the 'Spectator' (March 12, 1871, p.
320) comments as follows on this passage:--"Mr. Darwin finds himself compelled to reintroduce a new doctrine of the fall of man.
He shews that the instincts of the higher animals are far nobler than the habits of savage races of men, and he finds himself, therefore, compelled to re-introduce,--in a form of the substantial orthodoxy of which he appears to be quite unconscious,--and
What does the Jewish tradition of the moral degeneration of man through his snatching at a knowledge forbidden him by his highest instinct assert beyond this"?
) as to lead them regularly to destroy their own offspring, or to be quite devoid of jealousy.
There would have been no prudential restraint from marriage, and the sexes would have freely united at an early age.
Hence the progenitors of man would have tended to increase rapidly; but checks of some kind, either periodical or constant, must have kept down their numbers, even more severely than with existing savages.
What the precise nature of these checks were, we cannot say, any more than with most other animals.
We know that horses and cattle, which are not extremely prolific animals, when first turned loose in South America, increased at an enormous rate.
The elephant, the slowest breeder of all known animals, would in a few thousand years stock the whole world.
The increase of every species of monkey must be checked by some means; but not, as Brehm remarks, by the attacks of beasts of prey.
No one will assume that the actual power of reproduction in the wild horses and cattle of America, was at first in any sensible degree increased; or that, as each district became fully stocked, this same power was diminished.
No doubt, in this case, and in all others, many checks concur, and different checks under different circumstances; periodical dearths, depending on unfavourable seasons, being probably the most important of all.
So it will have been with the early progenitors of man.
NATURAL SELECTION.
We have now seen that man is variable in body and mind; and that the variations are induced, either directly or indirectly, by the same general causes, and obey the same general laws, as with the lower animals.
Man has spread widely over the face of the earth, and must have been exposed, during his incessant migrations (63.
See some good remarks to this effect by W. Stanley Jevons, "A Deduction from Darwin's Theory," 'Nature,' 1869, p.
231.
), to the most diversified conditions.
The inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego, the Cape of Good Hope, and Tasmania in the one hemisphere, and of the arctic regions in the other, must have passed through many climates, and changed their habits many times, before they reached their present homes.
(64.
Latham, 'Man and his Migrations,' 1851, p.
135.
) The early progenitors of man must also have tended, like all other animals, to have increased beyond their means of subsistence; they must, therefore, occasionally have been exposed to a struggle for existence, and consequently to the rigid law of
Beneficial variations of all kinds will thus, either occasionally or habitually, have been preserved and injurious ones eliminated.
I do not refer to strongly-marked deviations of structure, which occur only at long intervals of time, but to mere individual differences.
We know, for instance, that the muscles of our hands and feet, which determine our powers of movement, are liable, like those of the lower animals, (65.
Messrs.
Murie and Mivart in their 'Anatomy of the Lemuroidea' ('Transact.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' vol.
vii.
1869, pp.
96-98) say, "some muscles are so irregular in their distribution that they cannot be well classed in any of the above groups".
These muscles differ even on the opposite sides of the same individual.
) to incessant variability.
If then the progenitors of man inhabiting any district, especially one undergoing some change in its conditions, were divided into two equal bodies, the one half which included all the individuals best adapted by their powers of movement for gaining
Man in the rudest state in which he now exists is the most dominant animal that has ever appeared on this earth.
He has spread more widely than any other highly organised form: and all others have yielded before him.
He manifestly owes this immense superiority to his intellectual faculties, to his social habits, which lead him to aid and defend his fellows, and to his corporeal structure.
The supreme importance of these characters has been proved by the final arbitrament of the battle for life.
Through his powers of intellect, articulate language has been evolved; and on this his wonderful advancement has mainly depended.
As Mr. Chauncey Wright remarks (66.
Limits of Natural Selection, 'North American Review,' Oct.
1870, p.
295.
): "a psychological analysis of the faculty of language shews, that even the smallest proficiency in it might require more brain power than the greatest proficiency in any other direction".
He has invented and is able to use various weapons, tools, traps, etc.
, with which he defends himself, kills or catches prey, and otherwise obtains food.
He has made rafts or canoes for fishing or crossing over to neighbouring fertile islands.
He has discovered the art of making fire, by which hard and stringy roots can be rendered digestible, and poisonous roots or herbs innocuous.
This discovery of fire, probably the greatest ever made by man, excepting language, dates from before the dawn of history.
These several inventions, by which man in the rudest state has become so pre-eminent, are the direct results of the development of his powers of observation, memory, curiosity, imagination, and reason.
I cannot, therefore, understand how it is that Mr. Wallace (67.
'Quarterly Review,' April 1869, p.
392.
This subject is more fully discussed in Mr. Wallace's 'Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection,' 1870, in which all the essays referred to in this work are re-published.
The 'Essay on Man,' has been ably criticised by Prof.
Claparede, one of the most distinguished zoologists in Europe, in an article published in the 'Bibliotheque Universelle,' June 1870.
The remark quoted in my text will surprise every one who has read Mr. Wallace's celebrated paper on 'The Origin of Human Races Deduced from the Theory of Natural Selection,' originally published in the 'Anthropological Review,' May 1864, p.
clviii.
I cannot here resist quoting a most just remark by Sir J. Lubbock ('Prehistoric Times,' 1865, p.
479) in reference to this paper, namely, that Mr. Wallace, "with characteristic unselfishness, ascribes it (i.
e.
the idea of natural selection) unreservedly to Mr. Darwin, although, as is well known, he struck out the idea independently, and published it, though not with the same elaboration, at the same time".
) maintains, that "natural selection could only have endowed the savage with a brain a little superior to that of an ape".
Although the intellectual powers and social habits of man are of paramount importance to him, we must not underrate the importance of his bodily structure, to which subject the remainder of this chapter will be devoted; the development of the intellectual
Even to hammer with precision is no easy matter, as every one who has tried to learn carpentry will admit.
To throw a stone with as true an aim as a Fuegian in defending himself, or in killing birds, requires the most consummate perfection in the correlated action of the muscles of the hand, arm, and shoulder, and, further, a fine sense of touch.
In throwing a stone or spear, and in many other actions, a man must stand firmly on his feet; and this again demands the perfect co-adaptation of numerous muscles.
To chip a flint into the rudest tool, or to form a barbed spear or hook from a bone, demands the use of a perfect hand; for, as a most capable judge, Mr. Schoolcraft (68.
Quoted by Mr. Lawson Tait in his 'Law of Natural Selection,' 'Dublin Quarterly Journal of Medical Science,' Feb.
1869.
Dr. Keller is likewise quoted to the same effect.
), remarks, the shaping fragments of stone into knives, lances, or arrow-heads, shews "extraordinary ability and long practice".
This is to a great extent proved by the fact that primeval men practised a division of labour; each man did not manufacture his own flint tools or rude pottery, but certain individuals appear to have devoted themselves to such work, no doubt receiving in
Archaeologists are convinced that an enormous interval of time elapsed before our ancestors thought of grinding chipped flints into smooth tools.
One can hardly doubt, that a man-like animal who possessed a hand and arm sufficiently perfect to throw a stone with precision, or to form a flint into a rude tool, could, with sufficient practice, as far as mechanical skill alone is concerned, make almost
The structure of the hand in this respect may be compared with that of the vocal organs, which in the apes are used for uttering various signal-cries, or, as in one genus, musical cadences; but in man the closely similar vocal organs have become adapted
Turning now to the nearest allies of men, and therefore to the best representatives of our early progenitors, we find that the hands of the Quadrumana are constructed on the same general pattern as our own, but are far less perfectly adapted for
Their hands do not serve for locomotion so well as the feet of a dog; as may be seen in such monkeys as the chimpanzee and orang, which walk on the outer margins of the palms, or on the knuckles.
(69.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
71.
) Their hands, however, are admirably adapted for climbing trees.
Monkeys seize thin branches or ropes, with the thumb on one side and the fingers and palm on the other, in the same manner as we do.
They can thus also lift rather large objects, such as the neck of a bottle, to their mouths.
Baboons turn over stones, and scratch up roots with their hands.
They seize nuts, insects, or other small objects with the thumb in opposition to the fingers, and no doubt they thus extract eggs and young from the nests of birds.
American monkeys beat the wild oranges on the branches until the rind is cracked, and then tear it off with the fingers of the two hands.
In a wild state they break open hard fruits with stones.
Other monkeys open mussel-shells with the two thumbs.
With their fingers they pull out thorns and burs, and hunt for each other's parasites.
They roll down stones, or throw them at their enemies: nevertheless, they are clumsy in these various actions, and, as I have myself seen, are quite unable to throw a stone with precision.
It seems to me far from true that because "objects are grasped clumsily" by monkeys, "a much less specialised organ of prehension" would have served them (70.
'Quarterly Review,' April 1869, p.
392.
) equally well with their present hands.
On the contrary, I see no reason to doubt that more perfectly constructed hands would have been an advantage to them, provided that they were not thus rendered less fitted for climbing trees.
We may suspect that a hand as perfect as that of man would have been disadvantageous for climbing; for the most arboreal monkeys in the world, namely, Ateles in America, Colobus in Africa, and Hylobates in Asia, are either thumbless, or their toes
(71.
In Hylobates syndactylus, as the name expresses, two of the toes regularly cohere; and this, as Mr. Blyth informs me, is occasionally the case with the toes of H. agilis, lar, and leuciscus.
Colobus is strictly arboreal and extraordinarily active (Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. i.
s.
50), but whether a better climber than the species of the allied genera, I do not know.
It deserves notice that the feet of the sloths, the most arboreal animals in the world, are wonderfully hook- like.
As soon as some ancient member in the great series of the Primates came to be less arboreal, owing to a change in its manner of procuring subsistence, or to some change in the surrounding conditions, its habitual manner of progression would have been
Baboons frequent hilly and rocky districts, and only from necessity climb high trees (72.
Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. i.
s.
80.
); and they have acquired almost the gait of a dog.
Man alone has become a biped; and we can, I think, partly see how he has come to assume his erect attitude, which forms one of his most conspicuous characters.
Man could not have attained his present dominant position in the world without the use of his hands, which are so admirably adapted to act in obedience to his will.
Sir C. Bell (73.
'The Hand,' etc.
, 'Bridgewater Treatise,' 1833, p.
38.
) insists that "the hand supplies all instruments, and by its correspondence with the intellect gives him universal dominion".
But the hands and arms could hardly have become perfect enough to have manufactured weapons, or to have hurled stones and spears with a true aim, as long as they were habitually used for locomotion and for supporting the whole weight of the body, or, as
Such rough treatment would also have blunted the sense of touch, on which their delicate use largely depends.
From these causes alone it would have been an advantage to man to become a biped; but for many actions it is indispensable that the arms and whole upper part of the body should be free; and he must for this end stand firmly on his feet.
To gain this great advantage, the feet have been rendered flat; and the great toe has been peculiarly modified, though this has entailed the almost complete loss of its power of prehension.
It accords with the principle of the division of physiological labour, prevailing throughout the animal kingdom, that as the hands became perfected for prehension, the feet should have become perfected for support and locomotion.
With some savages, however, the foot has not altogether lost its prehensile power, as shewn by their manner of climbing trees, and of using them in other ways.
(74.
Haeckel has an excellent discussion on the steps by which man became a biped: 'Natrliche Schpfungsgeschichte,' 1868, s.
507.
Dr. Buchner ('Confrences sur la Thorie Darwinienne,' 1869, p.
135) has given good cases of the use of the foot as a prehensile organ by man; and has also written on the manner of progression of the higher apes, to which I allude in the following paragraph: see also Owen ('Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
71) on this latter subject.
If it be an advantage to man to stand firmly on his feet and to have his hands and arms free, of which, from his pre-eminent success in the battle of life there can be no doubt, then I can see no reason why it should not have been advantageous to the
They would thus have been better able to defend themselves with stones or clubs, to attack their prey, or otherwise to obtain food.
The best built individuals would in the long run have succeeded best, and have survived in larger numbers.
If the gorilla and a few allied forms had become extinct, it might have been argued, with great force and apparent truth, that an animal could not have been gradually converted from a quadruped into a biped, as all the individuals in an intermediate
But we know (and this is well worthy of reflection) that the anthropomorphous apes are now actually in an intermediate condition; and no one doubts that they are on the whole well adapted for their conditions of life.
Thus the gorilla runs with a sidelong shambling gait, but more commonly progresses by resting on its bent hands.
The long-armed apes occasionally use their arms like crutches, swinging their bodies forward between them, and some kinds of Hylobates, without having been taught, can walk or run upright with tolerable quickness; yet they move awkwardly, and much less
We see, in short, in existing monkeys a manner of progression intermediate between that of a quadruped and a biped; but, as an unprejudiced judge (75.
Prof.
Broca, La Constitution des Vertbres caudales; 'La Revue d'Anthropologie,' 1872, p.
26, (separate copy).
) insists, the anthropomorphous apes approach in structure more nearly to the bipedal than to the quadrupedal type.
As the progenitors of man became more and more erect, with their hands and arms more and more modified for prehension and other purposes, with their feet and legs at the same time transformed for firm support and progression, endless other changes of
The pelvis would have to be broadened, the spine peculiarly curved, and the head fixed in an altered position, all which changes have been attained by man.
Prof.
Schaaffhausen (76.
'On the Primitive Form of the Skull,' translated in 'Anthropological Review,' Oct.
1868, p.
428.
Owen ('Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
ii.
1866, p.
551) on the mastoid processes in the higher apes.
) maintains that "the powerful mastoid processes of the human skull are the result of his erect position;" and these processes are absent in the orang, chimpanzee, etc.
, and are smaller in the gorilla than in man.
Various other structures, which appear connected with man's erect position, might here have been added.
It is very difficult to decide how far these correlated modifications are the result of natural selection, and how far of the inherited effects of the increased use of certain parts, or of the action of one part on another.
No doubt these means of change often co-operate: thus when certain muscles, and the crests of bone to which they are attached, become enlarged by habitual use, this shews that certain actions are habitually performed and must be serviceable.
Hence the individuals which performed them best, would tend to survive in greater numbers.
The free use of the arms and hands, partly the cause and partly the result of man's erect position, appears to have led in an indirect manner to other modifications of structure.
The early male forefathers of man were, as previously stated, probably furnished with great canine teeth; but as they gradually acquired the habit of using stones, clubs, or other weapons, for fighting with their enemies or rivals, they would use their
In this case, the jaws, together with the teeth, would become reduced in size, as we may feel almost sure from innumerable analogous cases.
In a future chapter we shall meet with a closely parallel case, in the reduction or complete disappearance of the canine teeth in male ruminants, apparently in relation with the development of their horns; and in horses, in relation to their habit of
In the adult male anthropomorphous apes, as Rutimeyer (77.
'Die Grenzen der Thierwelt, eine Betrachtung zu Darwin's Lehre,' 1868, s.
51.
), and others, have insisted, it is the effect on the skull of the great development of the jaw-muscles that causes it to differ so greatly in many respects from that of man, and has given to these animals "a truly frightful physiognomy".
Therefore, as the jaws and teeth in man's progenitors gradually become reduced in size, the adult skull would have come to resemble more and more that of existing man.
As we shall hereafter see, a great reduction of the canine teeth in the males would almost certainly affect the teeth of the females through inheritance.
As the various mental faculties gradually developed themselves the brain would almost certainly become larger.
No one, I presume, doubts that the large proportion which the size of man's brain bears to his body, compared to the same proportion in the gorilla or orang, is closely connected with his higher mental powers.
We meet with closely analogous facts with insects, for in ants the cerebral ganglia are of extraordinary dimensions, and in all the Hymenoptera these ganglia are many times larger than in the less intelligent orders, such as beetles.
(78.
Dujardin, 'Annales des Sciences Nat.
' 3rd series, Zoolog.
, tom.
xiv.
1850, p.
203.
See also Mr. Lowne, 'Anatomy and Phys.
of the Musca vomitoria,' 1870, p.
14.
My son, Mr. F. Darwin, dissected for me the cerebral ganglia of the Formica rufa.
) On the other hand, no one supposes that the intellect of any two animals or of any two men can be accurately gauged by the cubic contents of their skulls.
It is certain that there may be extraordinary mental activity with an extremely small absolute mass of nervous matter: thus the wonderfully diversified instincts, mental powers, and affections of ants are notorious, yet their cerebral ganglia are not so
Under this point of view, the brain of an ant is one of the most marvellous atoms of matter in the world, perhaps more so than the brain of a man.
The belief that there exists in man some close relation between the size of the brain and the development of the intellectual faculties is supported by the comparison of the skulls of savage and civilised races, of ancient and modern people, and by the
Dr. J. Barnard Davis has proved (79.
'Philosophical Transactions,' 1869, p.
513.
), by many careful measurements, that the mean internal capacity of the skull in Europeans is 92.
3 cubic inches; in Americans 87.
5; in Asiatics 87.
1; and in Australians only 81.
9 cubic inches.
Professor Broca (80.
'Les Selections,' M. P. Broca, 'Revue d'Anthropologies,' 1873; see also, as quoted in C. Vogt's 'Lectures on Man,' Engl.
translat.
, 1864, pp.
88, 90.
Prichard, 'Physical History of Mankind,' vol.
i.
1838, p.
305.
) found that the nineteenth century skulls from graves in Paris were larger than those from vaults of the twelfth century, in the proportion of 1484 to 1426; and that the increased size, as ascertained by measurements, was exclusively in the frontal part
Prichard is persuaded that the present inhabitants of Britain have "much more capacious brain-cases" than the ancient inhabitants.
Nevertheless, it must be admitted that some skulls of very high antiquity, such as the famous one of Neanderthal, are well developed and capacious.
(81.
In the interesting article just referred to, Prof.
Broca has well remarked, that in civilised nations, the average capacity of the skull must be lowered by the preservation of a considerable number of individuals, weak in mind and body, who would have been promptly eliminated in the savage state.
On the other hand, with savages, the average includes only the more capable individuals, who have been able to survive under extremely hard conditions of life.
Broca thus explains the otherwise inexplicable fact, that the mean capacity of the skull of the ancient Troglodytes of Lozere is greater than that of modern Frenchmen.
) With respect to the lower animals, M.E. Lartet (82.
'Comptes-rendus des Sciences,' etc.
, June 1, 1868.
), by comparing the crania of tertiary and recent mammals belonging to the same groups, has come to the remarkable conclusion that the brain is generally larger and the convolutions are more complex in the more recent forms.
On the other hand, I have shewn (83.
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
pp.
124-129.
) that the brains of domestic rabbits are considerably reduced in bulk, in comparison with those of the wild rabbit or hare; and this may be attributed to their having been closely confined during many generations, so that they have exerted their
The gradually increasing weight of the brain and skull in man must have influenced the development of the supporting spinal column, more especially whilst he was becoming erect.
As this change of position was being brought about, the internal pressure of the brain will also have influenced the form of the skull; for many facts shew how easily the skull is thus affected.
Ethnologists believe that it is modified by the kind of cradle in which infants sleep.
Habitual spasms of the muscles, and a cicatrix from a severe burn, have permanently modified the facial bones.
In young persons whose heads have become fixed either sideways or backwards, owing to disease, one of the two eyes has changed its position, and the shape of the skull has been altered apparently by the pressure of the brain in a new direction.
(84.
Schaaffhausen gives from Blumenbach and Busch, the cases of the spasms and cicatrix, in 'Anthropological Review,' Oct.
1868, p.
420.
Dr. Jarrold ('Anthropologia,' 1808, pp.
115, 116) adduces from Camper and from his own observations, cases of the modification of the skull from the head being fixed in an unnatural position.
He believes that in certain trades, such as that of a shoemaker, where the head is habitually held forward, the forehead becomes more rounded and prominent.
) I have shewn that with long-eared rabbits even so trifling a cause as the lopping forward of one ear drags forward almost every bone of the skull on that side; so that the bones on the opposite side no longer strictly correspond.
Lastly, if any animal were to increase or diminish much in general size, without any change in its mental powers, or if the mental powers were to be much increased or diminished, without any great change in the size of the body, the shape of the skull
I infer this from my observations on domestic rabbits, some kinds of which have become very much larger than the wild animal, whilst others have retained nearly the same size, but in both cases the brain has been much reduced relatively to the size of the
Now I was at first much surprised on finding that in all these rabbits the skull had become elongated or dolichocephalic; for instance, of two skulls of nearly equal breadth, the one from a wild rabbit and the other from a large domestic kind, the former
15 and the latter 4.
3 inches in length.
(85.
'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
117, on the elongation of the skull; p.
119, on the effect of the lopping of one ear.
) One of the most marked distinctions in different races of men is that the skull in some is elongated, and in others rounded; and here the explanation suggested by the case of the rabbits may hold good; for Welcker finds that short "men incline more to
Quoted by Schaaffhausen, in 'Anthropological Review,' Oct.
1868, p.
419.
); and tall men may be compared with the larger and longer-bodied rabbits, all of which have elongated skulls or are dolichocephalic.
From these several facts we can understand, to a certain extent, the means by which the great size and more or less rounded form of the skull have been acquired by man; and these are characters eminently distinctive of him in comparison with the lower
Another most conspicuous difference between man and the lower animals is the nakedness of his skin.
Whales and porpoises (Cetacea), dugongs (Sirenia) and the hippopotamus are naked; and this may be advantageous to them for gliding through the water; nor would it be injurious to them from the loss of warmth, as the species, which inhabit the colder
Elephants and rhinoceroses are almost hairless; and as certain extinct species, which formerly lived under an Arctic climate, were covered with long wool or hair, it would almost appear as if the existing species of both genera had lost their hairy
This appears the more probable, as the elephants in India which live on elevated and cool districts are more hairy (87.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
619.
) than those on the lowlands.
May we then infer that man became divested of hair from having aboriginally inhabited some tropical land?
That the hair is chiefly retained in the male sex on the chest and face, and in both sexes at the junction of all four limbs with the trunk, favours this inference--on the assumption that the hair was lost before man became erect; for the parts which now
The crown of the head, however, offers a curious exception, for at all times it must have been one of the most exposed parts, yet it is thickly clothed with hair.
The fact, however, that the other members of the order of Primates, to which man belongs, although inhabiting various hot regions, are well clothed with hair, generally thickest on the upper surface (88.
Isidore Geoffroy St.-Hilaire remarks ('Histoire Nat.
Generale,' tom.
ii.
1859, pp.
215-217) on the head of man being covered with long hair; also on the upper surfaces of monkeys and of other mammals being more thickly clothed than the lower surfaces.
This has likewise been observed by various authors.
Prof.
P. Gervais ('Histoire Nat.
des Mammifres,' tom.
i.
1854, p.
28), however, states that in the Gorilla the hair is thinner on the back, where it is partly rubbed off, than on the lower surface.
), is opposed to the supposition that man became naked through the action of the sun.
Mr. Belt believes (89.
The 'Naturalist in Nicaragua,' 1874, p.
209.
As some confirmation of Mr. Belt's view, I may quote the following passage from Sir W. Denison ('Varieties of Vice-Regal Life,' vol.
i.
1870, p.
440): "It is said to be a practice with the Australians, when the vermin get troublesome, to singe themselves".
) that within the tropics it is an advantage to man to be destitute of hair, as he is thus enabled to free himself of the multitude of ticks (acari) and other parasites, with which he is often infested, and which sometimes cause ulceration.
But whether this evil is of sufficient magnitude to have led to the denudation of his body through natural selection, may be doubted, since none of the many quadrupeds inhabiting the tropics have, as far as I know, acquired any specialised means of relief.
The view which seems to me the most probable is that man, or rather primarily woman, became divested of hair for ornamental purposes, as we shall see under Sexual Selection; and, according to this belief, it is not surprising that man should differ so
According to a popular impression, the absence of a tail is eminently distinctive of man; but as those apes which come nearest to him are destitute of this organ, its disappearance does not relate exclusively to man.
The tail often differs remarkably in length within the same genus: thus in some species of Macacus it is longer than the whole body, and is formed of twenty-four vertebrae; in others it consists of a scarcely visible stump, containing only three or four
In some kinds of baboons there are twenty-five, whilst in the mandrill there are ten very small stunted caudal vertebrae, or, according to Cuvier (90.
Mr. St. George Mivart, 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1865, pp.
562, 583.
Dr. J.E. Gray, 'Cat.
Brit.
Mus.
: 'Skeletons.
' Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
ii.
p.
517.
Isidore Geoffroy, 'Hist.
Nat.
Gen.
' tom.
ii.
p.
244.
), sometimes only five.
The tail, whether it be long or short, almost always tapers towards the end; and this, I presume, results from the atrophy of the terminal muscles, together with their arteries and nerves, through disuse, leading to the atrophy of the terminal bones.
But no explanation can at present be given of the great diversity which often occurs in its length.
Here, however, we are more specially concerned with the complete external disappearance of the tail.
Professor Broca has recently shewn (91.
'Revue d'Anthropologie,' 1872; 'La Constitution des vertbres caudales.
') that the tail in all quadrupeds consists of two portions, generally separated abruptly from each other; the basal portion consists of vertebrae, more or less perfectly channelled and furnished with apophyses like ordinary vertebrae; whereas those of the
A tail, though not externally visible, is really present in man and the anthropomorphous apes, and is constructed on exactly the same pattern in both.
In the terminal portion the vertebrae, constituting the os coccyx, are quite rudimentary, being much reduced in size and number.
In the basal portion, the vertebrae are likewise few, are united firmly together, and are arrested in development; but they have been rendered much broader and flatter than the corresponding vertebrae in the tails of other animals: they constitute what
These are of functional importance by supporting certain internal parts and in other ways; and their modification is directly connected with the erect or semi-erect attitude of man and the anthropomorphous apes.
This conclusion is the more trustworthy, as Broca formerly held a different view, which he has now abandoned.
The modification, therefore, of the basal caudal vertebrae in man and the higher apes may have been effected, directly or indirectly, through natural selection.
But what are we to say about the rudimentary and variable vertebrae of the terminal portion of the tail, forming the os coccyx?
A notion which has often been, and will no doubt again be ridiculed, namely, that friction has had something to do with the disappearance of the external portion of the tail, is not so ridiculous as it at first appears.
Dr. Anderson (92.
'Proceedings Zoological Society,' 1872, p.
210.
) states that the extremely short tail of Macacus brunneus is formed of eleven vertebrae, including the imbedded basal ones.
The extremity is tendinous and contains no vertebrae; this is succeeded by five rudimentary ones, so minute that together they are only one line and a half in length, and these are permanently bent to one side in the shape of a hook.
The free part of the tail, only a little above an inch in length, includes only four more small vertebrae.
This short tail is carried erect; but about a quarter of its total length is doubled on to itself to the left; and this terminal part, which includes the hook-like portion, serves "to fill up the interspace between the upper divergent portion of the
Dr. Anderson thus sums up his observations: "These facts seem to me to have only one explanation; this tail, from its short size, is in the monkey's way when it sits down, and frequently becomes placed under the animal while it is in this attitude; and
Under these circumstances it is not surprising that the surface of the tail should have been roughened and rendered callous, and Dr. Murie (93.
'Proceedings Zoological Society,' 1872, p.
786.
), who carefully observed this species in the Zoological Gardens, as well as three other closely allied forms with slightly longer tails, says that when the animal sits down, the tail "is necessarily thrust to one side of the buttocks; and whether long or
As we now have evidence that mutilations occasionally produce an inherited effect (94.
I allude to Dr. Brown- Sequard's observations on the transmitted effect of an operation causing epilepsy in guinea-pigs, and likewise more recently on the analogous effects of cutting the sympathetic nerve in the neck.
I shall hereafter have occasion to refer to Mr. Salvin's interesting case of the apparently inherited effects of mot-mots biting off the barbs of their own tail- feathers.
See also on the general subject 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
pp.
22-24.
), it is not very improbable that in short-tailed monkeys, the projecting part of the tail, being functionally useless, should after many generations have become rudimentary and distorted, from being continually rubbed and chafed.
We see the projecting part in this condition in the Macacus brunneus, and absolutely aborted in the M. ecaudatus and in several of the higher apes.
Finally, then, as far as we can judge, the tail has disappeared in man and the anthropomorphous apes, owing to the terminal portion having been injured by friction during a long lapse of time; the basal and embedded portion having been reduced and
I have now endeavoured to shew that some of the most distinctive characters of man have in all probability been acquired, either directly, or more commonly indirectly, through natural selection.
We should bear in mind that modifications in structure or constitution which do not serve to adapt an organism to its habits of life, to the food which it consumes, or passively to the surrounding conditions, cannot have been thus acquired.
We must not, however, be too confident in deciding what modifications are of service to each being: we should remember how little we know about the use of many parts, or what changes in the blood or tissues may serve to fit an organism for a new climate or
Nor must we forget the principle of correlation, by which, as Isidore Geoffroy has shewn in the case of man, many strange deviations of structure are tied together.
Independently of correlation, a change in one part often leads, through the increased or decreased use of other parts, to other changes of a quite unexpected nature.
It is also well to reflect on such facts, as the wonderful growth of galls on plants caused by the poison of an insect, and on the remarkable changes of colour in the plumage of parrots when fed on certain fishes, or inoculated with the poison of toads
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
pp.
280, 282.
); for we can thus see that the fluids of the system, if altered for some special purpose, might induce other changes.
We should especially bear in mind that modifications acquired and continually used during past ages for some useful purpose, would probably become firmly fixed, and might be long inherited.
Thus a large yet undefined extension may safely be given to the direct and indirect results of natural selection; but I now admit, after reading the essay by Nageli on plants, and the remarks by various authors with respect to animals, more especially
I have altered the fifth edition of the 'Origin' so as to confine my remarks to adaptive changes of structure; but I am convinced, from the light gained during even the last few years, that very many structures which now appear to us useless, will
Nevertheless, I did not formerly consider sufficiently the existence of structures, which, as far as we can at present judge, are neither beneficial nor injurious; and this I believe to be one of the greatest oversights as yet detected in my work.
I may be permitted to say, as some excuse, that I had two distinct objects in view; firstly, to shew that species had not been separately created, and secondly, that natural selection had been the chief agent of change, though largely aided by the
I was not, however, able to annul the influence of my former belief, then almost universal, that each species had been purposely created; and this led to my tacit assumption that every detail of structure, excepting rudiments, was of some special, though
Any one with this assumption in his mind would naturally extend too far the action of natural selection, either during past or present times.
Some of those who admit the principle of evolution, but reject natural selection, seem to forget, when criticising my book, that I had the above two objects in view; hence if I have erred in giving to natural selection great power, which I am very far from
It is, as I can now see, probable that all organic beings, including man, possess peculiarities of structure, which neither are now, nor were formerly of any service to them, and which, therefore, are of no physiological importance.
We know not what produces the numberless slight differences between the individuals of each species, for reversion only carries the problem a few steps backwards, but each peculiarity must have had its efficient cause.
If these causes, whatever they may be, were to act more uniformly and energetically during a lengthened period (and against this no reason can be assigned), the result would probably be not a mere slight individual difference, but a well-marked and
Changed structures, which are in no way beneficial, cannot be kept uniform through natural selection, though the injurious will be thus eliminated.
Uniformity of character would, however, naturally follow from the assumed uniformity of the exciting causes, and likewise from the free intercrossing of many individuals.
During successive periods, the same organism might in this manner acquire successive modifications, which would be transmitted in a nearly uniform state as long as the exciting causes remained the same and there was free intercrossing.
With respect to the exciting causes we can only say, as when speaking of so-called spontaneous variations, that they relate much more closely to the constitution of the varying organism, than to the nature of the conditions to which it has been subjected.
CONCLUSION.
In this chapter we have seen that as man at the present day is liable, like every other animal, to multiform individual differences or slight variations, so no doubt were the early progenitors of man; the variations being formerly induced by the same
As all animals tend to multiply beyond their means of subsistence, so it must have been with the progenitors of man; and this would inevitably lead to a struggle for existence and to natural selection.
The latter process would be greatly aided by the inherited effects of the increased use of parts, and these two processes would incessantly react on each other.
It appears, also, as we shall hereafter see, that various unimportant characters have been acquired by man through sexual selection.
An unexplained residuum of change must be left to the assumed uniform action of those unknown agencies, which occasionally induce strongly marked and abrupt deviations of structure in our domestic productions.
Judging from the habits of savages and of the greater number of the Quadrumana, primeval men, and even their ape-like progenitors, probably lived in society.
With strictly social animals, natural selection sometimes acts on the individual, through the preservation of variations which are beneficial to the community.
A community which includes a large number of well-endowed individuals increases in number, and is victorious over other less favoured ones; even although each separate member gains no advantage over the others of the same community.
Associated insects have thus acquired many remarkable structures, which are of little or no service to the individual, such as the pollen-collecting apparatus, or the sting of the worker-bee, or the great jaws of soldier-ants.
With the higher social animals, I am not aware that any structure has been modified solely for the good of the community, though some are of secondary service to it.
For instance, the horns of ruminants and the great canine teeth of baboons appear to have been acquired by the males as weapons for sexual strife, but they are used in defence of the herd or troop.
In regard to certain mental powers the case, as we shall see in the fifth chapter, is wholly different; for these faculties have been chiefly, or even exclusively, gained for the benefit of the community, and the individuals thereof have at the same time
It has often been objected to such views as the foregoing, that man is one of the most helpless and defenceless creatures in the world; and that during his early and less well-developed condition, he would have been still more helpless.
The Duke of Argyll, for instance, insists (96.
'Primeval Man,' 1869, p.
66.
) that "the human frame has diverged from the structure of brutes, in the direction of greater physical helplessness and weakness.
That is to say, it is a divergence which of all others it is most impossible to ascribe to mere natural selection".
He adduces the naked and unprotected state of the body, the absence of great teeth or claws for defence, the small strength and speed of man, and his slight power of discovering food or of avoiding danger by smell.
To these deficiencies there might be added one still more serious, namely, that he cannot climb quickly, and so escape from enemies.
The loss of hair would not have been a great injury to the inhabitants of a warm country.
For we know that the unclothed Fuegians can exist under a wretched climate.
When we compare the defenceless state of man with that of apes, we must remember that the great canine teeth with which the latter are provided, are possessed in their full development by the males alone, and are chiefly used by them for fighting with
In regard to bodily size or strength, we do not know whether man is descended from some small species, like the chimpanzee, or from one as powerful as the gorilla; and, therefore, we cannot say whether man has become larger and stronger, or smaller and
We should, however, bear in mind that an animal possessing great size, strength, and ferocity, and which, like the gorilla, could defend itself from all enemies, would not perhaps have become social: and this would most effectually have checked the
Hence it might have been an immense advantage to man to have sprung from some comparatively weak creature.
The small strength and speed of man, his want of natural weapons, etc.
, are more than counterbalanced, firstly, by his intellectual powers, through which he has formed for himself weapons, tools, etc.
, though still remaining in a barbarous state, and, secondly, by his social qualities which lead him to give and receive aid from his fellow-men.
No country in the world abounds in a greater degree with dangerous beasts than Southern Africa; no country presents more fearful physical hardships than the Arctic regions; yet one of the puniest of races, that of the Bushmen, maintains itself in Southern
The ancestors of man were, no doubt, inferior in intellect, and probably in social disposition, to the lowest existing savages; but it is quite conceivable that they might have existed, or even flourished, if they had advanced in intellect, whilst
But these ancestors would not have been exposed to any special danger, even if far more helpless and defenceless than any existing savages, had they inhabited some warm continent or large island, such as Australia, New Guinea, or Borneo, which is now the
And natural selection arising from the competition of tribe with tribe, in some such large area as one of these, together with the inherited effects of habit, would, under favourable conditions, have sufficed to raise man to his present high position in
CHAPTER III.
COMPARISON OF THE MENTAL POWERS OF MAN AND THE LOWER ANIMALS.
The difference in mental power between the highest ape and the lowest savage, immense--Certain instincts in common--The emotions--Curiosity-- Imitation--Attention--Memory--Imagination--Reason--Progressive improvement --Tools and weapons used by
We have seen in the last two chapters that man bears in his bodily structure clear traces of his descent from some lower form; but it may be urged that, as man differs so greatly in his mental power from all other animals, there must be some error in this
No doubt the difference in this respect is enormous, even if we compare the mind of one of the lowest savages, who has no words to express any number higher than four, and who uses hardly any abstract terms for common objects or for the affections (1.
See the evidence on those points, as given by Lubbock, 'Prehistoric Times,' p.
354, etc.
), with that of the most highly organised ape.
The difference would, no doubt, still remain immense, even if one of the higher apes had been improved or civilised as much as a dog has been in comparison with its parent-form, the wolf or jackal.
The Fuegians rank amongst the lowest barbarians; but I was continually struck with surprise how closely the three natives on board H.M.S. "Beagle," who had lived some years in England, and could talk a little English, resembled us in disposition and in
If no organic being excepting man had possessed any mental power, or if his powers had been of a wholly different nature from those of the lower animals, then we should never have been able to convince ourselves that our high faculties had been gradually
But it can be shewn that there is no fundamental difference of this kind.
We must also admit that there is a much wider interval in mental power between one of the lowest fishes, as a lamprey or lancelet, and one of the higher apes, than between an ape and man; yet this interval is filled up by numberless gradations.
Nor is the difference slight in moral disposition between a barbarian, such as the man described by the old navigator Byron, who dashed his child on the rocks for dropping a basket of sea-urchins, and a Howard or Clarkson; and in intellect, between a
Differences of this kind between the highest men of the highest races and the lowest savages, are connected by the finest gradations.
Therefore it is possible that they might pass and be developed into each other.
My object in this chapter is to shew that there is no fundamental difference between man and the higher mammals in their mental faculties.
Each division of the subject might have been extended into a separate essay, but must here be treated briefly.
As no classification of the mental powers has been universally accepted, I shall arrange my remarks in the order most convenient for my purpose; and will select those facts which have struck me most, with the hope that they may produce some effect on the
With respect to animals very low in the scale, I shall give some additional facts under Sexual Selection, shewing that their mental powers are much higher than might have been expected.
The variability of the faculties in the individuals of the same species is an important point for us, and some few illustrations will here be given.
But it would be superfluous to enter into many details on this head, for I have found on frequent enquiry, that it is the unanimous opinion of all those who have long attended to animals of many kinds, including birds, that the individuals differ greatly
In what manner the mental powers were first developed in the lowest organisms, is as hopeless an enquiry as how life itself first originated.
These are problems for the distant future, if they are ever to be solved by man.
As man possesses the same senses as the lower animals, his fundamental intuitions must be the same.
Man has also some few instincts in common, as that of self-preservation, sexual love, the love of the mother for her new- born offspring, the desire possessed by the latter to suck, and so forth.
But man, perhaps, has somewhat fewer instincts than those possessed by the animals which come next to him in the series.
The orang in the Eastern islands, and the chimpanzee in Africa, build platforms on which they sleep; and, as both species follow the same habit, it might be argued that this was due to instinct, but we cannot feel sure that it is not the result of both
These apes, as we may assume, avoid the many poisonous fruits of the tropics, and man has no such knowledge: but as our domestic animals, when taken to foreign lands, and when first turned out in the spring, often eat poisonous herbs, which they afterwards
It is, however, certain, as we shall presently see, that apes have an instinctive dread of serpents, and probably of other dangerous animals.
The fewness and the comparative simplicity of the instincts in the higher animals are remarkable in contrast with those of the lower animals.
Cuvier maintained that instinct and intelligence stand in an inverse ratio to each other; and some have thought that the intellectual faculties of the higher animals have been gradually developed from their instincts.
But Pouchet, in an interesting essay (2.
'L'Instinct chez les Insectes,' 'Revue des Deux Mondes,' Feb.
1870, p.
690.
), has shewn that no such inverse ratio really exists.
Those insects which possess the most wonderful instincts are certainly the most intelligent.
In the vertebrate series, the least intelligent members, namely fishes and amphibians, do not possess complex instincts; and amongst mammals the animal most remarkable for its instincts, namely the beaver, is highly intelligent, as will be admitted by
(3.
'The American Beaver and His Works,' 1868.
) Although the first dawnings of intelligence, according to Mr. Herbert Spencer (4.
'The Principles of Psychology,' 2nd edit.
, 1870, pp.
418- 443.
), have been developed through the multiplication and co-ordination of reflex actions, and although many of the simpler instincts graduate into reflex actions, and can hardly be distinguished from them, as in the case of young animals sucking, yet the more
I am, however, very far from wishing to deny that instinctive actions may lose their fixed and untaught character, and be replaced by others performed by the aid of the free will.
On the other hand, some intelligent actions, after being performed during several generations, become converted into instincts and are inherited, as when birds on oceanic islands learn to avoid man.
These actions may then be said to be degraded in character, for they are no longer performed through reason or from experience.
But the greater number of the more complex instincts appear to have been gained in a wholly different manner, through the natural selection of variations of simpler instinctive actions.
Such variations appear to arise from the same unknown causes acting on the cerebral organisation, which induce slight variations or individual differences in other parts of the body; and these variations, owing to our ignorance, are often said to arise
We can, I think, come to no other conclusion with respect to the origin of the more complex instincts, when we reflect on the marvellous instincts of sterile worker- ants and bees, which leave no offspring to inherit the effects of experience and of
Although, as we learn from the above-mentioned insects and the beaver, a high degree of intelligence is certainly compatible with complex instincts, and although actions, at first learnt voluntarily can soon through habit be performed with the quickness
Little is known about the functions of the brain, but we can perceive that as the intellectual powers become highly developed, the various parts of the brain must be connected by very intricate channels of the freest intercommunication; and as a
There seems even to exist some relation between a low degree of intelligence and a strong tendency to the formation of fixed, though not inherited habits; for as a sagacious physician remarked to me, persons who are slightly imbecile tend to act in
I have thought this digression worth giving, because we may easily underrate the mental powers of the higher animals, and especially of man, when we compare their actions founded on the memory of past events, on foresight, reason, and imagination, with
No doubt, as Mr. Wallace has argued (5.
'Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection,' 1870, p.
212.
), much of the intelligent work done by man is due to imitation and not to reason; but there is this great difference between his actions and many of those performed by the lower animals, namely, that man cannot, on his first trial, make, for instance, a
He has to learn his work by practice; a beaver, on the other hand, can make its dam or canal, and a bird its nest, as well, or nearly as well, and a spider its wonderful web, quite as well (6.
For the evidence on this head, see Mr. J. Traherne Moggridge's most interesting work, 'Harvesting Ants and Trap-Door Spiders,' 1873, pp.
126, 128.
), the first time it tries as when old and experienced.
To return to our immediate subject: the lower animals, like man, manifestly feel pleasure and pain, happiness and misery.
Happiness is never better exhibited than by young animals, such as puppies, kittens, lambs, etc.
, when playing together, like our own children.
Even insects play together, as has been described by that excellent observer, P. Huber (7.
'Recherches sur les Moeurs des Fourmis,' 1810, p.
173.
), who saw ants chasing and pretending to bite each other, like so many puppies.
The fact that the lower animals are excited by the same emotions as ourselves is so well established, that it will not be necessary to weary the reader by many details.
Terror acts in the same manner on them as on us, causing the muscles to tremble, the heart to palpitate, the sphincters to be relaxed, and the hair to stand on end.
Suspicion, the offspring of fear, is eminently characteristic of most wild animals.
It is, I think, impossible to read the account given by Sir E. Tennent, of the behaviour of the female elephants, used as decoys, without admitting that they intentionally practise deceit, and well know what they are about.
Courage and timidity are extremely variable qualities in the individuals of the same species, as is plainly seen in our dogs.
Some dogs and horses are ill-tempered, and easily turn sulky; others are good-tempered; and these qualities are certainly inherited.
Every one knows how liable animals are to furious rage, and how plainly they shew it.
Many, and probably true, anecdotes have been published on the long-delayed and artful revenge of various animals.
The accurate Rengger, and Brehm (8.
All the following statements, given on the authority of these two naturalists, are taken from Rengger's 'Naturgesch.
der Sugethiere von Paraguay,' 1830, s.
41-57, and from Brehm's 'Thierleben,' B. i.
s.
10-87.
) state that the American and African monkeys which they kept tame, certainly revenged themselves.
Sir Andrew Smith, a zoologist whose scrupulous accuracy was known to many persons, told me the following story of which he was himself an eye- witness; at the Cape of Good Hope an officer had often plagued a certain baboon, and the animal, seeing him
For long afterwards the baboon rejoiced and triumphed whenever he saw his victim.
The love of a dog for his master is notorious; as an old writer quaintly says (9.
Quoted by Dr. Lauder Lindsay, in his 'Physiology of Mind in the Lower Animals,' 'Journal of Mental Science,' April 1871, p.
38.
), "A dog is the only thing on this earth that luvs you more than he luvs himself".
In the agony of death a dog has been known to caress his master, and every one has heard of the dog suffering under vivisection, who licked the hand of the operator; this man, unless the operation was fully justified by an increase of our knowledge, or
As Whewell (10.
'Bridgewater Treatise,' p.
263.
) has well asked, "who that reads the touching instances of maternal affection, related so often of the women of all nations, and of the females of all animals, can doubt that the principle of action is the same in the two cases"?
We see maternal affection exhibited in the most trifling details; thus Rengger observed an American monkey (a Cebus) carefully driving away the flies which plagued her infant; and Duvaucel saw a Hylobates washing the faces of her young ones in a stream.
So intense is the grief of female monkeys for the loss of their young, that it invariably caused the death of certain kinds kept under confinement by Brehm in N. Africa.
Orphan monkeys were always adopted and carefully guarded by the other monkeys, both males and females.
One female baboon had so capacious a heart that she not only adopted young monkeys of other species, but stole young dogs and cats, which she continually carried about.
Her kindness, however, did not go so far as to share her food with her adopted offspring, at which Brehm was surprised, as his monkeys always divided everything quite fairly with their own young ones.
An adopted kitten scratched this affectionate baboon, who certainly had a fine intellect, for she was much astonished at being scratched, and immediately examined the kitten's feet, and without more ado bit off the claws.
(11.
A critic, without any grounds ('Quarterly Review,' July 1871, p.
72), disputes the possibility of this act as described by Brehm, for the sake of discrediting my work.
Therefore I tried, and found that I could readily seize with my own teeth the sharp little claws of a kitten nearly five weeks old.
) In the Zoological Gardens, I heard from the keeper that an old baboon (C.
chacma) had adopted a Rhesus monkey; but when a young drill and mandrill were placed in the cage, she seemed to perceive that these monkeys, though distinct species, were her nearer relatives, for she at once rejected the Rhesus and adopted both of them.
The young Rhesus, as I saw, was greatly discontented at being thus rejected, and it would, like a naughty child, annoy and attack the young drill and mandrill whenever it could do so with safety; this conduct exciting great indignation in the old baboon.
Monkeys will also, according to Brehm, defend their master when attacked by any one, as well as dogs to whom they are attached, from the attacks of other dogs.
But we here trench on the subjects of sympathy and fidelity, to which I shall recur.
Some of Brehm's monkeys took much delight in teasing a certain old dog whom they disliked, as well as other animals, in various ingenious ways.
Most of the more complex emotions are common to the higher animals and ourselves.
Every one has seen how jealous a dog is of his master's affection, if lavished on any other creature; and I have observed the same fact with monkeys.
This shews that animals not only love, but have desire to be loved.
Animals manifestly feel emulation.
They love approbation or praise; and a dog carrying a basket for his master exhibits in a high degree self-complacency or pride.
There can, I think, be no doubt that a dog feels shame, as distinct from fear, and something very like modesty when begging too often for food.
A great dog scorns the snarling of a little dog, and this may be called magnanimity.
Several observers have stated that monkeys certainly dislike being laughed at; and they sometimes invent imaginary offences.
In the Zoological Gardens I saw a baboon who always got into a furious rage when his keeper took out a letter or book and read it aloud to him; and his rage was so violent that, as I witnessed on one occasion, he bit his own leg till the blood flowed.
Dogs shew what may be fairly called a sense of humour, as distinct from mere play; if a bit of stick or other such object be thrown to one, he will often carry it away for a short distance; and then squatting down with it on the ground close before him,
The dog will then seize it and rush away in triumph, repeating the same manoeuvre, and evidently enjoying the practical joke.
We will now turn to the more intellectual emotions and faculties, which are very important, as forming the basis for the development of the higher mental powers.
Animals manifestly enjoy excitement, and suffer from ennui, as may be seen with dogs, and, according to Rengger, with monkeys.
All animals feel WONDER, and many exhibit CURIOSITY.
They sometimes suffer from this latter quality, as when the hunter plays antics and thus attracts them; I have witnessed this with deer, and so it is with the wary chamois, and with some kinds of wild-ducks.
Brehm gives a curious account of the instinctive dread, which his monkeys exhibited, for snakes; but their curiosity was so great that they could not desist from occasionally satiating their horror in a most human fashion, by lifting up the lid of the box
I was so much surprised at his account, that I took a stuffed and coiled-up snake into the monkey-house at the Zoological Gardens, and the excitement thus caused was one of the most curious spectacles which I ever beheld.
Three species of Cercopithecus were the most alarmed; they dashed about their cages, and uttered sharp signal cries of danger, which were understood by the other monkeys.
A few young monkeys and one old Anubis baboon alone took no notice of the snake.
I then placed the stuffed specimen on the ground in one of the larger compartments.
After a time all the monkeys collected round it in a large circle, and staring intently, presented a most ludicrous appearance.
They became extremely nervous; so that when a wooden ball, with which they were familiar as a plaything, was accidentally moved in the straw, under which it was partly hidden, they all instantly started away.
These monkeys behaved very differently when a dead fish, a mouse (12.
I have given a short account of their behaviour on this occasion in my 'Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals,' p.
43.
), a living turtle, and other new objects were placed in their cages; for though at first frightened, they soon approached, handled and examined them.
I then placed a live snake in a paper bag, with the mouth loosely closed, in one of the larger compartments.
One of the monkeys immediately approached, cautiously opened the bag a little, peeped in, and instantly dashed away.
Then I witnessed what Brehm has described, for monkey after monkey, with head raised high and turned on one side, could not resist taking a momentary peep into the upright bag, at the dreadful object lying quietly at the bottom.
It would almost appear as if monkeys had some notion of zoological affinities, for those kept by Brehm exhibited a strange, though mistaken, instinctive dread of innocent lizards and frogs.
An orang, also, has been known to be much alarmed at the first sight of a turtle.
(13.
W.C.L. Martin, 'Natural History of Mammalia,' 1841, p.
405.
) The principle of IMITATION is strong in man, and especially, as I have myself observed, with savages.
In certain morbid states of the brain this tendency is exaggerated to an extraordinary degree: some hemiplegic patients and others, at the commencement of inflammatory softening of the brain, unconsciously imitate every word which is uttered, whether in
(14.
Dr. Bateman, 'On Aphasia,' 1870, p.
110.
) Desor (15.
Quoted by Vogt, 'Mmoire sur les Microcephales,' 1867, p.
168.
) has remarked that no animal voluntarily imitates an action performed by man, until in the ascending scale we come to monkeys, which are well known to be ridiculous mockers.
Animals, however, sometimes imitate each other's actions: thus two species of wolves, which had been reared by dogs, learned to bark, as does sometimes the jackal (16.
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
27.
), but whether this can be called voluntary imitation is another question.
Birds imitate the songs of their parents, and sometimes of other birds; and parrots are notorious imitators of any sound which they often hear.
Dureau de la Malle gives an account (17.
'Annales des Sciences Nat.
' (1st Series), tom.
xxii.
p.
397.
) of a dog reared by a cat, who learnt to imitate the well-known action of a cat licking her paws, and thus washing her ears and face; this was also witnessed by the celebrated naturalist Audouin.
I have received several confirmatory accounts; in one of these, a dog had not been suckled by a cat, but had been brought up with one, together with kittens, and had thus acquired the above habit, which he ever afterwards practised during his life of
Dureau de la Malle's dog likewise learnt from the kittens to play with a ball by rolling it about with his fore paws, and springing on it.
A correspondent assures me that a cat in his house used to put her paws into jugs of milk having too narrow a mouth for her head.
A kitten of this cat soon learned the same trick, and practised it ever afterwards, whenever there was an opportunity.
The parents of many animals, trusting to the principle of imitation in their young, and more especially to their instinctive or inherited tendencies, may be said to educate them.
We see this when a cat brings a live mouse to her kittens; and Dureau de la Malle has given a curious account (in the paper above quoted) of his observations on hawks which taught their young dexterity, as well as judgment of distances, by first dropping
Hardly any faculty is more important for the intellectual progress of man than ATTENTION.
Animals clearly manifest this power, as when a cat watches by a hole and prepares to spring on its prey.
Wild animals sometimes become so absorbed when thus engaged, that they may be easily approached.
Mr. Bartlett has given me a curious proof how variable this faculty is in monkeys.
A man who trains monkeys to act in plays, used to purchase common kinds from the Zoological Society at the price of five pounds for each; but he offered to give double the price, if he might keep three or four of them for a few days, in order to select
When asked how he could possibly learn so soon, whether a particular monkey would turn out a good actor, he answered that it all depended on their power of attention.
If when he was talking and explaining anything to a monkey, its attention was easily distracted, as by a fly on the wall or other trifling object, the case was hopeless.
If he tried by punishment to make an inattentive monkey act, it turned sulky.
On the other hand, a monkey which carefully attended to him could always be trained.
It is almost superfluous to state that animals have excellent MEMORIES for persons and places.
A baboon at the Cape of Good Hope, as I have been informed by Sir Andrew Smith, recognised him with joy after an absence of nine months.
I had a dog who was savage and averse to all strangers, and I purposely tried his memory after an absence of five years and two days.
I went near the stable where he lived, and shouted to him in my old manner; he shewed no joy, but instantly followed me out walking, and obeyed me, exactly as if I had parted with him only half an hour before.
A train of old associations, dormant during five years, had thus been instantaneously awakened in his mind.
Even ants, as P. Huber (18.
'Les Moeurs des Fourmis,' 1810, p.
150.
) has clearly shewn, recognised their fellow-ants belonging to the same community after a separation of four months.
Animals can certainly by some means judge of the intervals of time between recurrent events.
The IMAGINATION is one of the highest prerogatives of man.
By this faculty he unites former images and ideas, independently of the will, and thus creates brilliant and novel results.
A poet, as Jean Paul Richter remarks (19.
Quoted in Dr. Maudsley's 'Physiology and Pathology of Mind,' 1868, pp.
19, 220.
), "who must reflect whether he shall make a character say yes or no--to the devil with him; he is only a stupid corpse".
Dreaming gives us the best notion of this power; as Jean Paul again says, "The dream is an involuntary art of poetry".
The value of the products of our imagination depends of course on the number, accuracy, and clearness of our impressions, on our judgment and taste in selecting or rejecting the involuntary combinations, and to a certain extent on our power of voluntarily
As dogs, cats, horses, and probably all the higher animals, even birds (20.
Dr. Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
i.
1862, p.
xxi.
Houzeau says that his parokeets and canary-birds dreamt: 'Etudes sur les Facultes Mentales des Animaux,' tom.
ii.
p.
136.
) have vivid dreams, and this is shewn by their movements and the sounds uttered, we must admit that they possess some power of imagination.
There must be something special, which causes dogs to howl in the night, and especially during moonlight, in that remarkable and melancholy manner called baying.
All dogs do not do so; and, according to Houzeau (21.
ibid.
1872, tom.
ii.
p.
181.
), they do not then look at the moon, but at some fixed point near the horizon.
Houzeau thinks that their imaginations are disturbed by the vague outlines of the surrounding objects, and conjure up before them fantastic images: if this be so, their feelings may almost be called superstitious.
Of all the faculties of the human mind, it will, I presume, be admitted that REASON stands at the summit.
Only a few persons now dispute that animals possess some power of reasoning.
Animals may constantly be seen to pause, deliberate, and resolve.
It is a significant fact, that the more the habits of any particular animal are studied by a naturalist, the more he attributes to reason and the less to unlearnt instincts.
(22.
Mr. L.H. Morgan's work on 'The American Beaver,' 1868, offers a good illustration of this remark.
I cannot help thinking, however, that he goes too far in underrating the power of instinct.
) In future chapters we shall see that some animals extremely low in the scale apparently display a certain amount of reason.
No doubt it is often difficult to distinguish between the power of reason and that of instinct.
For instance, Dr. Hayes, in his work on 'The Open Polar Sea,' repeatedly remarks that his dogs, instead of continuing to draw the sledges in a compact body, diverged and separated when they came to thin ice, so that their weight might be more evenly
This was often the first warning which the travellers received that the ice was becoming thin and dangerous.
Now, did the dogs act thus from the experience of each individual, or from the example of the older and wiser dogs, or from an inherited habit, that is from instinct?
This instinct, may possibly have arisen since the time, long ago, when dogs were first employed by the natives in drawing their sledges; or the Arctic wolves, the parent-stock of the Esquimaux dog, may have acquired an instinct impelling them not to attack
We can only judge by the circumstances under which actions are performed, whether they are due to instinct, or to reason, or to the mere association of ideas: this latter principle, however, is intimately connected with reason.
A curious case has been given by Prof.
Mobius (23.
'Die Bewegungen der Thiere,' etc.
, 1873, p.
11.
), of a pike, separated by a plate of glass from an adjoining aquarium stocked with fish, and who often dashed himself with such violence against the glass in trying to catch the other fishes, that he was sometimes completely stunned.
The pike went on thus for three months, but at last learnt caution, and ceased to do so.
The plate of glass was then removed, but the pike would not attack these particular fishes, though he would devour others which were afterwards introduced; so strongly was the idea of a violent shock associated in his feeble mind with the attempt on his
If a savage, who had never seen a large plate-glass window, were to dash himself even once against it, he would for a long time afterwards associate a shock with a window-frame; but very differently from the pike, he would probably reflect on the nature of
Now with monkeys, as we shall presently see, a painful or merely a disagreeable impression, from an action once performed, is sometimes sufficient to prevent the animal from repeating it.
If we attribute this difference between the monkey and the pike solely to the association of ideas being so much stronger and more persistent in the one than the other, though the pike often received much the more severe injury, can we maintain in the case
Houzeau relates (24.
'tudes sur les Facults Mentales des Animaux,' 1872, tom.
ii.
p.
265.
) that, whilst crossing a wide and arid plain in Texas, his two dogs suffered greatly from thirst, and that between thirty and forty times they rushed down the hollows to search for water.
These hollows were not valleys, and there were no trees in them, or any other difference in the vegetation, and as they were absolutely dry there could have been no smell of damp earth.
The dogs behaved as if they knew that a dip in the ground offered them the best chance of finding water, and Houzeau has often witnessed the same behaviour in other animals.
I have seen, as I daresay have others, that when a small object is thrown on the ground beyond the reach of one of the elephants in the Zoological Gardens, he blows through his trunk on the ground beyond the object, so that the current reflected on all
Again a well-known ethnologist, Mr. Westropp, informs me that he observed in Vienna a bear deliberately making with his paw a current in some water, which was close to the bars of his cage, so as to draw a piece of floating bread within his reach.
These actions of the elephant and bear can hardly be attributed to instinct or inherited habit, as they would be of little use to an animal in a state of nature.
Now, what is the difference between such actions, when performed by an uncultivated man, and by one of the higher animals?
The savage and the dog have often found water at a low level, and the coincidence under such circumstances has become associated in their minds.
A cultivated man would perhaps make some general proposition on the subject; but from all that we know of savages it is extremely doubtful whether they would do so, and a dog certainly would not.
But a savage, as well as a dog, would search in the same way, though frequently disappointed; and in both it seems to be equally an act of reason, whether or not any general proposition on the subject is consciously placed before the mind.
(25.
Prof.
Huxley has analysed with admirable clearness the mental steps by which a man, as well as a dog, arrives at a conclusion in a case analogous to that given in my text.
See his article, 'Mr. Darwin's Critics,' in the 'Contemporary Review,' Nov.
1871, p.
462, and in his 'Critiques and Essays,' 1873, p.
279.
) The same would apply to the elephant and the bear making currents in the air or water.
The savage would certainly neither know nor care by what law the desired movements were effected; yet his act would be guided by a rude process of reasoning, as surely as would a philosopher in his longest chain of deductions.
There would no doubt be this difference between him and one of the higher animals, that he would take notice of much slighter circumstances and conditions, and would observe any connection between them after much less experience, and this would be of
I kept a daily record of the actions of one of my infants, and when he was about eleven months old, and before he could speak a single word, I was continually struck with the greater quickness, with which all sorts of objects and sounds were associated
But the higher animals differ in exactly the same way in this power of association from those low in the scale, such as the pike, as well as in that of drawing inferences and of observation.
The promptings of reason, after very short experience, are well shewn by the following actions of American monkeys, which stand low in their order.
Rengger, a most careful observer, states that when he first gave eggs to his monkeys in Paraguay, they smashed them, and thus lost much of their contents; afterwards they gently hit one end against some hard body, and picked off the bits of shell with
After cutting themselves only ONCE with any sharp tool, they would not touch it again, or would handle it with the greatest caution.
Lumps of sugar were often given them wrapped up in paper; and Rengger sometimes put a live wasp in the paper, so that in hastily unfolding it they got stung; after this had ONCE happened, they always first held the packet to their ears to detect any
(26.
Mr. Belt, in his most interesting work, 'The Naturalist in Nicaragua,' 1874, (p.
119), likewise describes various actions of a tamed Cebus, which, I think, clearly shew that this animal possessed some reasoning power.
) The following cases relate to dogs.
Mr. Colquhoun (27.
'The Moor and the Loch,' p.
45.
Col.
Hutchinson on 'Dog Breaking,' 1850, p.
46.
) winged two wild-ducks, which fell on the further side of a stream; his retriever tried to bring over both at once, but could not succeed; she then, though never before known to ruffle a feather, deliberately killed one, brought over the other, and
Col.
Hutchinson relates that two partridges were shot at once, one being killed, the other wounded; the latter ran away, and was caught by the retriever, who on her return came across the dead bird; "she stopped, evidently greatly puzzled, and after one or two
This was the only known instance of her ever having wilfully injured any game".
Here we have reason though not quite perfect, for the retriever might have brought the wounded bird first and then returned for the dead one, as in the case of the two wild-ducks.
I give the above cases, as resting on the evidence of two independent witnesses, and because in both instances the retrievers, after deliberation, broke through a habit which is inherited by them (that of not killing the game retrieved), and because they
I will conclude by quoting a remark by the illustrious Humboldt.
(28.
'Personal Narrative,' Eng.
translat.
, vol.
iii.
p.
106.
) "The muleteers in S. America say, 'I will not give you the mule whose step is easiest, but la mas racional,--the one that reasons best'"; and; as, he adds, "this popular expression, dictated by long experience, combats the system of animated machines,
Nevertheless some writers even yet deny that the higher animals possess a trace of reason; and they endeavour to explain away, by what appears to be mere verbiage, (29.
I am glad to find that so acute a reasoner as Mr. Leslie Stephen ('Darwinism and Divinity, Essays on Free Thinking,' 1873, p.
80), in speaking of the supposed impassable barrier between the minds of man and the lower animals, says, "The distinctions, indeed, which have been drawn, seem to us to rest upon no better foundation than a great many other metaphysical distinctions; that
It is difficult to understand how anybody who has ever kept a dog, or seen an elephant, can have any doubt as to an animal's power of performing the essential processes of reasoning".
) all such facts as those above given.
It has, I think, now been shewn that man and the higher animals, especially the Primates, have some few instincts in common.
All have the same senses, intuitions, and sensations,--similar passions, affections, and emotions, even the more complex ones, such as jealousy, suspicion, emulation, gratitude, and magnanimity; they practise deceit and are revengeful; they are sometimes
The individuals of the same species graduate in intellect from absolute imbecility to high excellence.
They are also liable to insanity, though far less often than in the case of man.
(30.
See 'Madness in Animals,' by Dr. W. Lauder Lindsay, in 'Journal of Mental Science,' July 1871.
) Nevertheless, many authors have insisted that man is divided by an insuperable barrier from all the lower animals in his mental faculties.
I formerly made a collection of above a score of such aphorisms, but they are almost worthless, as their wide difference and number prove the difficulty, if not the impossibility, of the attempt.
It has been asserted that man alone is capable of progressive improvement; that he alone makes use of tools or fire, domesticates other animals, or possesses property; that no animal has the power of abstraction, or of forming general concepts, is
; believes in God, or is endowed with a conscience.
I will hazard a few remarks on the more important and interesting of these points.
Archbishop Sumner formerly maintained (31.
Quoted by Sir C. Lyell, 'Antiquity of Man,' p.
497.
) that man alone is capable of progressive improvement.
That he is capable of incomparably greater and more rapid improvement than is any other animal, admits of no dispute; and this is mainly due to his power of speaking and handing down his acquired knowledge.
With animals, looking first to the individual, every one who has had any experience in setting traps, knows that young animals can be caught much more easily than old ones; and they can be much more easily approached by an enemy.
Even with respect to old animals, it is impossible to catch many in the same place and in the same kind of trap, or to destroy them by the same kind of poison; yet it is improbable that all should have partaken of the poison, and impossible that all should
They must learn caution by seeing their brethren caught or poisoned.
In North America, where the fur-bearing animals have long been pursued, they exhibit, according to the unanimous testimony of all observers, an almost incredible amount of sagacity, caution and cunning; but trapping has been there so long carried on, that
I have received several accounts that when telegraphs are first set up in any district, many birds kill themselves by flying against the wires, but that in the course of a very few years they learn to avoid this danger, by seeing, as it would appear, their
(32.
For additional evidence, with details, see M. Houzeau, 'tudes sur les Facults Mentales des Animaux,' tom.
ii.
1872, p.
147.
) If we look to successive generations, or to the race, there is no doubt that birds and other animals gradually both acquire and lose caution in relation to man or other enemies (33.
See, with respect to birds on oceanic islands, my 'Journal of Researches during the Voyage of the "Beagle,"' 1845, p.
398.
'Origin of Species,' 5th ed.
p.
260.
); and this caution is certainly in chief part an inherited habit or instinct, but in part the result of individual experience.
A good observer, Leroy (34.
'Lettres Phil.
sur l'Intelligence des Animaux,' nouvelle edit.
, 1802, p.
86.
), states, that in districts where foxes are much hunted, the young, on first leaving their burrows, are incontestably much more wary than the old ones in districts where they are not much disturbed.
Our domestic dogs are descended from wolves and jackals (35.
See the evidence on this head in chap.
i.
vol.
i.
, 'On the Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication.
'), and though they may not have gained in cunning, and may have lost in wariness and suspicion, yet they have progressed in certain moral qualities, such as in affection, trust- worthiness, temper, and probably in general intelligence.
The common rat has conquered and beaten several other species throughout Europe, in parts of North America, New Zealand, and recently in Formosa, as well as on the mainland of China.
Mr. Swinhoe (36.
'Proceedings Zoological Society,' 1864, p.
186.
), who describes these two latter cases, attributes the victory of the common rat over the large Mus coninga to its superior cunning; and this latter quality may probably be attributed to the habitual exercise of all its faculties in avoiding extirpation
It is, however, possible that the success of the common rat may be due to its having possessed greater cunning than its fellow- species, before it became associated with man.
To maintain, independently of any direct evidence, that no animal during the course of ages has progressed in intellect or other mental faculties, is to beg the question of the evolution of species.
We have seen that, according to Lartet, existing mammals belonging to several orders have larger brains than their ancient tertiary prototypes.
It has often been said that no animal uses any tool; but the chimpanzee in a state of nature cracks a native fruit, somewhat like a walnut, with a stone.
(37.
Savage and Wyman in 'Boston Journal of Natural History,' vol.
iv.
1843-44, p.
383.
) Rengger (38.
'Sugethiere von Paraguay,' 1830, s.
51-56.
) easily taught an American monkey thus to break open hard palm-nuts; and afterwards of its own accord, it used stones to open other kinds of nuts, as well as boxes.
It thus also removed the soft rind of fruit that had a disagreeable flavour.
Another monkey was taught to open the lid of a large box with a stick, and afterwards it used the stick as a lever to move heavy bodies; and I have myself seen a young orang put a stick into a crevice, slip his hand to the other end, and use it in the
The tamed elephants in India are well known to break off branches of trees and use them to drive away the flies; and this same act has been observed in an elephant in a state of nature.
(39.
The Indian Field, March 4, 1871.
) I have seen a young orang, when she thought she was going to be whipped, cover and protect herself with a blanket or straw.
In these several cases stones and sticks were employed as implements; but they are likewise used as weapons.
Brehm (40.
'Thierleben,' B. i.
s.
79, 82.
) states, on the authority of the well-known traveller Schimper, that in Abyssinia when the baboons belonging to one species (C.
gelada) descend in troops from the mountains to plunder the fields, they sometimes encounter troops of another species (C.
hamadryas), and then a fight ensues.
The Geladas roll down great stones, which the Hamadryas try to avoid, and then both species, making a great uproar, rush furiously against each other.
Brehm, when accompanying the Duke of Coburg-Gotha, aided in an attack with fire-arms on a troop of baboons in the pass of Mensa in Abyssinia.
The baboons in return rolled so many stones down the mountain, some as large as a man's head, that the attackers had to beat a hasty retreat; and the pass was actually closed for a time against the caravan.
It deserves notice that these baboons thus acted in concert.
Mr. Wallace (41.
'The Malay Archipelago,' vol.
i.
1869, p.
87.
) on three occasions saw female orangs, accompanied by their young, "breaking off branches and the great spiny fruit of the Durian tree, with every appearance of rage; causing such a shower of missiles as effectually kept us from approaching too near the
As I have repeatedly seen, a chimpanzee will throw any object at hand at a person who offends him; and the before-mentioned baboon at the Cape of Good Hope prepared mud for the purpose.
In the Zoological Gardens, a monkey, which had weak teeth, used to break open nuts with a stone; and I was assured by the keepers that after using the stone, he hid it in the straw, and would not let any other monkey touch it.
Here, then, we have the idea of property; but this idea is common to every dog with a bone, and to most or all birds with their nests.
The Duke of Argyll (42.
'Primeval Man,' 1869, pp.
145, 147.
) remarks, that the fashioning of an implement for a special purpose is absolutely peculiar to man; and he considers that this forms an immeasurable gulf between him and the brutes.
This is no doubt a very important distinction; but there appears to me much truth in Sir J. Lubbock's suggestion (43.
'Prehistoric Times,' 1865, p.
473, etc.
), that when primeval man first used flint-stones for any purpose, he would have accidentally splintered them, and would then have used the sharp fragments.
From this step it would be a small one to break the flints on purpose, and not a very wide step to fashion them rudely.
This latter advance, however, may have taken long ages, if we may judge by the immense interval of time which elapsed before the men of the neolithic period took to grinding and polishing their stone tools.
In breaking the flints, as Sir J. Lubbock likewise remarks, sparks would have been emitted, and in grinding them heat would have been evolved: thus the two usual methods of "obtaining fire may have originated".
The nature of fire would have been known in the many volcanic regions where lava occasionally flows through forests.
The anthropomorphous apes, guided probably by instinct, build for themselves temporary platforms; but as many instincts are largely controlled by reason, the simpler ones, such as this of building a platform, might readily pass into a voluntary and
The orang is known to cover itself at night with the leaves of the Pandanus; and Brehm states that one of his baboons used to protect itself from the heat of the sun by throwing a straw-mat over its head.
In these several habits, we probably see the first steps towards some of the simpler arts, such as rude architecture and dress, as they arose amongst the early progenitors of man.
ABSTRACTION, GENERAL CONCEPTIONS, SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS, MENTAL INDIVIDUALITY.
It would be very difficult for any one with even much more knowledge than I possess, to determine how far animals exhibit any traces of these high mental powers.
This difficulty arises from the impossibility of judging what passes through the mind of an animal; and again, the fact that writers differ to a great extent in the meaning which they attribute to the above terms, causes a further difficulty.
If one may judge from various articles which have been published lately, the greatest stress seems to be laid on the supposed entire absence in animals of the power of abstraction, or of forming general concepts.
But when a dog sees another dog at a distance, it is often clear that he perceives that it is a dog in the abstract; for when he gets nearer his whole manner suddenly changes, if the other dog be a friend.
A recent writer remarks, that in all such cases it is a pure assumption to assert that the mental act is not essentially of the same nature in the animal as in man.
If either refers what he perceives with his senses to a mental concept, then so do both.
(44.
Mr. Hookham, in a letter to Prof.
Max Muller, in the 'Birmingham News,' May 1873.
) When I say to my terrier, in an eager voice (and I have made the trial many times), "Hi, hi, where is it"?
she at once takes it as a sign that something is to be hunted, and generally first looks quickly all around, and then rushes into the nearest thicket, to scent for any game, but finding nothing, she looks up into any neighbouring tree for a squirrel.
Now do not these actions clearly shew that she had in her mind a general idea or concept that some animal is to be discovered and hunted?
It may be freely admitted that no animal is self-conscious, if by this term it is implied, that he reflects on such points, as whence he comes or whither he will go, or what is life and death, and so forth.
But how can we feel sure that an old dog with an excellent memory and some power of imagination, as shewn by his dreams, never reflects on his past pleasures or pains in the chase?
And this would be a form of self-consciousness.
On the other hand, as Buchner (45.
'Confrences sur la Thorie Darwinienne,' French translat.
1869, p.
132.
) has remarked, how little can the hard- worked wife of a degraded Australian savage, who uses very few abstract words, and cannot count above four, exert her self-consciousness, or reflect on the nature of her own existence.
It is generally admitted, that the higher animals possess memory, attention, association, and even some imagination and reason.
If these powers, which differ much in different animals, are capable of improvement, there seems no great improbability in more complex faculties, such as the higher forms of abstraction, and self- consciousness, etc.
, having been evolved through the development and combination of the simpler ones.
It has been urged against the views here maintained that it is impossible to say at what point in the ascending scale animals become capable of abstraction, etc.
; but who can say at what age this occurs in our young children?
We see at least that such powers are developed in children by imperceptible degrees.
That animals retain their mental individuality is unquestionable.
When my voice awakened a train of old associations in the mind of the before- mentioned dog, he must have retained his mental individuality, although every atom of his brain had probably undergone change more than once during the interval of five years.
This dog might have brought forward the argument lately advanced to crush all evolutionists, and said, "I abide amid all mental moods and all material changes...
The teaching that atoms leave their impressions as legacies to other atoms falling into the places they have vacated is contradictory of the utterance of consciousness, and is therefore false; but it is the teaching necessitated by evolutionism,
(46.
The Rev.
Dr. J. M'Cann, 'Anti-Darwinism,' 1869, p.
13.
) LANGUAGE.
This faculty has justly been considered as one of the chief distinctions between man and the lower animals.
But man, as a highly competent judge, Archbishop Whately remarks, "is not the only animal that can make use of language to express what is passing in his mind, and can understand, more or less, what is so expressed by another".
(47.
Quoted in 'Anthropological Review,' 1864, p.
158.
) In Paraguay the Cebus azarae when excited utters at least six distinct sounds, which excite in other monkeys similar emotions.
(48.
Rengger, ibid.
s.
45.
) The movements of the features and gestures of monkeys are understood by us, and they partly understand ours, as Rengger and others declare.
It is a more remarkable fact that the dog, since being domesticated, has learnt to bark (49.
See my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
27.
) in at least four or five distinct tones.
Although barking is a new art, no doubt the wild parent-species of the dog expressed their feelings by cries of various kinds.
With the domesticated dog we have the bark of eagerness, as in the chase; that of anger, as well as growling; the yelp or howl of despair, as when shut up; the baying at night; the bark of joy, as when starting on a walk with his master; and the very
According to Houzeau, who paid particular attention to the subject, the domestic fowl utters at least a dozen significant sounds.
(50.
'Facults Mentales des Animaux,' tom.
ii.
1872, p.
346-349.
) The habitual use of articulate language is, however, peculiar to man; but he uses, in common with the lower animals, inarticulate cries to express his meaning, aided by gestures and the movements of the muscles of the face.
(51.
See a discussion on this subject in Mr. E.B. Tylor's very interesting work, 'Researches into the Early History of Mankind,' 1865, chaps.
ii.
to iv.
) This especially holds good with the more simple and vivid feelings, which are but little connected with our higher intelligence.
Our cries of pain, fear, surprise, anger, together with their appropriate actions, and the murmur of a mother to her beloved child are more expressive than any words.
That which distinguishes man from the lower animals is not the understanding of articulate sounds, for, as every one knows, dogs understand many words and sentences.
In this respect they are at the same stage of development as infants, between the ages of ten and twelve months, who understand many words and short sentences, but cannot yet utter a single word.
It is not the mere articulation which is our distinguishing character, for parrots and other birds possess this power.
Nor is it the mere capacity of connecting definite sounds with definite ideas; for it is certain that some parrots, which have been taught to speak, connect unerringly words with things, and persons with events.
(52.
I have received several detailed accounts to this effect.
Admiral Sir B.J. Sulivan, whom I know to be a careful observer, assures me that an African parrot, long kept in his father's house, invariably called certain persons of the household, as well as visitors, by their names.
He said "good morning" to every one at breakfast, and "good night" to each as they left the room at night, and never reversed these salutations.
To Sir B.J. Sulivan's father, he used to add to the " good morning" a short sentence, which was never once repeated after his father's death.
He scolded violently a strange dog which came into the room through the open window; and he scolded another parrot (saying "you naughty polly") which had got out of its cage, and was eating apples on the kitchen table.
See also, to the same effect, Houzeau on parrots, 'Facults Mentales,' tom.
ii.
p.
309.
Dr. A. Moschkau informs me that he knew a starling which never made a mistake in saying in German "good morning" to persons arriving, and "good bye, old fellow," to those departing.
I could add several other such cases.
) The lower animals differ from man solely in his almost infinitely larger power of associating together the most diversified sounds and ideas; and this obviously depends on the high development of his mental powers.
As Horne Tooke, one of the founders of the noble science of philology, observes, language is an art, like brewing or baking; but writing would have been a better simile.
It certainly is not a true instinct, for every language has to be learnt.
It differs, however, widely from all ordinary arts, for man has an instinctive tendency to speak, as we see in the babble of our young children; whilst no child has an instinctive tendency to brew, bake, or write.
Moreover, no philologist now supposes that any language has been deliberately invented; it has been slowly and unconsciously developed by many steps.
(53.
See some good remarks on this head by Prof.
Whitney, in his 'Oriental and Linguistic Studies,' 1873, p.
354.
He observes that the desire of communication between man is the living force, which, in the development of language, "works both consciously and unconsciously; consciously as regards the immediate end to be attained; unconsciously as regards the further
) The sounds uttered by birds offer in several respects the nearest analogy to language, for all the members of the same species utter the same instinctive cries expressive of their emotions; and all the kinds which sing, exert their power instinctively;
These sounds, as Daines Barrington (54.
Hon.
Daines Barrington in 'Philosoph.
Transactions,' 1773, p.
262.
See also Dureau de la Malle, in 'Ann.
des.
Sc.
Nat.
' 3rd series, Zoolog.
, tom.
x.
p.
119.
) has proved, "are no more innate than language is in man".
The first attempts to sing "may be compared to the imperfect endeavour in a child to babble".
The young males continue practising, or as the bird-catchers say, "recording," for ten or eleven months.
Their first essays shew hardly a rudiment of the future song; but as they grow older we can perceive what they are aiming at; and at last they are said "to sing their song round".
Nestlings which have learnt the song of a distinct species, as with the canary-birds educated in the Tyrol, teach and transmit their new song to their offspring.
The slight natural differences of song in the same species inhabiting different districts may be appositely compared, as Barrington remarks, "to provincial dialects"; and the songs of allied, though distinct species may be compared with the languages of
I have given the foregoing details to shew that an instinctive tendency to acquire an art is not peculiar to man.
With respect to the origin of articulate language, after having read on the one side the highly interesting works of Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood, the Rev.
F. Farrar, and Prof.
Schleicher (55.
'On the Origin of Language,' by H. Wedgwood, 1866.
'Chapters on Language,' by the Rev.
F.W. Farrar, 1865.
These works are most interesting.
See also 'De la Phys.
et de Parole,' par Albert Lemoine, 1865, p.
190.
The work on this subject, by the late Prof.
Aug.
Schleicher, has been translated by Dr. Bikkers into English, under the title of 'Darwinism tested by the Science of Language,' 1869.
), and the celebrated lectures of Prof.
Max Muller on the other side, I cannot doubt that language owes its origin to the imitation and modification of various natural sounds, the voices of other animals, and man's own instinctive cries, aided by signs and gestures.
When we treat of sexual selection we shall see that primeval man, or rather some early progenitor of man, probably first used his voice in producing true musical cadences, that is in singing, as do some of the gibbon-apes at the present day; and we may
It is, therefore, probable that the imitation of musical cries by articulate sounds may have given rise to words expressive of various complex emotions.
The strong tendency in our nearest allies, the monkeys, in microcephalous idiots (56.
Vogt, 'Mmoire sur les Microcephales,' 1867, p.
169.
With respect to savages, I have given some facts in my 'Journal of Researches,' etc.
, 1845, p.
206.
), and in the barbarous races of mankind, to imitate whatever they hear deserves notice, as bearing on the subject of imitation.
Since monkeys certainly understand much that is said to them by man, and when wild, utter signal-cries of danger to their fellows (57.
See clear evidence on this head in the two works so often quoted, by Brehm and Rengger.
); and since fowls give distinct warnings for danger on the ground, or in the sky from hawks (both, as well as a third cry, intelligible to dogs) (58.
Houzeau gives a very curious account of his observations on this subject in his 'Facults Mentales des Animaux,' tom.
ii.
p.
348.
), may not some unusually wise ape- like animal have imitated the growl of a beast of prey, and thus told his fellow-monkeys the nature of the expected danger?
This would have been a first step in the formation of a language.
As the voice was used more and more, the vocal organs would have been strengthened and perfected through the principle of the inherited effects of use; and this would have reacted on the power of speech.
But the relation between the continued use of language and the development of the brain, has no doubt been far more important.
The mental powers in some early progenitor of man must have been more highly developed than in any existing ape, before even the most imperfect form of speech could have come into use; but we may confidently believe that the continued use and advancement
A complex train of thought can no more be carried on without the aid of words, whether spoken or silent, than a long calculation without the use of figures or algebra.
It appears, also, that even an ordinary train of thought almost requires, or is greatly facilitated by some form of language, for the dumb, deaf, and blind girl, Laura Bridgman, was observed to use her fingers whilst dreaming.
(59.
See remarks on this head by Dr. Maudsley, 'The Physiology and Pathology of Mind,' 2nd ed.
, 1868, p.
199.
) Nevertheless, a long succession of vivid and connected ideas may pass through the mind without the aid of any form of language, as we may infer from the movements of dogs during their dreams.
We have, also, seen that animals are able to reason to a certain extent, manifestly without the aid of language.
The intimate connection between the brain, as it is now developed in us, and the faculty of speech, is well shewn by those curious cases of brain-disease in which speech is specially affected, as when the power to remember substantives is lost, whilst
(60.
Many curious cases have been recorded.
See, for instance, Dr. Bateman 'On Aphasia,' 1870, pp.
27, 31, 53, 100, etc.
Also, 'Inquiries Concerning the Intellectual Powers,' by Dr. Abercrombie, 1838, p.
150.
) There is no more improbability in the continued use of the mental and vocal organs leading to inherited changes in their structure and functions, than in the case of hand-writing, which depends partly on the form of the hand and partly on the disposition
(61.
'The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
p.
6.
' Several writers, more especially Prof.
Max Muller (62.
Lectures on 'Mr. Darwin's Philosophy of Language,' 1873.
), have lately insisted that the use of language implies the power of forming general concepts; and that as no animals are supposed to possess this power, an impassable barrier is formed between them and man.
(63.
The judgment of a distinguished philologist, such as Prof.
Whitney, will have far more weight on this point than anything that I can say.
He remarks ('Oriental and Linguistic Studies,' 1873, p.
297), in speaking of Bleek's views: "Because on the grand scale language is the necessary auxiliary of thought, indispensable to the development of the power of thinking, to the distinctness and variety and complexity of cognitions to the full mastery of
He might just as reasonably assert that the human hand cannot act without a tool.
With such a doctrine to start from, he cannot stop short of Max Muller's worst paradoxes, that an infant (in fans, not speaking) is not a human being, and that deaf-mutes do not become possessed of reason until they learn to twist their fingers into
Max Muller gives in italics ('Lectures on Mr. Darwin's Philosophy of Language,' 1873, third lecture) this aphorism: "There is no thought without words, as little as there are words without thought".
What a strange definition must here be given to the word thought!
) With respect to animals, I have already endeavoured to shew that they have this power, at least in a rude and incipient degree.
As far as concerns infants of from ten to eleven months old, and deaf-mutes, it seems to me incredible, that they should be able to connect certain sounds with certain general ideas as quickly as they do, unless such ideas were already formed in their
The same remark may be extended to the more intelligent animals; as Mr. Leslie Stephen observes (64.
'Essays on Free Thinking,' etc.
, 1873, p.
82.
), "A dog frames a general concept of cats or sheep, and knows the corresponding words as well as a philosopher.
And the capacity to understand is as good a proof of vocal intelligence, though in an inferior degree, as the capacity to speak".
Why the organs now used for speech should have been originally perfected for this purpose, rather than any other organs, it is not difficult to see.
Ants have considerable powers of intercommunication by means of their antennae, as shewn by Huber, who devotes a whole chapter to their language.
We might have used our fingers as efficient instruments, for a person with practice can report to a deaf man every word of a speech rapidly delivered at a public meeting; but the loss of our hands, whilst thus employed, would have been a serious
As all the higher mammals possess vocal organs, constructed on the same general plan as ours, and used as a means of communication, it was obviously probable that these same organs would be still further developed if the power of communication had to be
(65.
See some good remarks to this effect by Dr. Maudsley, 'The Physiology and Pathology of Mind,' 1868, p.
199.
) The fact of the higher apes not using their vocal organs for speech, no doubt depends on their intelligence not having been sufficiently advanced.
The possession by them of organs, which with long-continued practice might have been used for speech, although not thus used, is paralleled by the case of many birds which possess organs fitted for singing, though they never sing.
Thus, the nightingale and crow have vocal organs similarly constructed, these being used by the former for diversified song, and by the latter only for croaking.
(66.
Macgillivray, 'Hist.
of British Birds,' vol.
ii.
1839, p.
29.
An excellent observer, Mr. Blackwall, remarks that the magpie learns to pronounce single words, and even short sentences, more readily than almost any other British bird; yet, as he adds, after long and closely investigating its habits, he has never known
'Researches in Zoology,' 1834, p.
158.
) If it be asked why apes have not had their intellects developed to the same degree as that of man, general causes only can be assigned in answer, and it is unreasonable to expect any thing more definite, considering our ignorance with respect to the
The formation of different languages and of distinct species, and the proofs that both have been developed through a gradual process, are curiously parallel.
(67.
See the very interesting parallelism between the development of species and languages, given by Sir C. Lyell in 'The Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man,' 1863, chap.
xxiii.
) But we can trace the formation of many words further back than that of species, for we can perceive how they actually arose from the imitation of various sounds.
We find in distinct languages striking homologies due to community of descent, and analogies due to a similar process of formation.
The manner in which certain letters or sounds change when others change is very like correlated growth.
We have in both cases the reduplication of parts, the effects of long-continued use, and so forth.
The frequent presence of rudiments, both in languages and in species, is still more remarkable.
The letter m in the word am, means I; so that in the expression I am, a superfluous and useless rudiment has been retained.
In the spelling also of words, letters often remain as the rudiments of ancient forms of pronunciation.
Languages, like organic beings, can be classed in groups under groups; and they can be classed either naturally according to descent, or artificially by other characters.
Dominant languages and dialects spread widely, and lead to the gradual extinction of other tongues.
A language, like a species, when once extinct, never, as Sir C. Lyell remarks, reappears.
The same language never has two birth-places.
Distinct languages may be crossed or blended together.
(68.
See remarks to this effect by the Rev.
F.W. Farrar, in an interesting article, entitled 'Philology and Darwinism,' in 'Nature,' March 24th, 1870, p.
528.
) We see variability in every tongue, and new words are continually cropping up; but as there is a limit to the powers of the memory, single words, like whole languages, gradually become extinct.
As Max Muller (69.
'Nature,' January 6th, 1870, p.
257.
) has well remarked:--"A struggle for life is constantly going on amongst the words and grammatical forms in each language.
The better, the shorter, the easier forms are constantly gaining the upper hand, and they owe their success to their own inherent virtue".
To these more important causes of the survival of certain words, mere novelty and fashion may be added; for there is in the mind of man a strong love for slight changes in all things.
The survival or preservation of certain favoured words in the struggle for existence is natural selection.
The perfectly regular and wonderfully complex construction of the languages of many barbarous nations has often been advanced as a proof, either of the divine origin of these languages, or of the high art and former civilisation of their founders.
Thus F. von Schlegel writes: "In those languages which appear to be at the lowest grade of intellectual culture, we frequently observe a very high and elaborate degree of art in their grammatical structure.
This is especially the case with the Basque and the Lapponian, and many of the American languages".
(70.
Quoted by C.S. Wake, 'Chapters on Man,' 1868, p.
101.
) But it is assuredly an error to speak of any language as an art, in the sense of its having been elaborately and methodically formed.
Philologists now admit that conjugations, declensions, etc.
, originally existed as distinct words, since joined together; and as such words express the most obvious relations between objects and persons, it is not surprising that they should have been used by the men of most races during the earliest ages.
With respect to perfection, the following illustration will best shew how easily we may err: a Crinoid sometimes consists of no less than 150,000 pieces of shell (71.
Buckland, 'Bridgewater Treatise,' p.
411.
), all arranged with perfect symmetry in radiating lines; but a naturalist does not consider an animal of this kind as more perfect than a bilateral one with comparatively few parts, and with none of these parts alike, excepting on the opposite sides of
He justly considers the differentiation and specialisation of organs as the test of perfection.
So with languages: the most symmetrical and complex ought not to be ranked above irregular, abbreviated, and bastardised languages, which have borrowed expressive words and useful forms of construction from various conquering, conquered, or immigrant
From these few and imperfect remarks I conclude that the extremely complex and regular construction of many barbarous languages, is no proof that they owe their origin to a special act of creation.
(72.
See some good remarks on the simplification of languages, by Sir J. Lubbock, 'Origin of Civilisation,' 1870, p.
278.
) Nor, as we have seen, does the faculty of articulate speech in itself offer any insuperable objection to the belief that man has been developed from some lower form.
SENSE OF BEAUTY.
This sense has been declared to be peculiar to man.
I refer here only to the pleasure given by certain colours, forms, and sounds, and which may fairly be called a sense of the beautiful; with cultivated men such sensations are, however, intimately associated with complex ideas and trains of thought.
When we behold a male bird elaborately displaying his graceful plumes or splendid colours before the female, whilst other birds, not thus decorated, make no such display, it is impossible to doubt that she admires the beauty of her male partner.
As women everywhere deck themselves with these plumes, the beauty of such ornaments cannot be disputed.
As we shall see later, the nests of humming-birds, and the playing passages of bower-birds are tastefully ornamented with gaily- coloured objects; and this shews that they must receive some kind of pleasure from the sight of such things.
With the great majority of animals, however, the taste for the beautiful is confined, as far as we can judge, to the attractions of the opposite sex.
The sweet strains poured forth by many male birds during the season of love, are certainly admired by the females, of which fact evidence will hereafter be given.
If female birds had been incapable of appreciating the beautiful colours, the ornaments, and voices of their male partners, all the labour and anxiety exhibited by the latter in displaying their charms before the females would have been thrown away; and
Why certain bright colours should excite pleasure cannot, I presume, be explained, any more than why certain flavours and scents are agreeable; but habit has something to do with the result, for that which is at first unpleasant to our senses, ultimately
With respect to sounds, Helmholtz has explained to a certain extent on physiological principles, why harmonies and certain cadences are agreeable.
But besides this, sounds frequently recurring at irregular intervals are highly disagreeable, as every one will admit who has listened at night to the irregular flapping of a rope on board ship.
The same principle seems to come into play with vision, as the eye prefers symmetry or figures with some regular recurrence.
Patterns of this kind are employed by even the lowest savages as ornaments; and they have been developed through sexual selection for the adornment of some male animals.
Whether we can or not give any reason for the pleasure thus derived from vision and hearing, yet man and many of the lower animals are alike pleased by the same colours, graceful shading and forms, and the same sounds.
The taste for the beautiful, at least as far as female beauty is concerned, is not of a special nature in the human mind; for it differs widely in the different races of man, and is not quite the same even in the different nations of the same race.
Judging from the hideous ornaments, and the equally hideous music admired by most savages, it might be urged that their aesthetic faculty was not so highly developed as in certain animals, for instance, as in birds.
Obviously no animal would be capable of admiring such scenes as the heavens at night, a beautiful landscape, or refined music; but such high tastes are acquired through culture, and depend on complex associations; they are not enjoyed by barbarians or by
Many of the faculties, which have been of inestimable service to man for his progressive advancement, such as the powers of the imagination, wonder, curiosity, an undefined sense of beauty, a tendency to imitation, and the love of excitement or novelty,
I have alluded to this point, because a recent writer (73.
'The Spectator,' Dec.
4th, 1869, p.
1430.
) has oddly fixed on Caprice "as one of the most remarkable and typical differences between savages and brutes".
But not only can we partially understand how it is that man is from various conflicting influences rendered capricious, but that the lower animals are, as we shall hereafter see, likewise capricious in their affections, aversions, and sense of beauty.
There is also reason to suspect that they love novelty, for its own sake.
BELIEF IN GOD--RELIGION.
There is no evidence that man was aboriginally endowed with the ennobling belief in the existence of an Omnipotent God.
On the contrary there is ample evidence, derived not from hasty travellers, but from men who have long resided with savages, that numerous races have existed, and still exist, who have no idea of one or more gods, and who have no words in their languages
(74.
See an excellent article on this subject by the Rev.
F.W. Farrar, in the 'Anthropological Review,' Aug.
1864, p.
ccxvii.
For further facts see Sir J. Lubbock, 'Prehistoric Times,' 2nd edit.
, 1869, p.
564; and especially the chapters on Religion in his 'Origin of Civilisation,' 1870.
) The question is of course wholly distinct from that higher one, whether there exists a Creator and Ruler of the universe; and this has been answered in the affirmative by some of the highest intellects that have ever existed.
If, however, we include under the term "religion" the belief in unseen or spiritual agencies, the case is wholly different; for this belief seems to be universal with the less civilised races.
Nor is it difficult to comprehend how it arose.
As soon as the important faculties of the imagination, wonder, and curiosity, together with some power of reasoning, had become partially developed, man would naturally crave to understand what was passing around him, and would have vaguely speculated on
As Mr. M'Lennan (75.
'The Worship of Animals and Plants,' in the 'Fortnightly Review,' Oct.
1, 1869, p.
422.
) has remarked, "Some explanation of the phenomena of life, a man must feign for himself, and to judge from the universality of it, the simplest hypothesis, and the first to occur to men, seems to have been that natural phenomena are ascribable to the
It is also probable, as Mr. Tylor has shewn, that dreams may have first given rise to the notion of spirits; for savages do not readily distinguish between subjective and objective impressions.
When a savage dreams, the figures which appear before him are believed to have come from a distance, and to stand over him; or "the soul of the dreamer goes out on its travels, and comes home with a remembrance of what it has seen".
(76.
Tylor, 'Early History of Mankind,' 1865, p.
6.
See also the three striking chapters on the 'Development of Religion,' in Lubbock's 'Origin of Civilisation,' 1870.
In a like manner Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his ingenious essay in the 'Fortnightly Review' (May 1st, 1870, p.
535), accounts for the earliest forms of religious belief throughout the world, by man being led through dreams, shadows, and other causes, to look at himself as a double essence, corporeal and spiritual.
As the spiritual being is supposed to exist after death and to be powerful, it is propitiated by various gifts and ceremonies, and its aid invoked.
He then further shews that names or nicknames given from some animal or other object, to the early progenitors or founders of a tribe, are supposed after a long interval to represent the real progenitor of the tribe; and such animal or object is then
Nevertheless I cannot but suspect that there is a still earlier and ruder stage, when anything which manifests power or movement is thought to be endowed with some form of life, and with mental faculties analogous to our own.
) But until the faculties of imagination, curiosity, reason, etc.
, had been fairly well developed in the mind of man, his dreams would not have led him to believe in spirits, any more than in the case of a dog.
The tendency in savages to imagine that natural objects and agencies are animated by spiritual or living essences, is perhaps illustrated by a little fact which I once noticed: my dog, a full-grown and very sensible animal, was lying on the lawn during a
As it was, every time that the parasol slightly moved, the dog growled fiercely and barked.
He must, I think, have reasoned to himself in a rapid and unconscious manner, that movement without any apparent cause indicated the presence of some strange living agent, and that no stranger had a right to be on his territory.
The belief in spiritual agencies would easily pass into the belief in the existence of one or more gods.
For savages would naturally attribute to spirits the same passions, the same love of vengeance or simplest form of justice, and the same affections which they themselves feel.
The Fuegians appear to be in this respect in an intermediate condition, for when the surgeon on board the "Beagle" shot some young ducklings as specimens, York Minster declared in the most solemn manner, "Oh, Mr. Bynoe, much rain, much snow, blow much";
So again he related how, when his brother killed a "wild man," storms long raged, much rain and snow fell.
Yet we could never discover that the Fuegians believed in what we should call a God, or practised any religious rites; and Jemmy Button, with justifiable pride, stoutly maintained that there was no devil in his land.
This latter assertion is the more remarkable, as with savages the belief in bad spirits is far more common than that in good ones.
The feeling of religious devotion is a highly complex one, consisting of love, complete submission to an exalted and mysterious superior, a strong sense of dependence (77.
See an able article on the 'Physical Elements of Religion,' by Mr. L. Owen Pike, in 'Anthropological Review,' April 1870, p.
lxiii.
), fear, reverence, gratitude, hope for the future, and perhaps other elements.
No being could experience so complex an emotion until advanced in his intellectual and moral faculties to at least a moderately high level.
Nevertheless, we see some distant approach to this state of mind in the deep love of a dog for his master, associated with complete submission, some fear, and perhaps other feelings.
The behaviour of a dog when returning to his master after an absence, and, as I may add, of a monkey to his beloved keeper, is widely different from that towards their fellows.
In the latter case the transports of joy appear to be somewhat less, and the sense of equality is shewn in every action.
Professor Braubach goes so far as to maintain that a dog looks on his master as on a god.
(78.
'Religion, Moral, etc.
, der Darwin'schen Art-Lehre,' 1869, s.
53.
It is said (Dr. W. Lauder Lindsay, 'Journal of Mental Science,' 1871, p.
43), that Bacon long ago, and the poet Burns, held the same notion.
) The same high mental faculties which first led man to believe in unseen spiritual agencies, then in fetishism, polytheism, and ultimately in monotheism, would infallibly lead him, as long as his reasoning powers remained poorly developed, to various
Many of these are terrible to think of--such as the sacrifice of human beings to a blood-loving god; the trial of innocent persons by the ordeal of poison or fire; witchcraft, etc.
--yet it is well occasionally to reflect on these superstitions, for they shew us what an infinite debt of gratitude we owe to the improvement of our reason, to science, and to our accumulated knowledge.
As Sir J. Lubbock (79.
'Prehistoric Times,' 2nd edit.
, p.
571.
In this work (p.
571) there will be found an excellent account of the many strange and capricious customs of savages.
) has well observed, "it is not too much to say that the horrible dread of unknown evil hangs like a thick cloud over savage life, and embitters every pleasure".
These miserable and indirect consequences of our highest faculties may be compared with the incidental and occasional mistakes of the instincts of the lower animals.
CHAPTER IV.
COMPARISON OF THE MENTAL POWERS OF MAN AND THE LOWER ANIMALS--continued.
The moral sense--Fundamental proposition--The qualities of social animals-- Origin of sociability--Struggle between opposed instincts--Man a social animal--The more enduring social instincts conquer other less persistent instincts--The social virtues alone
I fully subscribe to the judgment of those writers (1.
See, for instance, on this subject, Quatrefages, 'Unit de l'Espce Humaine,' 1861, p.
21, etc.
) who maintain that of all the differences between man and the lower animals, the moral sense or conscience is by far the most important.
This sense, as Mackintosh (2.
'Dissertation on Ethical Philosophy,' 1837, p.
231, etc.
) remarks, "has a rightful supremacy over every other principle of human action"; it is summed up in that short but imperious word "ought," so full of high significance.
It is the most noble of all the attributes of man, leading him without a moment's hesitation to risk his life for that of a fellow-creature; or after due deliberation, impelled simply by the deep feeling of right or duty, to sacrifice it in some great
Immanuel Kant exclaims, "Duty!
Wondrous thought, that workest neither by fond insinuation, flattery, nor by any threat, but merely by holding up thy naked law in the soul, and so extorting for thyself always reverence, if not always obedience; before whom all appetites are dumb, however
(3.
'Metaphysics of Ethics,' translated by J.W. Semple, Edinburgh, 1836, p.
136.
) This great question has been discussed by many writers (4.
Mr. Bain gives a list ('Mental and Moral Science,' 1868, pp.
543-725) of twenty-six British authors who have written on this subject, and whose names are familiar to every reader; to these, Mr. Bain's own name, and those of Mr. Lecky, Mr. Shadworth Hodgson, Sir J. Lubbock, and others, might be added.
) of consummate ability; and my sole excuse for touching on it, is the impossibility of here passing it over; and because, as far as I know, no one has approached it exclusively from the side of natural history.
The investigation possesses, also, some independent interest, as an attempt to see how far the study of the lower animals throws light on one of the highest psychical faculties of man.
The following proposition seems to me in a high degree probable--namely, that any animal whatever, endowed with well-marked social instincts (5.
Sir B. Brodie, after observing that man is a social animal ('Psychological Enquiries,' 1854, p.
192), asks the pregnant question, "ought not this to settle the disputed question as to the existence of a moral sense"?
Similar ideas have probably occurred to many persons, as they did long ago to Marcus Aurelius.
Mr. J.S. Mill speaks, in his celebrated work, 'Utilitarianism,' (1864, pp.
45, 46), of the social feelings as a "powerful natural sentiment," and as "the natural basis of sentiment for utilitarian morality".
Again he says, "Like the other acquired capacities above referred to, the moral faculty, if not a part of our nature, is a natural out-growth from it; capable, like them, in a certain small degree of springing up spontaneously".
But in opposition to all this, he also remarks, "if, as in my own belief, the moral feelings are not innate, but acquired, they are not for that reason less natural".
It is with hesitation that I venture to differ at all from so profound a thinker, but it can hardly be disputed that the social feelings are instinctive or innate in the lower animals; and why should they not be so in man?
Mr. Bain (see, for instance, 'The Emotions and the Will,' 1865, p.
481) and others believe that the moral sense is acquired by each individual during his lifetime.
On the general theory of evolution this is at least extremely improbable.
The ignoring of all transmitted mental qualities will, as it seems to me, be hereafter judged as a most serious blemish in the works of Mr. Mill.
), the parental and filial affections being here included, would inevitably acquire a moral sense or conscience, as soon as its intellectual powers had become as well, or nearly as well developed, as in man.
For, FIRSTLY, the social instincts lead an animal to take pleasure in the society of its fellows, to feel a certain amount of sympathy with them, and to perform various services for them.
The services may be of a definite and evidently instinctive nature; or there may be only a wish and readiness, as with most of the higher social animals, to aid their fellows in certain general ways.
But these feelings and services are by no means extended to all the individuals of the same species, only to those of the same association.
SECONDLY, as soon as the mental faculties had become highly developed, images of all past actions and motives would be incessantly passing through the brain of each individual: and that feeling of dissatisfaction, or even misery, which invariably results,
It is clear that many instinctive desires, such as that of hunger, are in their nature of short duration; and after being satisfied, are not readily or vividly recalled.
THIRDLY, after the power of language had been acquired, and the wishes of the community could be expressed, the common opinion how each member ought to act for the public good, would naturally become in a paramount degree the guide to action.
But it should be borne in mind that however great weight we may attribute to public opinion, our regard for the approbation and disapprobation of our fellows depends on sympathy, which, as we shall see, forms an essential part of the social instinct, and
LASTLY, habit in the individual would ultimately play a very important part in guiding the conduct of each member; for the social instinct, together with sympathy, is, like any other instinct, greatly strengthened by habit, and so consequently would be
These several subordinate propositions must now be discussed, and some of them at considerable length.
It may be well first to premise that I do not wish to maintain that any strictly social animal, if its intellectual faculties were to become as active and as highly developed as in man, would acquire exactly the same moral sense as ours.
In the same manner as various animals have some sense of beauty, though they admire widely-different objects, so they might have a sense of right and wrong, though led by it to follow widely different lines of conduct.
If, for instance, to take an extreme case, men were reared under precisely the same conditions as hive-bees, there can hardly be a doubt that our unmarried females would, like the worker-bees, think it a sacred duty to kill their brothers, and mothers
(6.
Mr. H. Sidgwick remarks, in an able discussion on this subject (the 'Academy,' June 15, 1872, p.
231), "a superior bee, we may feel sure, would aspire to a milder solution of the population question".
Judging, however, from the habits of many or most savages, man solves the problem by female infanticide, polyandry and promiscuous intercourse; therefore it may well be doubted whether it would be by a milder method.
Miss Cobbe, in commenting ('Darwinism in Morals,' 'Theological Review,' April 1872, pp.
188-191) on the same illustration, says, the PRINCIPLES of social duty would be thus reversed; and by this, I presume, she means that the fulfilment of a social duty would tend to the injury of individuals; but she overlooks the fact, which she would
She goes so far as to say that if the theory of ethics advocated in this chapter were ever generally accepted, "I cannot but believe that in the hour of their triumph would be sounded the knell of the virtue of mankind"!
It is to be hoped that the belief in the permanence of virtue on this earth is not held by many persons on so weak a tenure.
) Nevertheless, the bee, or any other social animal, would gain in our supposed case, as it appears to me, some feeling of right or wrong, or a conscience.
For each individual would have an inward sense of possessing certain stronger or more enduring instincts, and others less strong or enduring; so that there would often be a struggle as to which impulse should be followed; and satisfaction, dissatisfaction,
In this case an inward monitor would tell the animal that it would have been better to have followed the one impulse rather than the other.
The one course ought to have been followed, and the other ought not; the one would have been right and the other wrong; but to these terms I shall recur.
SOCIABILITY.
Animals of many kinds are social; we find even distinct species living together; for example, some American monkeys; and united flocks of rooks, jackdaws, and starlings.
Man shews the same feeling in his strong love for the dog, which the dog returns with interest.
Every one must have noticed how miserable horses, dogs, sheep, etc.
, are when separated from their companions, and what strong mutual affection the two former kinds, at least, shew on their reunion.
It is curious to speculate on the feelings of a dog, who will rest peacefully for hours in a room with his master or any of the family, without the least notice being taken of him; but if left for a short time by himself, barks or howls dismally.
We will confine our attention to the higher social animals; and pass over insects, although some of these are social, and aid one another in many important ways.
The most common mutual service in the higher animals is to warn one another of danger by means of the united senses of all.
Every sportsman knows, as Dr. Jaeger remarks (7.
'Die Darwin'sche Theorie,' s.
101.
), how difficult it is to approach animals in a herd or troop.
Wild horses and cattle do not, I believe, make any danger-signal; but the attitude of any one of them who first discovers an enemy, warns the others.
Rabbits stamp loudly on the ground with their hind-feet as a signal: sheep and chamois do the same with their forefeet, uttering likewise a whistle.
Many birds, and some mammals, post sentinels, which in the case of seals are said (8.
Mr. R. Brown in 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1868, p.
409.
) generally to be the females.
The leader of a troop of monkeys acts as the sentinel, and utters cries expressive both of danger and of safety.
(9.
Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. i.
1864, s.
52, 79.
For the case of the monkeys extracting thorns from each other, see s.
54.
With respect to the Hamadryas turning over stones, the fact is given (s.
76), on the evidence of Alvarez, whose observations Brehm thinks quite trustworthy.
For the cases of the old male baboons attacking the dogs, see s.
79; and with respect to the eagle, s.
56.
) Social animals perform many little services for each other: horses nibble, and cows lick each other, on any spot which itches: monkeys search each other for external parasites; and Brehm states that after a troop of the Cercopithecus griseo-viridis has
Animals also render more important services to one another: thus wolves and some other beasts of prey hunt in packs, and aid one another in attacking their victims.
Pelicans fish in concert.
The Hamadryas baboons turn over stones to find insects, etc.
; and when they come to a large one, as many as can stand round, turn it over together and share the booty.
Social animals mutually defend each other.
Bull bisons in N. America, when there is danger, drive the cows and calves into the middle of the herd, whilst they defend the outside.
I shall also in a future chapter give an account of two young wild bulls at Chillingham attacking an old one in concert, and of two stallions together trying to drive away a third stallion from a troop of mares.
In Abyssinia, Brehm encountered a great troop of baboons who were crossing a valley: some had already ascended the opposite mountain, and some were still in the valley; the latter were attacked by the dogs, but the old males immediately hurried down from
They were again encouraged to the attack; but by this time all the baboons had reascended the heights, excepting a young one, about six months old, who, loudly calling for aid, climbed on a block of rock, and was surrounded.
Now one of the largest males, a true hero, came down again from the mountain, slowly went to the young one, coaxed him, and triumphantly led him away--the dogs being too much astonished to make an attack.
I cannot resist giving another scene which was witnessed by this same naturalist; an eagle seized a young Cercopithecus, which, by clinging to a branch, was not at once carried off; it cried loudly for assistance, upon which the other members of the troop,
This eagle, as Brehm remarks, assuredly would never again attack a single monkey of a troop.
(10.
Mr. Belt gives the case of a spider-monkey (Ateles) in Nicaragua, which was heard screaming for nearly two hours in the forest, and was found with an eagle perched close by it.
The bird apparently feared to attack as long as it remained face to face; and Mr. Belt believes, from what he has seen of the habits of these monkeys, that they protect themselves from eagles by keeping two or three together.
'The Naturalist in Nicaragua,' 1874, p.
118.
) It is certain that associated animals have a feeling of love for each other, which is not felt by non-social adult animals.
How far in most cases they actually sympathise in the pains and pleasures of others, is more doubtful, especially with respect to pleasures.
Mr. Buxton, however, who had excellent means of observation (11.
'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' November 1868, p.
382.
), states that his macaws, which lived free in Norfolk, took "an extravagant interest" in a pair with a nest; and whenever the female left it, she was surrounded by a troop "screaming horrible acclamations in her honour".
It is often difficult to judge whether animals have any feeling for the sufferings of others of their kind.
Who can say what cows feel, when they surround and stare intently on a dying or dead companion; apparently, however, as Houzeau remarks, they feel no pity.
That animals sometimes are far from feeling any sympathy is too certain; for they will expel a wounded animal from the herd, or gore or worry it to death.
This is almost the blackest fact in natural history, unless, indeed, the explanation which has been suggested is true, that their instinct or reason leads them to expel an injured companion, lest beasts of prey, including man, should be tempted to follow
In this case their conduct is not much worse than that of the North American Indians, who leave their feeble comrades to perish on the plains; or the Fijians, who, when their parents get old, or fall ill, bury them alive.
(12.
Sir J. Lubbock, 'Prehistoric Times,' 2nd ed.
, p.
446.
) Many animals, however, certainly sympathise with each other's distress or danger.
This is the case even with birds.
Captain Stansbury (13.
As quoted by Mr. L.H. Morgan, 'The American Beaver,' 1868, p.
272.
Capt.
Stansbury also gives an interesting account of the manner in which a very young pelican, carried away by a strong stream, was guided and encouraged in its attempts to reach the shore by half a dozen old birds.
) found on a salt lake in Utah an old and completely blind pelican, which was very fat, and must have been well fed for a long time by his companions.
Mr. Blyth, as he informs me, saw Indian crows feeding two or three of their companions which were blind; and I have heard of an analogous case with the domestic cock.
We may, if we choose, call these actions instinctive; but such cases are much too rare for the development of any special instinct.
(14.
As Mr. Bain states, "effective aid to a sufferer springs from sympathy proper:" 'Mental and Moral Science,' 1868, p.
245.
) I have myself seen a dog, who never passed a cat who lay sick in a basket, and was a great friend of his, without giving her a few licks with his tongue, the surest sign of kind feeling in a dog.
It must be called sympathy that leads a courageous dog to fly at any one who strikes his master, as he certainly will.
I saw a person pretending to beat a lady, who had a very timid little dog on her lap, and the trial had never been made before; the little creature instantly jumped away, but after the pretended beating was over, it was really pathetic to see how
Brehm (15.
'Thierleben,' B. i.
s.
85.
) states that when a baboon in confinement was pursued to be punished, the others tried to protect him.
It must have been sympathy in the cases above given which led the baboons and Cercopitheci to defend their young comrades from the dogs and the eagle.
I will give only one other instance of sympathetic and heroic conduct, in the case of a little American monkey.
Several years ago a keeper at the Zoological Gardens shewed me some deep and scarcely healed wounds on the nape of his own neck, inflicted on him, whilst kneeling on the floor, by a fierce baboon.
The little American monkey, who was a warm friend of this keeper, lived in the same large compartment, and was dreadfully afraid of the great baboon.
Nevertheless, as soon as he saw his friend in peril, he rushed to the rescue, and by screams and bites so distracted the baboon that the man was able to escape, after, as the surgeon thought, running great risk of his life.
Besides love and sympathy, animals exhibit other qualities connected with the social instincts, which in us would be called moral; and I agree with Agassiz (16.
'De l'Espce et de la Classe,' 1869, p.
97.
) that dogs possess something very like a conscience.
Dogs possess some power of self-command, and this does not appear to be wholly the result of fear.
As Braubach (17.
'Die Darwin'sche Art-Lehre,' 1869, s.
54.
) remarks, they will refrain from stealing food in the absence of their master.
They have long been accepted as the very type of fidelity and obedience.
But the elephant is likewise very faithful to his driver or keeper, and probably considers him as the leader of the herd.
Dr. Hooker informs me that an elephant, which he was riding in India, became so deeply bogged that he remained stuck fast until the next day, when he was extricated by men with ropes.
Under such circumstances elephants will seize with their trunks any object, dead or alive, to place under their knees, to prevent their sinking deeper in the mud; and the driver was dreadfully afraid lest the animal should have seized Dr. Hooker and
But the driver himself, as Dr. Hooker was assured, ran no risk.
This forbearance under an emergency so dreadful for a heavy animal, is a wonderful proof of noble fidelity.
(18.
See also Hooker's 'Himalayan Journals,' vol.
ii.
1854, p.
333.
) All animals living in a body, which defend themselves or attack their enemies in concert, must indeed be in some degree faithful to one another; and those that follow a leader must be in some degree obedient.
When the baboons in Abyssinia (19.
Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. i.
s.
76.
) plunder a garden, they silently follow their leader; and if an imprudent young animal makes a noise, he receives a slap from the others to teach him silence and obedience.
Mr. Galton, who has had excellent opportunities for observing the half-wild cattle in S. Africa, says (20.
See his extremely interesting paper on 'Gregariousness in Cattle, and in Man,' 'Macmillan's Magazine,' Feb.
1871, p.
353.
), that they cannot endure even a momentary separation from the herd.
They are essentially slavish, and accept the common determination, seeking no better lot than to be led by any one ox who has enough self-reliance to accept the position.
The men who break in these animals for harness, watch assiduously for those who, by grazing apart, shew a self-reliant disposition, and these they train as fore-oxen.
Mr. Galton adds that such animals are rare and valuable; and if many were born they would soon be eliminated, as lions are always on the look-out for the individuals which wander from the herd.
With respect to the impulse which leads certain animals to associate together, and to aid one another in many ways, we may infer that in most cases they are impelled by the same sense of satisfaction or pleasure which they experience in performing other
We see this in innumerable instances, and it is illustrated in a striking manner by the acquired instincts of our domesticated animals; thus a young shepherd-dog delights in driving and running round a flock of sheep, but not in worrying them; a young
What a strong feeling of inward satisfaction must impel a bird, so full of activity, to brood day after day over her eggs.
Migratory birds are quite miserable if stopped from migrating; perhaps they enjoy starting on their long flight; but it is hard to believe that the poor pinioned goose, described by Audubon, which started on foot at the proper time for its journey of
Some instincts are determined solely by painful feelings, as by fear, which leads to self-preservation, and is in some cases directed towards special enemies.
No one, I presume, can analyse the sensations of pleasure or pain.
In many instances, however, it is probable that instincts are persistently followed from the mere force of inheritance, without the stimulus of either pleasure or pain.
A young pointer, when it first scents game, apparently cannot help pointing.
A squirrel in a cage who pats the nuts which it cannot eat, as if to bury them in the ground, can hardly be thought to act thus, either from pleasure or pain.
Hence the common assumption that men must be impelled to every action by experiencing some pleasure or pain may be erroneous.
Although a habit may be blindly and implicitly followed, independently of any pleasure or pain felt at the moment, yet if it be forcibly and abruptly checked, a vague sense of dissatisfaction is generally experienced.
It has often been assumed that animals were in the first place rendered social, and that they feel as a consequence uncomfortable when separated from each other, and comfortable whilst together; but it is a more probable view that these sensations were
The feeling of pleasure from society is probably an extension of the parental or filial affections, since the social instinct seems to be developed by the young remaining for a long time with their parents; and this extension may be attributed in part to
With those animals which were benefited by living in close association, the individuals which took the greatest pleasure in society would best escape various dangers, whilst those that cared least for their comrades, and lived solitary, would perish in
With respect to the origin of the parental and filial affections, which apparently lie at the base of the social instincts, we know not the steps by which they have been gained; but we may infer that it has been to a large extent through natural selection.
So it has almost certainly been with the unusual and opposite feeling of hatred between the nearest relations, as with the worker-bees which kill their brother drones, and with the queen-bees which kill their daughter-queens; the desire to destroy their
Parental affection, or some feeling which replaces it, has been developed in certain animals extremely low in the scale, for example, in star-fishes and spiders.
It is also occasionally present in a few members alone in a whole group of animals, as in the genus Forficula, or earwigs.
The all-important emotion of sympathy is distinct from that of love.
A mother may passionately love her sleeping and passive infant, but she can hardly at such times be said to feel sympathy for it.
The love of a man for his dog is distinct from sympathy, and so is that of a dog for his master.
Adam Smith formerly argued, as has Mr. Bain recently, that the basis of sympathy lies in our strong retentiveness of former states of pain or pleasure.
Hence, "the sight of another person enduring hunger, cold, fatigue, revives in us some recollection of these states, which are painful even in idea".
We are thus impelled to relieve the sufferings of another, in order that our own painful feelings may be at the same time relieved.
In like manner we are led to participate in the pleasures of others.
(21.
See the first and striking chapter in Adam Smith's 'Theory of Moral Sentiments.
' Also 'Mr. Bain's Mental and Moral Science,' 1868, pp.
244, and 275-282.
Mr. Bain states, that, "sympathy is, indirectly, a source of pleasure to the sympathiser"; and he accounts for this through reciprocity.
He remarks that "the person benefited, or others in his stead, may make up, by sympathy and good offices returned, for all the sacrifice".
But if, as appears to be the case, sympathy is strictly an instinct, its exercise would give direct pleasure, in the same manner as the exercise, as before remarked, of almost every other instinct.
) But I cannot see how this view explains the fact that sympathy is excited, in an immeasurably stronger degree, by a beloved, than by an indifferent person.
The mere sight of suffering, independently of love, would suffice to call up in us vivid recollections and associations.
The explanation may lie in the fact that, with all animals, sympathy is directed solely towards the members of the same community, and therefore towards known, and more or less beloved members, but not to all the individuals of the same species.
This fact is not more surprising than that the fears of many animals should be directed against special enemies.
Species which are not social, such as lions and tigers, no doubt feel sympathy for the suffering of their own young, but not for that of any other animal.
With mankind, selfishness, experience, and imitation, probably add, as Mr. Bain has shewn, to the power of sympathy; for we are led by the hope of receiving good in return to perform acts of sympathetic kindness to others; and sympathy is much strengthened
In however complex a manner this feeling may have originated, as it is one of high importance to all those animals which aid and defend one another, it will have been increased through natural selection; for those communities, which included the greatest
It is, however, impossible to decide in many cases whether certain social instincts have been acquired through natural selection, or are the indirect result of other instincts and faculties, such as sympathy, reason, experience, and a tendency to
So remarkable an instinct as the placing sentinels to warn the community of danger, can hardly have been the indirect result of any of these faculties; it must, therefore, have been directly acquired.
On the other hand, the habit followed by the males of some social animals of defending the community, and of attacking their enemies or their prey in concert, may perhaps have originated from mutual sympathy; but courage, and in most cases strength, must
Of the various instincts and habits, some are much stronger than others; that is, some either give more pleasure in their performance, and more distress in their prevention, than others; or, which is probably quite as important, they are, through
We are ourselves conscious that some habits are much more difficult to cure or change than others.
Hence a struggle may often be observed in animals between different instincts, or between an instinct and some habitual disposition; as when a dog rushes after a hare, is rebuked, pauses, hesitates, pursues again, or returns ashamed to his master; or as
But the most curious instance known to me of one instinct getting the better of another, is the migratory instinct conquering the maternal instinct.
The former is wonderfully strong; a confined bird will at the proper season beat her breast against the wires of her cage, until it is bare and bloody.
It causes young salmon to leap out of the fresh water, in which they could continue to exist, and thus unintentionally to commit suicide.
Every one knows how strong the maternal instinct is, leading even timid birds to face great danger, though with hesitation, and in opposition to the instinct of self-preservation.
Nevertheless, the migratory instinct is so powerful, that late in the autumn swallows, house-martins, and swifts frequently desert their tender young, leaving them to perish miserably in their nests.
(22.
This fact, the Rev.
L. Jenyns states (see his edition of 'White's Nat.
Hist.
of Selborne,' 1853, p.
204) was first recorded by the illustrious Jenner, in 'Phil.
Transact.
' 1824, and has since been confirmed by several observers, especially by Mr. Blackwall.
This latter careful observer examined, late in the autumn, during two years, thirty-six nests; he found that twelve contained young dead birds, five contained eggs on the point of being hatched, and three, eggs not nearly hatched.
Many birds, not yet old enough for a prolonged flight, are likewise deserted and left behind.
See Blackwall, 'Researches in Zoology,' 1834, pp.
108, 118.
For some additional evidence, although this is not wanted, see Leroy, 'Lettres Phil.
' 1802, p.
217.
For Swifts, Gould's 'Introduction to the Birds of Great Britain,' 1823, p.
5.
Similar cases have been observed in Canada by Mr. Adams; 'Pop.
Science Review,' July 1873, p.
283.
) We can perceive that an instinctive impulse, if it be in any way more beneficial to a species than some other or opposed instinct, would be rendered the more potent of the two through natural selection; for the individuals which had it most strongly
Whether this is the case with the migratory in comparison with the maternal instinct, may be doubted.
The great persistence, or steady action of the former at certain seasons of the year during the whole day, may give it for a time paramount force.
MAN A SOCIAL ANIMAL.
Every one will admit that man is a social being.
We see this in his dislike of solitude, and in his wish for society beyond that of his own family.
Solitary confinement is one of the severest punishments which can be inflicted.
Some authors suppose that man primevally lived in single families; but at the present day, though single families, or only two or three together, roam the solitudes of some savage lands, they always, as far as I can discover, hold friendly relations with
Such families occasionally meet in council, and unite for their common defence.
It is no argument against savage man being a social animal, that the tribes inhabiting adjacent districts are almost always at war with each other; for the social instincts never extend to all the individuals of the same species.
Judging from the analogy of the majority of the Quadrumana, it is probable that the early ape-like progenitors of man were likewise social; but this is not of much importance for us.
Although man, as he now exists, has few special instincts, having lost any which his early progenitors may have possessed, this is no reason why he should not have retained from an extremely remote period some degree of instinctive love and sympathy for
We are indeed all conscious that we do possess such sympathetic feelings (23.
Hume remarks ('An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals,' edit.
of 1751, p.
132), "There seems a necessity for confessing that the happiness and misery of others are not spectacles altogether indifferent to us, but that the view of the former...communicates a secret joy; the appearance of the latter...
throws a melancholy damp over the imagination".
); but our consciousness does not tell us whether they are instinctive, having originated long ago in the same manner as with the lower animals, or whether they have been acquired by each of us during our early years.
As man is a social animal, it is almost certain that he would inherit a tendency to be faithful to his comrades, and obedient to the leader of his tribe; for these qualities are common to most social animals.
He would consequently possess some capacity for self-command.
He would from an inherited tendency be willing to defend, in concert with others, his fellow-men; and would be ready to aid them in any way, which did not too greatly interfere with his own welfare or his own strong desires.
The social animals which stand at the bottom of the scale are guided almost exclusively, and those which stand higher in the scale are largely guided, by special instincts in the aid which they give to the members of the same community; but they are
Although man, as just remarked, has no special instincts to tell him how to aid his fellow- men, he still has the impulse, and with his improved intellectual faculties would naturally be much guided in this respect by reason and experience.
Instinctive sympathy would also cause him to value highly the approbation of his fellows; for, as Mr. Bain has clearly shewn (24.
'Mental and Moral Science,' 1868, p.
254.
), the love of praise and the strong feeling of glory, and the still stronger horror of scorn and infamy, "are due to the workings of sympathy".
Consequently man would be influenced in the highest degree by the wishes, approbation, and blame of his fellow-men, as expressed by their gestures and language.
Thus the social instincts, which must have been acquired by man in a very rude state, and probably even by his early ape-like progenitors, still give the impulse to some of his best actions; but his actions are in a higher degree determined by the
But as love, sympathy and self-command become strengthened by habit, and as the power of reasoning becomes clearer, so that man can value justly the judgments of his fellows, he will feel himself impelled, apart from any transitory pleasure or pain, to
He might then declare--not that any barbarian or uncultivated man could thus think--I am the supreme judge of my own conduct, and in the words of Kant, I will not in my own person violate the dignity of humanity.
THE MORE ENDURING SOCIAL INSTINCTS CONQUER THE LESS PERSISTENT INSTINCTS.
We have not, however, as yet considered the main point, on which, from our present point of view, the whole question of the moral sense turns.
Why should a man feel that he ought to obey one instinctive desire rather than another?
Why is he bitterly regretful, if he has yielded to a strong sense of self-preservation, and has not risked his life to save that of a fellow- creature?
or why does he regret having stolen food from hunger?
It is evident in the first place, that with mankind the instinctive impulses have different degrees of strength; a savage will risk his own life to save that of a member of the same community, but will be wholly indifferent about a stranger: a young and
Nevertheless many a civilised man, or even boy, who never before risked his life for another, but full of courage and sympathy, has disregarded the instinct of self-preservation, and plunged at once into a torrent to save a drowning man, though a stranger.
In this case man is impelled by the same instinctive motive, which made the heroic little American monkey, formerly described, save his keeper, by attacking the great and dreaded baboon.
Such actions as the above appear to be the simple result of the greater strength of the social or maternal instincts rather than that of any other instinct or motive; for they are performed too instantaneously for reflection, or for pleasure or pain to be
In a timid man, on the other hand, the instinct of self-preservation might be so strong, that he would be unable to force himself to run any such risk, perhaps not even for his own child.
I am aware that some persons maintain that actions performed impulsively, as in the above cases, do not come under the dominion of the moral sense, and cannot be called moral.
They confine this term to actions done deliberately, after a victory over opposing desires, or when prompted by some exalted motive.
But it appears scarcely possible to draw any clear line of distinction of this kind.
(25.
I refer here to the distinction between what has been called MATERIAL and FORMAL morality.
I am glad to find that Professor Huxley ('Critiques and Addresses,' 1873, p.
287) takes the same view on this subject as I do.
Mr. Leslie Stephen remarks ('Essays on Freethinking and Plain Speaking,' 1873, p.
83), "the metaphysical distinction, between material and formal morality is as irrelevant as other such distinctions".
) As far as exalted motives are concerned, many instances have been recorded of savages, destitute of any feeling of general benevolence towards mankind, and not guided by any religious motive, who have deliberately sacrificed their lives as prisoners(26.
I have given one such case, namely of three Patagonian Indians who preferred being shot, one after the other, to betraying the plans of their companions in war ('Journal of Researches,' 1845, p.
103).
), rather than betray their comrades; and surely their conduct ought to be considered as moral.
As far as deliberation, and the victory over opposing motives are concerned, animals may be seen doubting between opposed instincts, in rescuing their offspring or comrades from danger; yet their actions, though done for the good of others, are not called
Moreover, anything performed very often by us, will at last be done without deliberation or hesitation, and can then hardly be distinguished from an instinct; yet surely no one will pretend that such an action ceases to be moral.
On the contrary, we all feel that an act cannot be considered as perfect, or as performed in the most noble manner, unless it be done impulsively, without deliberation or effort, in the same manner as by a man in whom the requisite qualities are innate.
He who is forced to overcome his fear or want of sympathy before he acts, deserves, however, in one way higher credit than the man whose innate disposition leads him to a good act without effort.
As we cannot distinguish between motives, we rank all actions of a certain class as moral, if performed by a moral being.
A moral being is one who is capable of comparing his past and future actions or motives, and of approving or disapproving of them.
We have no reason to suppose that any of the lower animals have this capacity; therefore, when a Newfoundland dog drags a child out of the water, or a monkey faces danger to rescue its comrade, or takes charge of an orphan monkey, we do not call its
But in the case of man, who alone can with certainty be ranked as a moral being, actions of a certain class are called moral, whether performed deliberately, after a struggle with opposing motives, or impulsively through instinct, or from the effects of
But to return to our more immediate subject.
Although some instincts are more powerful than others, and thus lead to corresponding actions, yet it is untenable, that in man the social instincts (including the love of praise and fear of blame) possess greater strength, or have, through long habit,
Why then does man regret, even though trying to banish such regret, that he has followed the one natural impulse rather than the other; and why does he further feel that he ought to regret his conduct?
Man in this respect differs profoundly from the lower animals.
Nevertheless we can, I think, see with some degree of clearness the reason of this difference.
Man, from the activity of his mental faculties, cannot avoid reflection: past impressions and images are incessantly and clearly passing through his mind.
Now with those animals which live permanently in a body, the social instincts are ever present and persistent.
Such animals are always ready to utter the danger-signal, to defend the community, and to give aid to their fellows in accordance with their habits; they feel at all times, without the stimulus of any special passion or desire, some degree of love and
So it is with ourselves.
Even when we are quite alone, how often do we think with pleasure or pain of what others think of us,--of their imagined approbation or disapprobation; and this all follows from sympathy, a fundamental element of the social instincts.
A man who possessed no trace of such instincts would be an unnatural monster.
On the other hand, the desire to satisfy hunger, or any passion such as vengeance, is in its nature temporary, and can for a time be fully satisfied.
Nor is it easy, perhaps hardly possible, to call up with complete vividness the feeling, for instance, of hunger; nor indeed, as has often been remarked, of any suffering.
The instinct of self- preservation is not felt except in the presence of danger; and many a coward has thought himself brave until he has met his enemy face to face.
The wish for another man's property is perhaps as persistent a desire as any that can be named; but even in this case the satisfaction of actual possession is generally a weaker feeling than the desire: many a thief, if not a habitual one, after success
(27.
Enmity or hatred seems also to be a highly persistent feeling, perhaps more so than any other that can be named.
Envy is defined as hatred of another for some excellence or success; and Bacon insists (Essay ix.
), "Of all other affections envy is the most importune and continual".
Dogs are very apt to hate both strange men and strange dogs, especially if they live near at hand, but do not belong to the same family, tribe, or clan; this feeling would thus seem to be innate, and is certainly a most persistent one.
It seems to be the complement and converse of the true social instinct.
From what we hear of savages, it would appear that something of the same kind holds good with them.
If this be so, it would be a small step in any one to transfer such feelings to any member of the same tribe if he had done him an injury and had become his enemy.
Nor is it probable that the primitive conscience would reproach a man for injuring his enemy; rather it would reproach him, if he had not revenged himself.
To do good in return for evil, to love your enemy, is a height of morality to which it may be doubted whether the social instincts would, by themselves, have ever led us.
It is necessary that these instincts, together with sympathy, should have been highly cultivated and extended by the aid of reason, instruction, and the love or fear of God, before any such golden rule would ever be thought of and obeyed.
) A man cannot prevent past impressions often repassing through his mind; he will thus be driven to make a comparison between the impressions of past hunger, vengeance satisfied, or danger shunned at other men's cost, with the almost ever-present instinct
This knowledge cannot be banished from his mind, and from instinctive sympathy is esteemed of great moment.
He will then feel as if he had been baulked in following a present instinct or habit, and this with all animals causes dissatisfaction, or even misery.
The above case of the swallow affords an illustration, though of a reversed nature, of a temporary though for the time strongly persistent instinct conquering another instinct, which is usually dominant over all others.
At the proper season these birds seem all day long to be impressed with the desire to migrate; their habits change; they become restless, are noisy and congregate in flocks.
Whilst the mother-bird is feeding, or brooding over her nestlings, the maternal instinct is probably stronger than the migratory; but the instinct which is the more persistent gains the victory, and at last, at a moment when her young ones are not in
When arrived at the end of her long journey, and the migratory instinct has ceased to act, what an agony of remorse the bird would feel, if, from being endowed with great mental activity, she could not prevent the image constantly passing through her mind,
At the moment of action, man will no doubt be apt to follow the stronger impulse; and though this may occasionally prompt him to the noblest deeds, it will more commonly lead him to gratify his own desires at the expense of other men.
But after their gratification when past and weaker impressions are judged by the ever-enduring social instinct, and by his deep regard for the good opinion of his fellows, retribution will surely come.
He will then feel remorse, repentance, regret, or shame; this latter feeling, however, relates almost exclusively to the judgment of others.
He will consequently resolve more or less firmly to act differently for the future; and this is conscience; for conscience looks backwards, and serves as a guide for the future.
The nature and strength of the feelings which we call regret, shame, repentance or remorse, depend apparently not only on the strength of the violated instinct, but partly on the strength of the temptation, and often still more on the judgment of our
How far each man values the appreciation of others, depends on the strength of his innate or acquired feeling of sympathy; and on his own capacity for reasoning out the remote consequences of his acts.
Another element is most important, although not necessary, the reverence or fear of the Gods, or Spirits believed in by each man: and this applies especially in cases of remorse.
Several critics have objected that though some slight regret or repentance may be explained by the view advocated in this chapter, it is impossible thus to account for the soul-shaking feeling of remorse.
But I can see little force in this objection.
My critics do not define what they mean by remorse, and I can find no definition implying more than an overwhelming sense of repentance.
Remorse seems to bear the same relation to repentance, as rage does to anger, or agony to pain.
It is far from strange that an instinct so strong and so generally admired, as maternal love, should, if disobeyed, lead to the deepest misery, as soon as the impression of the past cause of disobedience is weakened.
Even when an action is opposed to no special instinct, merely to know that our friends and equals despise us for it is enough to cause great misery.
Who can doubt that the refusal to fight a duel through fear has caused many men an agony of shame?
Many a Hindoo, it is said, has been stirred to the bottom of his soul by having partaken of unclean food.
Here is another case of what must, I think, be called remorse.
Dr. Landor acted as a magistrate in West Australia, and relates (28.
'Insanity in Relation to Law,' Ontario, United States, 1871, p.
1.
), that a native on his farm, after losing one of his wives from disease, came and said that, "he was going to a distant tribe to spear a woman, to satisfy his sense of duty to his wife.
I told him that if he did so, I would send him to prison for life.
He remained about the farm for some months, but got exceedingly thin, and complained that he could not rest or eat, that his wife's spirit was haunting him, because he had not taken a life for hers.
I was inexorable, and assured him that nothing should save him if he did".
Nevertheless the man disappeared for more than a year, and then returned in high condition; and his other wife told Dr. Landor that her husband had taken the life of a woman belonging to a distant tribe; but it was impossible to obtain legal evidence of
The breach of a rule held sacred by the tribe, will thus, as it seems, give rise to the deepest feelings,--and this quite apart from the social instincts, excepting in so far as the rule is grounded on the judgment of the community.
How so many strange superstitions have arisen throughout the world we know not; nor can we tell how some real and great crimes, such as incest, have come to be held in an abhorrence (which is not however quite universal) by the lowest savages.
It is even doubtful whether in some tribes incest would be looked on with greater horror, than would the marriage of a man with a woman bearing the same name, though not a relation.
"To violate this law is a crime which the Australians hold in the greatest abhorrence, in this agreeing exactly with certain tribes of North America.
When the question is put in either district, is it worse to kill a girl of a foreign tribe, or to marry a girl of one's own, an answer just opposite to ours would be given without hesitation".
(29.
E.B. Tylor, in 'Contemporary Review,' April 1873, p.
707.
) We may, therefore, reject the belief, lately insisted on by some writers, that the abhorrence of incest is due to our possessing a special God-implanted conscience.
On the whole it is intelligible, that a man urged by so powerful a sentiment as remorse, though arising as above explained, should be led to act in a manner, which he has been taught to believe serves as an expiation, such as delivering himself up to
Man prompted by his conscience, will through long habit acquire such perfect self-command, that his desires and passions will at last yield instantly and without a struggle to his social sympathies and instincts, including his feeling for the judgment of
The still hungry, or the still revengeful man will not think of stealing food, or of wreaking his vengeance.
It is possible, or as we shall hereafter see, even probable, that the habit of self-command may, like other habits, be inherited.
Thus at last man comes to feel, through acquired and perhaps inherited habit, that it is best for him to obey his more persistent impulses.
The imperious word "ought" seems merely to imply the consciousness of the existence of a rule of conduct, however it may have originated.
Formerly it must have been often vehemently urged that an insulted gentleman OUGHT to fight a duel.
We even say that a pointer OUGHT to point, and a retriever to retrieve game.
If they fail to do so, they fail in their duty and act wrongly.
If any desire or instinct leading to an action opposed to the good of others still appears, when recalled to mind, as strong as, or stronger than, the social instinct, a man will feel no keen regret at having followed it; but he will be conscious that if
If he has no such sympathy, and if his desires leading to bad actions are at the time strong, and when recalled are not over-mastered by the persistent social instincts, and the judgment of others, then he is essentially a bad man (30.
Dr. Prosper Despine, in his Psychologie Naturelle, 1868 (tom.
i.
p.
243; tom.
ii.
p.
169) gives many curious cases of the worst criminals, who apparently have been entirely destitute of conscience.
); and the sole restraining motive left is the fear of punishment, and the conviction that in the long run it would be best for his own selfish interests to regard the good of others rather than his own.
It is obvious that every one may with an easy conscience gratify his own desires, if they do not interfere with his social instincts, that is with the good of others; but in order to be quite free from self-reproach, or at least of anxiety, it is almost
Nor must he break through the fixed habits of his life, especially if these are supported by reason; for if he does, he will assuredly feel dissatisfaction.
He must likewise avoid the reprobation of the one God or gods in whom, according to his knowledge or superstition, he may believe; but in this case the additional fear of divine punishment often supervenes.
THE STRICTLY SOCIAL VIRTUES AT FIRST ALONE REGARDED.
The above view of the origin and nature of the moral sense, which tells us what we ought to do, and of the conscience which reproves us if we disobey it, accords well with what we see of the early and undeveloped condition of this faculty in mankind.
The virtues which must be practised, at least generally, by rude men, so that they may associate in a body, are those which are still recognised as the most important.
But they are practised almost exclusively in relation to the men of the same tribe; and their opposites are not regarded as crimes in relation to the men of other tribes.
No tribe could hold together if murder, robbery, treachery, etc.
, were common; consequently such crimes within the limits of the same tribe "are branded with everlasting infamy" (31.
See an able article in the 'North British Review,' 1867, p.
395.
See also Mr. W. Bagehot's articles on the Importance of Obedience and Coherence to Primitive Man, in the 'Fortnightly Review,' 1867, p.
529, and 1868, p.
457, etc.
); but excite no such sentiment beyond these limits.
A North-American Indian is well pleased with himself, and is honoured by others, when he scalps a man of another tribe; and a Dyak cuts off the head of an unoffending person, and dries it as a trophy.
The murder of infants has prevailed on the largest scale throughout the world (32.
The fullest account which I have met with is by Dr. Gerland, in his 'Ueber den Aussterben der Naturvlker,' 1868; but I shall have to recur to the subject of infanticide in a future chapter.
), and has met with no reproach; but infanticide, especially of females, has been thought to be good for the tribe, or at least not injurious.
Suicide during former times was not generally considered as a crime (33.
See the very interesting discussion on suicide in Lecky's 'History of European Morals,' vol.
i.
1869, p.
223.
With respect to savages, Mr. Winwood Reade informs me that the negroes of West Africa often commit suicide.
It is well known how common it was amongst the miserable aborigines of South America after the Spanish conquest.
For New Zealand, see the voyage of the Novara, and for the Aleutian Islands, Mller, as quoted by Houzeau, 'Les Facults Mentales,' etc.
, tom.
ii.
p.
136.
), but rather, from the courage displayed, as an honourable act; and it is still practised by some semi- civilised and savage nations without reproach, for it does not obviously concern others of the tribe.
It has been recorded that an Indian Thug conscientiously regretted that he had not robbed and strangled as many travellers as did his father before him.
In a rude state of civilisation the robbery of strangers is, indeed, generally considered as honourable.
Slavery, although in some ways beneficial during ancient times (34.
See Mr. Bagehot, 'Physics and Politics,' 1872, p.
72.
), is a great crime; yet it was not so regarded until quite recently, even by the most civilised nations.
And this was especially the case, because the slaves belonged in general to a race different from that of their masters.
As barbarians do not regard the opinion of their women, wives are commonly treated like slaves.
Most savages are utterly indifferent to the sufferings of strangers, or even delight in witnessing them.
It is well known that the women and children of the North-American Indians aided in torturing their enemies.
Some savages take a horrid pleasure in cruelty to animals (35.
See, for instance, Mr. Hamilton's account of the Kaffirs, 'Anthropological Review,' 1870, p.
xv.
), and humanity is an unknown virtue.
Nevertheless, besides the family affections, kindness is common, especially during sickness, between the members of the same tribe, and is sometimes extended beyond these limits.
Mungo Park's touching account of the kindness of the negro women of the interior to him is well known.
Many instances could be given of the noble fidelity of savages towards each other, but not to strangers; common experience justifies the maxim of the Spaniard, "Never, never trust an Indian".
There cannot be fidelity without truth; and this fundamental virtue is not rare between the members of the same tribe: thus Mungo Park heard the negro women teaching their young children to love the truth.
This, again, is one of the virtues which becomes so deeply rooted in the mind, that it is sometimes practised by savages, even at a high cost, towards strangers; but to lie to your enemy has rarely been thought a sin, as the history of modern diplomacy too
As soon as a tribe has a recognised leader, disobedience becomes a crime, and even abject submission is looked at as a sacred virtue.
As during rude times no man can be useful or faithful to his tribe without courage, this quality has universally been placed in the highest rank; and although in civilised countries a good yet timid man may be far more useful to the community than a brave
Prudence, on the other hand, which does not concern the welfare of others, though a very useful virtue, has never been highly esteemed.
As no man can practise the virtues necessary for the welfare of his tribe without self-sacrifice, self- command, and the power of endurance, these qualities have been at all times highly and most justly valued.
The American savage voluntarily submits to the most horrid tortures without a groan, to prove and strengthen his fortitude and courage; and we cannot help admiring him, or even an Indian Fakir, who, from a foolish religious motive, swings suspended by a
The other so-called self-regarding virtues, which do not obviously, though they may really, affect the welfare of the tribe, have never been esteemed by savages, though now highly appreciated by civilised nations.
The greatest intemperance is no reproach with savages.
Utter licentiousness, and unnatural crimes, prevail to an astounding extent.
(36.
Mr. M'Lennan has given ('Primitive Marriage,' 1865, p.
176) a good collection of facts on this head.
) As soon, however, as marriage, whether polygamous, or monogamous, becomes common, jealousy will lead to the inculcation of female virtue; and this, being honoured, will tend to spread to the unmarried females.
How slowly it spreads to the male sex, we see at the present day.
Chastity eminently requires self-command; therefore it has been honoured from a very early period in the moral history of civilised man.
As a consequence of this, the senseless practice of celibacy has been ranked from a remote period as a virtue.
(38.
Lecky, 'History of European Morals,' vol.
i.
1869, p.
109.
) The hatred of indecency, which appears to us so natural as to be thought innate, and which is so valuable an aid to chastity, is a modern virtue, appertaining exclusively, as Sir G. Staunton remarks (38.
'Embassy to China,' vol.
ii.
p.
348.
), to civilised life.
This is shewn by the ancient religious rites of various nations, by the drawings on the walls of Pompeii, and by the practices of many savages.
We have now seen that actions are regarded by savages, and were probably so regarded by primeval man, as good or bad, solely as they obviously affect the welfare of the tribe,--not that of the species, nor that of an individual member of the tribe.
This conclusion agrees well with the belief that the so-called moral sense is aboriginally derived from the social instincts, for both relate at first exclusively to the community.
The chief causes of the low morality of savages, as judged by our standard, are, firstly, the confinement of sympathy to the same tribe.
Secondly, powers of reasoning insufficient to recognise the bearing of many virtues, especially of the self-regarding virtues, on the general welfare of the tribe.
Savages, for instance, fail to trace the multiplied evils consequent on a want of temperance, chastity, etc.
And, thirdly, weak power of self-command; for this power has not been strengthened through long-continued, perhaps inherited, habit, instruction and religion.
I have entered into the above details on the immorality of savages (39.
See on this subject copious evidence in Chap.
vii.
of Sir J. Lubbock, 'Origin of Civilisation,' 1870.
), because some authors have recently taken a high view of their moral nature, or have attributed most of their crimes to mistaken benevolence.
(40.
For instance Lecky, 'History of European Morals,' vol.
i.
p.
124.
) These authors appear to rest their conclusion on savages possessing those virtues which are serviceable, or even necessary, for the existence of the family and of the tribe,--qualities which they undoubtedly do possess, and often in a high degree.
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
It was assumed formerly by philosophers of the derivative (41.
This term is used in an able article in the 'Westminster Review,' Oct.
1869, p.
498.
For the "Greatest happiness principle," see J.S. Mill, 'Utilitarianism,' p.
17.
) school of morals that the foundation of morality lay in a form of Selfishness; but more recently the "Greatest happiness principle" has been brought prominently forward.
It is, however, more correct to speak of the latter principle as the standard, and not as the motive of conduct.
Nevertheless, all the authors whose works I have consulted, with a few exceptions (42.
Mill recognises ('System of Logic,' vol.
ii.
p.
422) in the clearest manner, that actions may be performed through habit without the anticipation of pleasure.
Mr. H. Sidgwick also, in his Essay on Pleasure and Desire ('The Contemporary Review,' April 1872, p.
671), remarks: "To sum up, in contravention of the doctrine that our conscious active impulses are always directed towards the production of agreeable sensations in ourselves, I would maintain that we find everywhere in consciousness extra-regarding
A dim feeling that our impulses do not by any means always arise from any contemporaneous or anticipated pleasure, has, I cannot but think, been one chief cause of the acceptance of the intuitive theory of morality, and of the rejection of the utilitarian
With respect to the latter theory the standard and the motive of conduct have no doubt often been confused, but they are really in some degree blended.
), write as if there must be a distinct motive for every action, and that this must be associated with some pleasure or displeasure.
But man seems often to act impulsively, that is from instinct or long habit, without any consciousness of pleasure, in the same manner as does probably a bee or ant, when it blindly follows its instincts.
Under circumstances of extreme peril, as during a fire, when a man endeavours to save a fellow-creature without a moment's hesitation, he can hardly feel pleasure; and still less has he time to reflect on the dissatisfaction which he might subsequently
Should he afterwards reflect over his own conduct, he would feel that there lies within him an impulsive power widely different from a search after pleasure or happiness; and this seems to be the deeply planted social instinct.
In the case of the lower animals it seems much more appropriate to speak of their social instincts, as having been developed for the general good rather than for the general happiness of the species.
The term, general good, may be defined as the rearing of the greatest number of individuals in full vigour and health, with all their faculties perfect, under the conditions to which they are subjected.
As the social instincts both of man and the lower animals have no doubt been developed by nearly the same steps, it would be advisable, if found practicable, to use the same definition in both cases, and to take as the standard of morality, the general
When a man risks his life to save that of a fellow-creature, it seems also more correct to say that he acts for the general good, rather than for the general happiness of mankind.
No doubt the welfare and the happiness of the individual usually coincide; and a contented, happy tribe will flourish better than one that is discontented and unhappy.
We have seen that even at an early period in the history of man, the expressed wishes of the community will have naturally influenced to a large extent the conduct of each member; and as all wish for happiness, the "greatest happiness principle" will have
Thus the reproach is removed of laying the foundation of the noblest part of our nature in the base principle of selfishness; unless, indeed, the satisfaction which every animal feels, when it follows its proper instincts, and the dissatisfaction felt when
The wishes and opinions of the members of the same community, expressed at first orally, but later by writing also, either form the sole guides of our conduct, or greatly reinforce the social instincts; such opinions, however, have sometimes a tendency
This latter fact is well exemplified by the LAW OF HONOUR, that is, the law of the opinion of our equals, and not of all our countrymen.
The breach of this law, even when the breach is known to be strictly accordant with true morality, has caused many a man more agony than a real crime.
We recognise the same influence in the burning sense of shame which most of us have felt, even after the interval of years, when calling to mind some accidental breach of a trifling, though fixed, rule of etiquette.
The judgment of the community will generally be guided by some rude experience of what is best in the long run for all the members; but this judgment will not rarely err from ignorance and weak powers of reasoning.
Hence the strangest customs and superstitions, in complete opposition to the true welfare and happiness of mankind, have become all-powerful throughout the world.
We see this in the horror felt by a Hindoo who breaks his caste, and in many other such cases.
It would be difficult to distinguish between the remorse felt by a Hindoo who has yielded to the temptation of eating unclean food, from that felt after committing a theft; but the former would probably be the more severe.
How so many absurd rules of conduct, as well as so many absurd religious beliefs, have originated, we do not know; nor how it is that they have become, in all quarters of the world, so deeply impressed on the mind of men; but it is worthy of remark that a
Neither can we say why certain admirable virtues, such as the love of truth, are much more highly appreciated by some savage tribes than by others (43.
Good instances are given by Mr. Wallace in 'Scientific Opinion,' Sept.
15, 1869; and more fully in his 'Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection,' 1870, p.
353.
); nor, again, why similar differences prevail even amongst highly civilised nations.
Knowing how firmly fixed many strange customs and superstitions have become, we need feel no surprise that the self- regarding virtues, supported as they are by reason, should now appear to us so natural as to be thought innate, although they were not
Not withstanding many sources of doubt, man can generally and readily distinguish between the higher and lower moral rules.
The higher are founded on the social instincts, and relate to the welfare of others.
They are supported by the approbation of our fellow-men and by reason.
The lower rules, though some of them when implying self-sacrifice hardly deserve to be called lower, relate chiefly to self, and arise from public opinion, matured by experience and cultivation; for they are not practised by rude tribes.
As man advances in civilisation, and small tribes are united into larger communities, the simplest reason would tell each individual that he ought to extend his social instincts and sympathies to all the members of the same nation, though personally
This point being once reached, there is only an artificial barrier to prevent his sympathies extending to the men of all nations and races.
If, indeed, such men are separated from him by great differences in appearance or habits, experience unfortunately shews us how long it is, before we look at them as our fellow-creatures.
Sympathy beyond the confines of man, that is, humanity to the lower animals, seems to be one of the latest moral acquisitions.
It is apparently unfelt by savages, except towards their pets.
How little the old Romans knew of it is shewn by their abhorrent gladiatorial exhibitions.
The very idea of humanity, as far as I could observe, was new to most of the Gauchos of the Pampas.
This virtue, one of the noblest with which man is endowed, seems to arise incidentally from our sympathies becoming more tender and more widely diffused, until they are extended to all sentient beings.
As soon as this virtue is honoured and practised by some few men, it spreads through instruction and example to the young, and eventually becomes incorporated in public opinion.
The highest possible stage in moral culture is when we recognise that we ought to control our thoughts, and "not even in inmost thought to think again the sins that made the past so pleasant to us".
(44.
Tennyson, Idylls of the King, p.
244.
) Whatever makes any bad action familiar to the mind, renders its performance by so much the easier.
As Marcus Aurelius long ago said, "Such as are thy habitual thoughts, such also will be the character of thy mind; for the soul is dyed by the thoughts".
(45.
'The Thoughts of the Emperor M. Aurelius Antoninus,' English translation, 2nd edit.
, 1869.
p.
112.
Marcus Aurelius was born A.D. 121.
) Our great philosopher, Herbert Spencer, has recently explained his views on the moral sense.
He says (46.
Letter to Mr. Mill in Bain's 'Mental and Moral Science,' 1868, p.
722.
), "I believe that the experiences of utility organised and consolidated through all past generations of the human race, have been producing corresponding modifications, which, by continued transmission and accumulation, have become in us certain faculties
There is not the least inherent improbability, as it seems to me, in virtuous tendencies being more or less strongly inherited; for, not to mention the various dispositions and habits transmitted by many of our domestic animals to their offspring, I have
If bad tendencies are transmitted, it is probable that good ones are likewise transmitted.
That the state of the body by affecting the brain, has great influence on the moral tendencies is known to most of those who have suffered from chronic derangements of the digestion or liver.
The same fact is likewise shewn by the "perversion or destruction of the moral sense being often one of the earliest symptoms of mental derangement" (47.
Maudsley, 'Body and Mind,' 1870, p.
60.
); and insanity is notoriously often inherited.
Except through the principle of the transmission of moral tendencies, we cannot understand the differences believed to exist in this respect between the various races of mankind.
Even the partial transmission of virtuous tendencies would be an immense assistance to the primary impulse derived directly and indirectly from the social instincts.
Admitting for a moment that virtuous tendencies are inherited, it appears probable, at least in such cases as chastity, temperance, humanity to animals, etc.
, that they become first impressed on the mental organization through habit, instruction and example, continued during several generations in the same family, and in a quite subordinate degree, or not at all, by the individuals possessing such virtues
My chief source of doubt with respect to any such inheritance, is that senseless customs, superstitions, and tastes, such as the horror of a Hindoo for unclean food, ought on the same principle to be transmitted.
I have not met with any evidence in support of the transmission of superstitious customs or senseless habits, although in itself it is perhaps not less probable than that animals should acquire inherited tastes for certain kinds of food or fear of certain
Finally the social instincts, which no doubt were acquired by man as by the lower animals for the good of the community, will from the first have given to him some wish to aid his fellows, some feeling of sympathy, and have compelled him to regard their
Such impulses will have served him at a very early period as a rude rule of right and wrong.
But as man gradually advanced in intellectual power, and was enabled to trace the more remote consequences of his actions; as he acquired sufficient knowledge to reject baneful customs and superstitions; as he regarded more and more, not only the welfare,
And it is admitted by moralists of the derivative school and by some intuitionists, that the standard of morality has risen since an early period in the history of man.
(48.
A writer in the 'North British Review' (July 1869, p.
531), well capable of forming a sound judgment, expresses himself strongly in favour of this conclusion.
Mr. Lecky ('History of Morals,' vol.
i.
p.
143) seems to a certain extent to coincide therein.
) As a struggle may sometimes be seen going on between the various instincts of the lower animals, it is not surprising that there should be a struggle in man between his social instincts, with their derived virtues, and his lower, though momentarily
This, as Mr. Galton (49.
See his remarkable work on 'Hereditary Genius,' 1869, p.
349.
The Duke of Argyll ('Primeval Man,' 1869, p.
188) has some good remarks on the contest in man's nature between right and wrong.
) has remarked, is all the less surprising, as man has emerged from a state of barbarism within a comparatively recent period.
After having yielded to some temptation we feel a sense of dissatisfaction, shame, repentance, or remorse, analogous to the feelings caused by other powerful instincts or desires, when left unsatisfied or baulked.
We compare the weakened impression of a past temptation with the ever present social instincts, or with habits, gained in early youth and strengthened during our whole lives, until they have become almost as strong as instincts.
If with the temptation still before us we do not yield, it is because either the social instinct or some custom is at the moment predominant, or because we have learnt that it will appear to us hereafter the stronger, when compared with the weakened
Looking to future generations, there is no cause to fear that the social instincts will grow weaker, and we may expect that virtuous habits will grow stronger, becoming perhaps fixed by inheritance.
In this case the struggle between our higher and lower impulses will be less severe, and virtue will be triumphant.
SUMMARY OF THE LAST TWO CHAPTERS.
There can be no doubt that the difference between the mind of the lowest man and that of the highest animal is immense.
An anthropomorphous ape, if he could take a dispassionate view of his own case, would admit that though he could form an artful plan to plunder a garden--though he could use stones for fighting or for breaking open nuts, yet that the thought of fashioning
Still less, as he would admit, could he follow out a train of metaphysical reasoning, or solve a mathematical problem, or reflect on God, or admire a grand natural scene.
Some apes, however, would probably declare that they could and did admire the beauty of the coloured skin and fur of their partners in marriage.
They would admit, that though they could make other apes understand by cries some of their perceptions and simpler wants, the notion of expressing definite ideas by definite sounds had never crossed their minds.
They might insist that they were ready to aid their fellow-apes of the same troop in many ways, to risk their lives for them, and to take charge of their orphans; but they would be forced to acknowledge that disinterested love for all living creatures, the
Nevertheless the difference in mind between man and the higher animals, great as it is, certainly is one of degree and not of kind.
We have seen that the senses and intuitions, the various emotions and faculties, such as love, memory, attention, curiosity, imitation, reason, etc.
, of which man boasts, may be found in an incipient, or even sometimes in a well-developed condition, in the lower animals.
They are also capable of some inherited improvement, as we see in the domestic dog compared with the wolf or jackal.
If it could be proved that certain high mental powers, such as the formation of general concepts, self-consciousness, etc.
, were absolutely peculiar to man, which seems extremely doubtful, it is not improbable that these qualities are merely the incidental results of other highly-advanced intellectual faculties; and these again mainly the result of the continued use of a
At what age does the new-born infant possess the power of abstraction, or become self-conscious, and reflect on its own existence?
We cannot answer; nor can we answer in regard to the ascending organic scale.
The half-art, half-instinct of language still bears the stamp of its gradual evolution.
The ennobling belief in God is not universal with man; and the belief in spiritual agencies naturally follows from other mental powers.
The moral sense perhaps affords the best and highest distinction between man and the lower animals; but I need say nothing on this head, as I have so lately endeavoured to shew that the social instincts,--the prime principle of man's moral constitution
'The Thoughts of Marcus Aurelius,' etc.
, p.
139.
)--with the aid of active intellectual powers and the effects of habit, naturally lead to the golden rule, "As ye would that men should do to you, do ye to them likewise;" and this lies at the foundation of morality.
In the next chapter I shall make some few remarks on the probable steps and means by which the several mental and moral faculties of man have been gradually evolved.
That such evolution is at least possible, ought not to be denied, for we daily see these faculties developing in every infant; and we may trace a perfect gradation from the mind of an utter idiot, lower than that of an animal low in the scale, to the mind
CHAPTER V. ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE INTELLECTUAL AND MORAL FACULTIES DURING PRIMEVAL AND CIVILISED TIMES.
Advancement of the intellectual powers through natural selection-- Importance of imitation--Social and moral faculties--Their development within the limits of the same tribe--Natural selection as affecting civilised nations--Evidence that civilised nations
The subjects to be discussed in this chapter are of the highest interest, but are treated by me in an imperfect and fragmentary manner.
Mr. Wallace, in an admirable paper before referred to (1.
Anthropological Review, May 1864, p.
clviii.
), argues that man, after he had partially acquired those intellectual and moral faculties which distinguish him from the lower animals, would have been but little liable to bodily modifications through natural selection or any other means.
For man is enabled through his mental faculties "to keep with an unchanged body in harmony with the changing universe".
He has great power of adapting his habits to new conditions of life.
He invents weapons, tools, and various stratagems to procure food and to defend himself.
When he migrates into a colder climate he uses clothes, builds sheds, and makes fires; and by the aid of fire cooks food otherwise indigestible.
He aids his fellow-men in many ways, and anticipates future events.
Even at a remote period he practised some division of labour.
The lower animals, on the other hand, must have their bodily structure modified in order to survive under greatly changed conditions.
They must be rendered stronger, or acquire more effective teeth or claws, for defence against new enemies; or they must be reduced in size, so as to escape detection and danger.
When they migrate into a colder climate, they must become clothed with thicker fur, or have their constitutions altered.
If they fail to be thus modified, they will cease to exist.
The case, however, is widely different, as Mr. Wallace has with justice insisted, in relation to the intellectual and moral faculties of man.
These faculties are variable; and we have every reason to believe that the variations tend to be inherited.
Therefore, if they were formerly of high importance to primeval man and to his ape-like progenitors, they would have been perfected or advanced through natural selection.
Of the high importance of the intellectual faculties there can be no doubt, for man mainly owes to them his predominant position in the world.
We can see, that in the rudest state of society, the individuals who were the most sagacious, who invented and used the best weapons or traps, and who were best able to defend themselves, would rear the greatest number of offspring.
The tribes, which included the largest number of men thus endowed, would increase in number and supplant other tribes.
Numbers depend primarily on the means of subsistence, and this depends partly on the physical nature of the country, but in a much higher degree on the arts which are there practised.
As a tribe increases and is victorious, it is often still further increased by the absorption of other tribes.
(2.
After a time the members or tribes which are absorbed into another tribe assume, as Sir Henry Maine remarks ('Ancient Law,' 1861, p.
131), that they are the co-descendants of the same ancestors.
) The stature and strength of the men of a tribe are likewise of some importance for its success, and these depend in part on the nature and amount of the food which can be obtained.
In Europe the men of the Bronze period were supplanted by a race more powerful, and, judging from their sword-handles, with larger hands (3.
Morlot, 'Soc.
Vaud.
Sc.
Nat.
' 1860, p.
294.
); but their success was probably still more due to their superiority in the arts.
All that we know about savages, or may infer from their traditions and from old monuments, the history of which is quite forgotten by the present inhabitants, shew that from the remotest times successful tribes have supplanted other tribes.
Relics of extinct or forgotten tribes have been discovered throughout the civilised regions of the earth, on the wild plains of America, and on the isolated islands in the Pacific Ocean.
At the present day civilised nations are everywhere supplanting barbarous nations, excepting where the climate opposes a deadly barrier; and they succeed mainly, though not exclusively, through their arts, which are the products of the intellect.
It is, therefore, highly probable that with mankind the intellectual faculties have been mainly and gradually perfected through natural selection; and this conclusion is sufficient for our purpose.
Undoubtedly it would be interesting to trace the development of each separate faculty from the state in which it exists in the lower animals to that in which it exists in man; but neither my ability nor knowledge permits the attempt.
It deserves notice that, as soon as the progenitors of man became social (and this probably occurred at a very early period), the principle of imitation, and reason, and experience would have increased, and much modified the intellectual powers in a way,
Apes are much given to imitation, as are the lowest savages; and the simple fact previously referred to, that after a time no animal can be caught in the same place by the same sort of trap, shews that animals learn by experience, and imitate the caution
Now, if some one man in a tribe, more sagacious than the others, invented a new snare or weapon, or other means of attack or defence, the plainest self- interest, without the assistance of much reasoning power, would prompt the other members to imitate
The habitual practice of each new art must likewise in some slight degree strengthen the intellect.
If the new invention were an important one, the tribe would increase in number, spread, and supplant other tribes.
In a tribe thus rendered more numerous there would always be a rather greater chance of the birth of other superior and inventive members.
If such men left children to inherit their mental superiority, the chance of the birth of still more ingenious members would be somewhat better, and in a very small tribe decidedly better.
Even if they left no children, the tribe would still include their blood-relations; and it has been ascertained by agriculturists (4.
I have given instances in my Variation of Animals under Domestication, vol.
ii.
p.
196.
) that by preserving and breeding from the family of an animal, which when slaughtered was found to be valuable, the desired character has been obtained.
Turning now to the social and moral faculties.
In order that primeval men, or the ape-like progenitors of man, should become social, they must have acquired the same instinctive feelings, which impel other animals to live in a body; and they no doubt exhibited the same general disposition.
They would have felt uneasy when separated from their comrades, for whom they would have felt some degree of love; they would have warned each other of danger, and have given mutual aid in attack or defence.
All this implies some degree of sympathy, fidelity, and courage.
Such social qualities, the paramount importance of which to the lower animals is disputed by no one, were no doubt acquired by the progenitors of man in a similar manner, namely, through natural selection, aided by inherited habit.
When two tribes of primeval man, living in the same country, came into competition, if (other circumstances being equal) the one tribe included a great number of courageous, sympathetic and faithful members, who were always ready to warn each other of
Let it be borne in mind how all- important in the never-ceasing wars of savages, fidelity and courage must be.
The advantage which disciplined soldiers have over undisciplined hordes follows chiefly from the confidence which each man feels in his comrades.
Obedience, as Mr. Bagehot has well shewn (5.
See a remarkable series of articles on 'Physics and Politics,' in the 'Fortnightly Review,' Nov.
1867; April 1, 1868; July 1, 1869, since separately published.
), is of the highest value, for any form of government is better than none.
Selfish and contentious people will not cohere, and without coherence nothing can be effected.
A tribe rich in the above qualities would spread and be victorious over other tribes: but in the course of time it would, judging from all past history, be in its turn overcome by some other tribe still more highly endowed.
Thus the social and moral qualities would tend slowly to advance and be diffused throughout the world.
But it may be asked, how within the limits of the same tribe did a large number of members first become endowed with these social and moral qualities, and how was the standard of excellence raised?
It is extremely doubtful whether the offspring of the more sympathetic and benevolent parents, or of those who were the most faithful to their comrades, would be reared in greater numbers than the children of selfish and treacherous parents belonging to
He who was ready to sacrifice his life, as many a savage has been, rather than betray his comrades, would often leave no offspring to inherit his noble nature.
The bravest men, who were always willing to come to the front in war, and who freely risked their lives for others, would on an average perish in larger numbers than other men.
Therefore, it hardly seems probable, that the number of men gifted with such virtues, or that the standard of their excellence, could be increased through natural selection, that is, by the survival of the fittest; for we are not here speaking of one tribe
Although the circumstances, leading to an increase in the number of those thus endowed within the same tribe, are too complex to be clearly followed out, we can trace some of the probable steps.
In the first place, as the reasoning powers and foresight of the members became improved, each man would soon learn that if he aided his fellow-men, he would commonly receive aid in return.
From this low motive he might acquire the habit of aiding his fellows; and the habit of performing benevolent actions certainly strengthens the feeling of sympathy which gives the first impulse to benevolent actions.
Habits, moreover, followed during many generations probably tend to be inherited.
But another and much more powerful stimulus to the development of the social virtues, is afforded by the praise and the blame of our fellow-men.
To the instinct of sympathy, as we have already seen, it is primarily due, that we habitually bestow both praise and blame on others, whilst we love the former and dread the latter when applied to ourselves; and this instinct no doubt was originally
At how early a period the progenitors of man in the course of their development, became capable of feeling and being impelled by, the praise or blame of their fellow- creatures, we cannot of course say.
But it appears that even dogs appreciate encouragement, praise, and blame.
The rudest savages feel the sentiment of glory, as they clearly shew by preserving the trophies of their prowess, by their habit of excessive boasting, and even by the extreme care which they take of their personal appearance and decorations; for unless
They certainly feel shame at the breach of some of their lesser rules, and apparently remorse, as shewn by the case of the Australian who grew thin and could not rest from having delayed to murder some other woman, so as to propitiate his dead wife's
Though I have not met with any other recorded case, it is scarcely credible that a savage, who will sacrifice his life rather than betray his tribe, or one who will deliver himself up as a prisoner rather than break his parole (6.
Mr. Wallace gives cases in his 'Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection,' 1870, p.
354.
), would not feel remorse in his inmost soul, if he had failed in a duty, which he held sacred.
We may therefore conclude that primeval man, at a very remote period, was influenced by the praise and blame of his fellows.
It is obvious, that the members of the same tribe would approve of conduct which appeared to them to be for the general good, and would reprobate that which appeared evil.
To do good unto others--to do unto others as ye would they should do unto you--is the foundation-stone of morality.
It is, therefore, hardly possible to exaggerate the importance during rude times of the love of praise and the dread of blame.
A man who was not impelled by any deep, instinctive feeling, to sacrifice his life for the good of others, yet was roused to such actions by a sense of glory, would by his example excite the same wish for glory in other men, and would strengthen by
He might thus do far more good to his tribe than by begetting offspring with a tendency to inherit his own high character.
With increased experience and reason, man perceives the more remote consequences of his actions, and the self-regarding virtues, such as temperance, chastity, etc.
, which during early times are, as we have before seen, utterly disregarded, come to be highly esteemed or even held sacred.
I need not, however, repeat what I have said on this head in the fourth chapter.
Ultimately our moral sense or conscience becomes a highly complex sentiment--originating in the social instincts, largely guided by the approbation of our fellow-men, ruled by reason, self-interest, and in later times by deep religious feelings, and
It must not be forgotten that although a high standard of morality gives but a slight or no advantage to each individual man and his children over the other men of the same tribe, yet that an increase in the number of well-endowed men and an advancement in
A tribe including many members who, from possessing in a high degree the spirit of patriotism, fidelity, obedience, courage, and sympathy, were always ready to aid one another, and to sacrifice themselves for the common good, would be victorious over most
At all times throughout the world tribes have supplanted other tribes; and as morality is one important element in their success, the standard of morality and the number of well-endowed men will thus everywhere tend to rise and increase.
It is, however, very difficult to form any judgment why one particular tribe and not another has been successful and has risen in the scale of civilisation.
Many savages are in the same condition as when first discovered several centuries ago.
As Mr. Bagehot has remarked, we are apt to look at progress as normal in human society; but history refutes this.
The ancients did not even entertain the idea, nor do the Oriental nations at the present day.
According to another high authority, Sir Henry Maine (7.
'Ancient Law,' 1861, p.
22.
For Mr. Bagehot's remarks, 'Fortnightly Review,' April 1, 1868, p.
452.
), "the greatest part of mankind has never shewn a particle of desire that its civil institutions should be improved".
Progress seems to depend on many concurrent favourable conditions, far too complex to be followed out.
But it has often been remarked, that a cool climate, from leading to industry and to the various arts, has been highly favourable thereto.
The Esquimaux, pressed by hard necessity, have succeeded in many ingenious inventions, but their climate has been too severe for continued progress.
Nomadic habits, whether over wide plains, or through the dense forests of the tropics, or along the shores of the sea, have in every case been highly detrimental.
Whilst observing the barbarous inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego, it struck me that the possession of some property, a fixed abode, and the union of many families under a chief, were the indispensable requisites for civilisation.
Such habits almost necessitate the cultivation of the ground; and the first steps in cultivation would probably result, as I have elsewhere shewn (8.
'The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
309.
), from some such accident as the seeds of a fruit-tree falling on a heap of refuse, and producing an unusually fine variety.
The problem, however, of the first advance of savages towards civilisation is at present much too difficult to be solved.
NATURAL SELECTION AS AFFECTING CIVILISED NATIONS.
I have hitherto only considered the advancement of man from a semi-human condition to that of the modern savage.
But some remarks on the action of natural selection on civilised nations may be worth adding.
This subject has been ably discussed by Mr. W.R. Greg (9.
'Fraser's Magazine,' Sept.
1868, p.
353.
This article seems to have struck many persons, and has given rise to two remarkable essays and a rejoinder in the 'Spectator,' Oct.
3rd and 17th, 1868.
It has also been discussed in the 'Quarterly Journal of Science,' 1869, p.
152, and by Mr. Lawson Tait in the 'Dublin Quarterly Journal of Medical Science,' Feb.
1869, and by Mr. E. Ray Lankester in his 'Comparative Longevity,' 1870, p.
128.
Similar views appeared previously in the 'Australasian,' July 13, 1867.
I have borrowed ideas from several of these writers.
), and previously by Mr. Wallace and Mr. Galton.
(10.
For Mr. Wallace, see 'Anthropological Review,' as before cited.
Mr. Galton in 'Macmillan's Magazine,' Aug.
1865, p.
318; also his great work, 'Hereditary Genius,' 1870.
) Most of my remarks are taken from these three authors.
With savages, the weak in body or mind are soon eliminated; and those that survive commonly exhibit a vigorous state of health.
We civilised men, on the other hand, do our utmost to check the process of elimination; we build asylums for the imbecile, the maimed, and the sick; we institute poor-laws; and our medical men exert their utmost skill to save the life of every one to the
There is reason to believe that vaccination has preserved thousands, who from a weak constitution would formerly have succumbed to small-pox.
Thus the weak members of civilised societies propagate their kind.
No one who has attended to the breeding of domestic animals will doubt that this must be highly injurious to the race of man.
It is surprising how soon a want of care, or care wrongly directed, leads to the degeneration of a domestic race; but excepting in the case of man himself, hardly any one is so ignorant as to allow his worst animals to breed.
The aid which we feel impelled to give to the helpless is mainly an incidental result of the instinct of sympathy, which was originally acquired as part of the social instincts, but subsequently rendered, in the manner previously indicated, more tender and
Nor could we check our sympathy, even at the urging of hard reason, without deterioration in the noblest part of our nature.
The surgeon may harden himself whilst performing an operation, for he knows that he is acting for the good of his patient; but if we were intentionally to neglect the weak and helpless, it could only be for a contingent benefit, with an overwhelming
We must therefore bear the undoubtedly bad effects of the weak surviving and propagating their kind; but there appears to be at least one check in steady action, namely that the weaker and inferior members of society do not marry so freely as the sound;
In every country in which a large standing army is kept up, the finest young men are taken by the conscription or are enlisted.
They are thus exposed to early death during war, are often tempted into vice, and are prevented from marrying during the prime of life.
On the other hand the shorter and feebler men, with poor constitutions, are left at home, and consequently have a much better chance of marrying and propagating their kind.
(11.
Prof.
H. Fick ('Einfluss der Naturwissenschaft auf das Recht,' June 1872) has some good remarks on this head, and on other such points.
) Man accumulates property and bequeaths it to his children, so that the children of the rich have an advantage over the poor in the race for success, independently of bodily or mental superiority.
On the other hand, the children of parents who are short-lived, and are therefore on an average deficient in health and vigour, come into their property sooner than other children, and will be likely to marry earlier, and leave a larger number of offspring
But the inheritance of property by itself is very far from an evil; for without the accumulation of capital the arts could not progress; and it is chiefly through their power that the civilised races have extended, and are now everywhere extending their
Nor does the moderate accumulation of wealth interfere with the process of selection.
When a poor man becomes moderately rich, his children enter trades or professions in which there is struggle enough, so that the able in body and mind succeed best.
The presence of a body of well-instructed men, who have not to labour for their daily bread, is important to a degree which cannot be over-estimated; as all high intellectual work is carried on by them, and on such work, material progress of all kinds
No doubt wealth when very great tends to convert men into useless drones, but their number is never large; and some degree of elimination here occurs, for we daily see rich men, who happen to be fools or profligate, squandering away their wealth.
Primogeniture with entailed estates is a more direct evil, though it may formerly have been a great advantage by the creation of a dominant class, and any government is better than none.
Most eldest sons, though they may be weak in body or mind, marry, whilst the younger sons, however superior in these respects, do not so generally marry.
Nor can worthless eldest sons with entailed estates squander their wealth.
But here, as elsewhere, the relations of civilised life are so complex that some compensatory checks intervene.
The men who are rich through primogeniture are able to select generation after generation the more beautiful and charming women; and these must generally be healthy in body and active in mind.
The evil consequences, such as they may be, of the continued preservation of the same line of descent, without any selection, are checked by men of rank always wishing to increase their wealth and power; and this they effect by marrying heiresses.
But the daughters of parents who have produced single children, are themselves, as Mr. Galton (12.
'Hereditary Genius,' 1870, pp.
132-140.
) has shewn, apt to be sterile; and thus noble families are continually cut off in the direct line, and their wealth flows into some side channel; but unfortunately this channel is not determined by superiority of any kind.
Although civilisation thus checks in many ways the action of natural selection, it apparently favours the better development of the body, by means of good food and the freedom from occasional hardships.
This may be inferred from civilised men having been found, wherever compared, to be physically stronger than savages.
(13.
Quatrefages, 'Revue des Cours Scientifiques,' 1867-68, p.
659.
) They appear also to have equal powers of endurance, as has been proved in many adventurous expeditions.
Even the great luxury of the rich can be but little detrimental; for the expectation of life of our aristocracy, at all ages and of both sexes, is very little inferior to that of healthy English lives in the lower classes.
(14.
See the fifth and sixth columns, compiled from good authorities, in the table given in Mr. E.R. Lankester's 'Comparative Longevity,' 1870, p.
115.
) We will now look to the intellectual faculties.
If in each grade of society the members were divided into two equal bodies, the one including the intellectually superior and the other the inferior, there can be little doubt that the former would succeed best in all occupations, and rear a greater number
Even in the lowest walks of life, skill and ability must be of some advantage; though in many occupations, owing to the great division of labour, a very small one.
Hence in civilised nations there will be some tendency to an increase both in the number and in the standard of the intellectually able.
But I do not wish to assert that this tendency may not be more than counterbalanced in other ways, as by the multiplication of the reckless and improvident; but even to such as these, ability must be some advantage.
It has often been objected to views like the foregoing, that the most eminent men who have ever lived have left no offspring to inherit their great intellect.
Mr. Galton says, "I regret I am unable to solve the simple question whether, and how far, men and women who are prodigies of genius are infertile.
I have, however, shewn that men of eminence are by no means so".
(15.
'Hereditary Genius,' 1870, p.
330.
) Great lawgivers, the founders of beneficent religions, great philosophers and discoverers in science, aid the progress of mankind in a far higher degree by their works than by leaving a numerous progeny.
In the case of corporeal structures, it is the selection of the slightly better-endowed and the elimination of the slightly less well-endowed individuals, and not the preservation of strongly-marked and rare anomalies, that leads to the advancement of a
(16.
'Origin of Species' (fifth edition, 1869), p.
104.
) So it will be with the intellectual faculties, since the somewhat abler men in each grade of society succeed rather better than the less able, and consequently increase in number, if not otherwise prevented.
When in any nation the standard of intellect and the number of intellectual men have increased, we may expect from the law of the deviation from an average, that prodigies of genius will, as shewn by Mr. Galton, appear somewhat more frequently than before.
In regard to the moral qualities, some elimination of the worst dispositions is always in progress even in the most civilised nations.
Malefactors are executed, or imprisoned for long periods, so that they cannot freely transmit their bad qualities.
Melancholic and insane persons are confined, or commit suicide.
Violent and quarrelsome men often come to a bloody end.
The restless who will not follow any steady occupation--and this relic of barbarism is a great check to civilisation (17.
'Hereditary Genius,' 1870, p.
347.
)--emigrate to newly-settled countries; where they prove useful pioneers.
Intemperance is so highly destructive, that the expectation of life of the intemperate, at the age of thirty for instance, is only 13.
8 years; whilst for the rural labourers of England at the same age it is 40.
59 years.
(18.
E. Ray Lankester, 'Comparative Longevity,' 1870, p.
115.
The table of the intemperate is from Neison's 'Vital Statistics.
' In regard to profligacy, see Dr. Farr, 'Influence of Marriage on Mortality,' 'Nat.
Assoc.
for the Promotion of Social Science,' 1858.
) Profligate women bear few children, and profligate men rarely marry; both suffer from disease.
In the breeding of domestic animals, the elimination of those individuals, though few in number, which are in any marked manner inferior, is by no means an unimportant element towards success.
This especially holds good with injurious characters which tend to reappear through reversion, such as blackness in sheep; and with mankind some of the worst dispositions, which occasionally without any assignable cause make their appearance in families,
This view seems indeed recognised in the common expression that such men are the black sheep of the family.
With civilised nations, as far as an advanced standard of morality, and an increased number of fairly good men are concerned, natural selection apparently effects but little; though the fundamental social instincts were originally thus gained.
But I have already said enough, whilst treating of the lower races, on the causes which lead to the advance of morality, namely, the approbation of our fellow-men--the strengthening of our sympathies by habit--example and imitation--reason--experience, and
A most important obstacle in civilised countries to an increase in the number of men of a superior class has been strongly insisted on by Mr. Greg and Mr. Galton (19.
'Fraser's Magazine,' Sept.
1868, p.
353.
'Macmillan's Magazine,' Aug.
1865, p.
318.
The Rev.
F.W. Farrar ('Fraser's Magazine,' Aug.
1870, p.
264) takes a different view.
), namely, the fact that the very poor and reckless, who are often degraded by vice, almost invariably marry early, whilst the careful and frugal, who are generally otherwise virtuous, marry late in life, so that they may be able to support themselves and
Those who marry early produce within a given period not only a greater number of generations, but, as shewn by Dr. Duncan (20.
'On the Laws of the Fertility of Women,' in 'Transactions of the Royal Society,' Edinburgh, vol.
xxiv.
p.
287; now published separately under the title of 'Fecundity, Fertility, and Sterility,' 1871.
See, also, Mr. Galton, 'Hereditary Genius,' pp.
352-357, for observations to the above effect.
), they produce many more children.
The children, moreover, that are borne by mothers during the prime of life are heavier and larger, and therefore probably more vigorous, than those born at other periods.
Thus the reckless, degraded, and often vicious members of society, tend to increase at a quicker rate than the provident and generally virtuous members.
Or as Mr. Greg puts the case: "The careless, squalid, unaspiring Irishman multiplies like rabbits: the frugal, foreseeing, self-respecting, ambitious Scot, stern in his morality, spiritual in his faith, sagacious and disciplined in his intelligence, passes
Given a land originally peopled by a thousand Saxons and a thousand Celts--and in a dozen generations five-sixths of the population would be Celts, but five- sixths of the property, of the power, of the intellect, would belong to the one-sixth of Saxons
In the eternal 'struggle for existence,' it would be the inferior and LESS favoured race that had prevailed--and prevailed by virtue not of its good qualities but of its faults".
There are, however, some checks to this downward tendency.
We have seen that the intemperate suffer from a high rate of mortality, and the extremely profligate leave few offspring.
The poorest classes crowd into towns, and it has been proved by Dr. Stark from the statistics of ten years in Scotland (21.
'Tenth Annual Report of Births, Deaths, etc.
, in Scotland,' 1867, p.
xxix.
), that at all ages the death-rate is higher in towns than in rural districts, "and during the first five years of life the town death-rate is almost exactly double that of the rural districts".
As these returns include both the rich and the poor, no doubt more than twice the number of births would be requisite to keep up the number of the very poor inhabitants in the towns, relatively to those in the country.
With women, marriage at too early an age is highly injurious; for it has been found in France that, "Twice as many wives under twenty die in the year, as died out of the same number of the unmarried".
The mortality, also, of husbands under twenty is "excessively high" (22.
These quotations are taken from our highest authority on such questions, namely, Dr. Farr, in his paper 'On the Influence of Marriage on the Mortality of the French People,' read before the Nat.
Assoc.
for the Promotion of Social Science, 1858.
), but what the cause of this may be, seems doubtful.
Lastly, if the men who prudently delay marrying until they can bring up their families in comfort, were to select, as they often do, women in the prime of life, the rate of increase in the better class would be only slightly lessened.
It was established from an enormous body of statistics, taken during 1853, that the unmarried men throughout France, between the ages of twenty and eighty, die in a much larger proportion than the married: for instance, out of every 1000 unmarried men,
3 annually died, whilst of the married, only 6.
5 died.
(23.
Dr. Farr, ibid.
The quotations given below are extracted from the same striking paper.
) A similar law was proved to hold good, during the years 1863 and 1864, with the entire population above the age of twenty in Scotland: for instance, out of every 1000 unmarried men, between the ages of twenty and thirty, 14.
97 annually died, whilst of the married only 7.
24 died, that is less than half.
(24.
I have taken the mean of the quinquennial means, given in 'The Tenth Annual Report of Births, Deaths, etc.
, in Scotland,' 1867.
The quotation from Dr. Stark is copied from an article in the 'Daily News,' Oct.
17, 1868, which Dr. Farr considers very carefully written.
) Dr. Stark remarks on this, "Bachelorhood is more destructive to life than the most unwholesome trades, or than residence in an unwholesome house or district where there has never been the most distant attempt at sanitary improvement".
He considers that the lessened mortality is the direct result of "marriage, and the more regular domestic habits which attend that state".
He admits, however, that the intemperate, profligate, and criminal classes, whose duration of life is low, do not commonly marry; and it must likewise be admitted that men with a weak constitution, ill health, or any great infirmity in body or mind, will
Dr. Stark seems to have come to the conclusion that marriage in itself is a main cause of prolonged life, from finding that aged married men still have a considerable advantage in this respect over the unmarried of the same advanced age; but every one must
There is another remarkable circumstance which seems to support Dr. Stark's conclusion, namely, that widows and widowers in France suffer in comparison with the married a very heavy rate of mortality; but Dr. Farr attributes this to the poverty and evil
On the whole we may conclude with Dr. Farr that the lesser mortality of married than of unmarried men, which seems to be a general law, "is mainly due to the constant elimination of imperfect types, and to the skilful selection of the finest individuals
(25.
Dr. Duncan remarks ('Fecundity, Fertility, etc.
' 1871, p.
334) on this subject: "At every age the healthy and beautiful go over from the unmarried side to the married, leaving the unmarried columns crowded with the sickly and unfortunate".
) We may, therefore, infer that sound and good men who out of prudence remain for a time unmarried, do not suffer a high rate of mortality.
If the various checks specified in the two last paragraphs, and perhaps others as yet unknown, do not prevent the reckless, the vicious and otherwise inferior members of society from increasing at a quicker rate than the better class of men, the nation
We must remember that progress is no invariable rule.
It is very difficult to say why one civilised nation rises, becomes more powerful, and spreads more widely, than another; or why the same nation progresses more quickly at one time than at another.
We can only say that it depends on an increase in the actual number of the population, on the number of men endowed with high intellectual and moral faculties, as well as on their standard of excellence.
Corporeal structure appears to have little influence, except so far as vigour of body leads to vigour of mind.
It has been urged by several writers that as high intellectual powers are advantageous to a nation, the old Greeks, who stood some grades higher in intellect than any race that has ever existed (26.
See the ingenious and original argument on this subject by Mr. Galton, 'Hereditary Genius,' pp.
340-342.
), ought, if the power of natural selection were real, to have risen still higher in the scale, increased in number, and stocked the whole of Europe.
Here we have the tacit assumption, so often made with respect to corporeal structures, that there is some innate tendency towards continued development in mind and body.
But development of all kinds depends on many concurrent favourable circumstances.
Natural selection acts only tentatively.
Individuals and races may have acquired certain indisputable advantages, and yet have perished from failing in other characters.
The Greeks may have retrograded from a want of coherence between the many small states, from the small size of their whole country, from the practice of slavery, or from extreme sensuality; for they did not succumb until "they were enervated and corrupt to
(27.
Mr. Greg, 'Fraser's Magazine,' Sept.
1868, p.
357.
) The western nations of Europe, who now so immeasurably surpass their former savage progenitors, and stand at the summit of civilisation, owe little or none of their superiority to direct inheritance from the old Greeks, though they owe much to the
Who can positively say why the Spanish nation, so dominant at one time, has been distanced in the race.
The awakening of the nations of Europe from the dark ages is a still more perplexing problem.
At that early period, as Mr. Galton has remarked, almost all the men of a gentle nature, those given to meditation or culture of the mind, had no refuge except in the bosom of a Church which demanded celibacy (28.
'Hereditary Genius,' 1870, pp.
357- 359.
The Rev.
F.W. Farrar ('Fraser's Magazine,' Aug.
1870, p.
257) advances arguments on the other side.
Sir C. Lyell had already ('Principles of Geology,' vol.
ii.
1868, p.
489), in a striking passage called attention to the evil influence of the Holy Inquisition in having, through selection, lowered the general standard of intelligence in Europe.
); and this could hardly fail to have had a deteriorating influence on each successive generation.
During this same period the Holy Inquisition selected with extreme care the freest and boldest men in order to burn or imprison them.
In Spain alone some of the best men--those who doubted and questioned, and without doubting there can be no progress--were eliminated during three centuries at the rate of a thousand a year.
The evil which the Catholic Church has thus effected is incalculable, though no doubt counterbalanced to a certain, perhaps to a large, extent in other ways; nevertheless, Europe has progressed at an unparalleled rate.
The remarkable success of the English as colonists, compared to other European nations, has been ascribed to their "daring and persistent energy"; a result which is well illustrated by comparing the progress of the Canadians of English and French
There is apparently much truth in the belief that the wonderful progress of the United States, as well as the character of the people, are the results of natural selection; for the more energetic, restless, and courageous men from all parts of Europe have
(29.
Mr. Galton, 'Macmillan's Magazine,' August 1865, p.
325.
See also, 'Nature,' 'On Darwinism and National Life,' Dec.
1869, p.
184.
) Looking to the distant future, I do not think that the Rev.
Mr. Zincke takes an exaggerated view when he says (30.
'Last Winter in the United States,' 1868, p.
29.
): "All other series of events--as that which resulted in the culture of mind in Greece, and that which resulted in the empire of Rome--only appear to have purpose and value when viewed in connection with, or rather as subsidiary to...
the great stream of Anglo- Saxon emigration to the west".
Obscure as is the problem of the advance of civilisation, we can at least see that a nation which produced during a lengthened period the greatest number of highly intellectual, energetic, brave, patriotic, and benevolent men, would generally prevail over
Natural selection follows from the struggle for existence; and this from a rapid rate of increase.
It is impossible not to regret bitterly, but whether wisely is another question, the rate at which man tends to increase; for this leads in barbarous tribes to infanticide and many other evils, and in civilised nations to abject poverty, celibacy, and to
But as man suffers from the same physical evils as the lower animals, he has no right to expect an immunity from the evils consequent on the struggle for existence.
Had he not been subjected during primeval times to natural selection, assuredly he would never have attained to his present rank.
Since we see in many parts of the world enormous areas of the most fertile land capable of supporting numerous happy homes, but peopled only by a few wandering savages, it might be argued that the struggle for existence had not been sufficiently severe to
Judging from all that we know of man and the lower animals, there has always been sufficient variability in their intellectual and moral faculties, for a steady advance through natural selection.
No doubt such advance demands many favourable concurrent circumstances; but it may well be doubted whether the most favourable would have sufficed, had not the rate of increase been rapid, and the consequent struggle for existence extremely severe.
It even appears from what we see, for instance, in parts of S. America, that a people which may be called civilised, such as the Spanish settlers, is liable to become indolent and to retrograde, when the conditions of life are very easy.
With highly civilised nations continued progress depends in a subordinate degree on natural selection; for such nations do not supplant and exterminate one another as do savage tribes.
Nevertheless the more intelligent members within the same community will succeed better in the long run than the inferior, and leave a more numerous progeny, and this is a form of natural selection.
The more efficient causes of progress seem to consist of a good education during youth whilst the brain is impressible, and of a high standard of excellence, inculcated by the ablest and best men, embodied in the laws, customs and traditions of the nation,
It should, however, be borne in mind, that the enforcement of public opinion depends on our appreciation of the approbation and disapprobation of others; and this appreciation is founded on our sympathy, which it can hardly be doubted was originally
(31.
I am much indebted to Mr. John Morley for some good criticisms on this subject: see, also Broca, 'Les Selections,' 'Revue d'Anthropologie,' 1872.
) ON THE EVIDENCE THAT ALL CIVILISED NATIONS WERE ONCE BARBAROUS.
The present subject has been treated in so full and admirable a manner by Sir J. Lubbock (32.
'On the Origin of Civilisation,' 'Proceedings of the Ethnological Society,' Nov.
26, 1867.
), Mr. Tylor, Mr. M'Lennan, and others, that I need here give only the briefest summary of their results.
The arguments recently advanced by the Duke of Argyll (33.
'Primeval Man,' 1869.
) and formerly by Archbishop Whately, in favour of the belief that man came into the world as a civilised being, and that all savages have since undergone degradation, seem to me weak in comparison with those advanced on the other side.
Many nations, no doubt, have fallen away in civilisation, and some may have lapsed into utter barbarism, though on this latter head I have met with no evidence.
The Fuegians were probably compelled by other conquering hordes to settle in their inhospitable country, and they may have become in consequence somewhat more degraded; but it would be difficult to prove that they have fallen much below the Botocudos, who
The evidence that all civilised nations are the descendants of barbarians, consists, on the one side, of clear traces of their former low condition in still-existing customs, beliefs, language, etc.
; and on the other side, of proofs that savages are independently able to raise themselves a few steps in the scale of civilisation, and have actually thus risen.
The evidence on the first head is extremely curious, but cannot be here given: I refer to such cases as that of the art of enumeration, which, as Mr. Tylor clearly shews by reference to the words still used in some places, originated in counting the
We have traces of this in our own decimal system, and in the Roman numerals, where, after the V, which is supposed to be an abbreviated picture of a human hand, we pass on to VI, etc.
, when the other hand no doubt was used.
So again, "when we speak of three-score and ten, we are counting by the vigesimal system, each score thus ideally made, standing for 20--for 'one man' as a Mexican or Carib would put it".
(34.
'Royal Institution of Great Britain,' March 15, 1867.
Also, 'Researches into the Early History of Mankind,' 1865.
) According to a large and increasing school of philologists, every language bears the marks of its slow and gradual evolution.
So it is with the art of writing, for letters are rudiments of pictorial representations.
It is hardly possible to read Mr. M'Lennan's work (35.
'Primitive Marriage,' 1865.
See, likewise, an excellent article, evidently by the same author, in the 'North British Review,' July 1869.
Also, Mr. L.H. Morgan, 'A Conjectural Solution of the Origin of the Class.
System of Relationship,' in 'Proc.
American Acad.
of Sciences,' vol.
vii.
Feb.
1868.
Prof.
Schaaffhausen ('Anthropolog.
Review,' Oct.
1869, p.
373) remarks on "the vestiges of human sacrifices found both in Homer and the Old Testament".
) and not admit that almost all civilised nations still retain traces of such rude habits as the forcible capture of wives.
What ancient nation, as the same author asks, can be named that was originally monogamous?
The primitive idea of justice, as shewn by the law of battle and other customs of which vestiges still remain, was likewise most rude.
Many existing superstitions are the remnants of former false religious beliefs.
The highest form of religion-- the grand idea of God hating sin and loving righteousness--was unknown during primeval times.
Turning to the other kind of evidence: Sir J. Lubbock has shewn that some savages have recently improved a little in some of their simpler arts.
From the extremely curious account which he gives of the weapons, tools, and arts, in use amongst savages in various parts of the world, it cannot be doubted that these have nearly all been independent discoveries, excepting perhaps the art of making fire.
(36.
Sir J. Lubbock, 'Prehistoric Times,' 2nd edit.
1869, chaps.
xv.
and xvi.
et passim.
See also the excellent 9th Chapter in Tylor's 'Early History of Mankind,' 2nd edit.
, 1870.
) The Australian boomerang is a good instance of one such independent discovery.
The Tahitians when first visited had advanced in many respects beyond the inhabitants of most of the other Polynesian islands.
There are no just grounds for the belief that the high culture of the native Peruvians and Mexicans was derived from abroad (37.
Dr. F. Mller has made some good remarks to this effect in the 'Reise der Novara: Anthropolog.
Theil,' Abtheil.
iii.
1868, s.
127.
); many native plants were there cultivated, and a few native animals domesticated.
We should bear in mind that, judging from the small influence of most missionaries, a wandering crew from some semi-civilised land, if washed to the shores of America, would not have produced any marked effect on the natives, unless they had already become
Looking to a very remote period in the history of the world, we find, to use Sir J. Lubbock's well-known terms, a paleolithic and neolithic period; and no one will pretend that the art of grinding rough flint tools was a borrowed one.
In all parts of Europe, as far east as Greece, in Palestine, India, Japan, New Zealand, and Africa, including Egypt, flint tools have been discovered in abundance; and of their use the existing inhabitants retain no tradition.
There is also indirect evidence of their former use by the Chinese and ancient Jews.
Hence there can hardly be a doubt that the inhabitants of these countries, which include nearly the whole civilised world, were once in a barbarous condition.
To believe that man was aboriginally civilised and then suffered utter degradation in so many regions, is to take a pitiably low view of human nature.
It is apparently a truer and more cheerful view that progress has been much more general than retrogression; that man has risen, though by slow and interrupted steps, from a lowly condition to the highest standard as yet attained by him in knowledge,
CHAPTER VI.
ON THE AFFINITIES AND GENEALOGY OF MAN.
Position of man in the animal series--The natural system genealogical-- Adaptive characters of slight value--Various small points of resemblance between man and the Quadrumana--Rank of man in the natural system-- Birthplace and antiquity of man--Absence of
Even if it be granted that the difference between man and his nearest allies is as great in corporeal structure as some naturalists maintain, and although we must grant that the difference between them is immense in mental power, yet the facts given in the
Man is liable to numerous, slight, and diversified variations, which are induced by the same general causes, are governed and transmitted in accordance with the same general laws, as in the lower animals.
Man has multiplied so rapidly, that he has necessarily been exposed to struggle for existence, and consequently to natural selection.
He has given rise to many races, some of which differ so much from each other, that they have often been ranked by naturalists as distinct species.
His body is constructed on the same homological plan as that of other mammals.
He passes through the same phases of embryological development.
He retains many rudimentary and useless structures, which no doubt were once serviceable.
Characters occasionally make their re-appearance in him, which we have reason to believe were possessed by his early progenitors.
If the origin of man had been wholly different from that of all other animals, these various appearances would be mere empty deceptions; but such an admission is incredible.
These appearances, on the other hand, are intelligible, at least to a large extent, if man is the co-descendant with other mammals of some unknown and lower form.
Some naturalists, from being deeply impressed with the mental and spiritual powers of man, have divided the whole organic world into three kingdoms, the Human, the Animal, and the Vegetable, thus giving to man a separate kingdom.
(1.
Isidore Geoffroy St.-Hilaire gives a detailed account of the position assigned to man by various naturalists in their classifications: 'Hist.
Nat.
Gen.
' tom.
ii.
1859, pp.
170-189.
) Spiritual powers cannot be compared or classed by the naturalist: but he may endeavour to shew, as I have done, that the mental faculties of man and the lower animals do not differ in kind, although immensely in degree.
A difference in degree, however great, does not justify us in placing man in a distinct kingdom, as will perhaps be best illustrated by comparing the mental powers of two insects, namely, a coccus or scale-insect and an ant, which undoubtedly belong to the
The difference is here greater than, though of a somewhat different kind from, that between man and the highest mammal.
The female coccus, whilst young, attaches itself by its proboscis to a plant; sucks the sap, but never moves again; is fertilised and lays eggs; and this is its whole history.
On the other hand, to describe the habits and mental powers of worker-ants, would require, as Pierre Huber has shewn, a large volume; I may, however, briefly specify a few points.
Ants certainly communicate information to each other, and several unite for the same work, or for games of play.
They recognise their fellow-ants after months of absence, and feel sympathy for each other.
They build great edifices, keep them clean, close the doors in the evening, and post sentries.
They make roads as well as tunnels under rivers, and temporary bridges over them, by clinging together.
They collect food for the community, and when an object, too large for entrance, is brought to the nest, they enlarge the door, and afterwards build it up again.
They store up seeds, of which they prevent the germination, and which, if damp, are brought up to the surface to dry.
They keep aphides and other insects as milch-cows.
They go out to battle in regular bands, and freely sacrifice their lives for the common weal.
They emigrate according to a preconcerted plan.
They capture slaves.
They move the eggs of their aphides, as well as their own eggs and cocoons, into warm parts of the nest, in order that they may be quickly hatched; and endless similar facts could be given.
(2.
Some of the most interesting facts ever published on the habits of ants are given by Mr. Belt, in his 'Naturalist in Nicaragua,' 1874.
See also Mr. Moggridge's admirable work, 'Harvesting Ants,' etc.
, 1873, also 'L'Instinct chez les Insectes,' by M. George Pouchet, 'Revue des Deux Mondes,' Feb.
1870, p.
682.
) On the whole, the difference in mental power between an ant and a coccus is immense; yet no one has ever dreamed of placing these insects in distinct classes, much less in distinct kingdoms.
No doubt the difference is bridged over by other insects; and this is not the case with man and the higher apes.
But we have every reason to believe that the breaks in the series are simply the results of many forms having become extinct.
Professor Owen, relying chiefly on the structure of the brain, has divided the mammalian series into four sub-classes.
One of these he devotes to man; in another he places both the marsupials and the Monotremata; so that he makes man as distinct from all other mammals as are these two latter groups conjoined.
This view has not been accepted, as far as I am aware, by any naturalist capable of forming an independent judgment, and therefore need not here be further considered.
We can understand why a classification founded on any single character or organ--even an organ so wonderfully complex and important as the brain--or on the high development of the mental faculties, is almost sure to prove unsatisfactory.
This principle has indeed been tried with hymenopterous insects; but when thus classed by their habits or instincts, the arrangement proved thoroughly artificial.
(3.
Westwood, 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
ii.
1840, p.
87.
) Classifications may, of course, be based on any character whatever, as on size, colour, or the element inhabited; but naturalists have long felt a profound conviction that there is a natural system.
This system, it is now generally admitted, must be, as far as possible, genealogical in arrangement,--that is, the co- descendants of the same form must be kept together in one group, apart from the co-descendants of any other form; but if the parent-forms
The amount of difference between the several groups--that is the amount of modification which each has undergone--is expressed by such terms as genera, families, orders, and classes.
As we have no record of the lines of descent, the pedigree can be discovered only by observing the degrees of resemblance between the beings which are to be classed.
For this object numerous points of resemblance are of much more importance than the amount of similarity or dissimilarity in a few points.
If two languages were found to resemble each other in a multitude of words and points of construction, they would be universally recognised as having sprung from a common source, notwithstanding that they differed greatly in some few words or points of
But with organic beings the points of resemblance must not consist of adaptations to similar habits of life: two animals may, for instance, have had their whole frames modified for living in the water, and yet they will not be brought any nearer to each
Hence we can see how it is that resemblances in several unimportant structures, in useless and rudimentary organs, or not now functionally active, or in an embryological condition, are by far the most serviceable for classification; for they can hardly be
We can further see why a great amount of modification in some one character ought not to lead us to separate widely any two organisms.
A part which already differs much from the same part in other allied forms has already, according to the theory of evolution, varied much; consequently it would (as long as the organism remained exposed to the same exciting conditions) be liable to further
In many cases the continued development of a part, for instance, of the beak of a bird, or of the teeth of a mammal, would not aid the species in gaining its food, or for any other object; but with man we can see no definite limit to the continued
Therefore in determining the position of man in the natural or genealogical system, the extreme development of his brain ought not to outweigh a multitude of resemblances in other less important or quite unimportant points.
The greater number of naturalists who have taken into consideration the whole structure of man, including his mental faculties, have followed Blumenbach and Cuvier, and have placed man in a separate Order, under the title of the Bimana, and therefore on an
Recently many of our best naturalists have recurred to the view first propounded by Linnaeus, so remarkable for his sagacity, and have placed man in the same Order with the Quadrumana, under the title of the Primates.
The justice of this conclusion will be admitted: for in the first place, we must bear in mind the comparative insignificance for classification of the great development of the brain in man, and that the strongly-marked differences between the skulls of man
In the second place, we must remember that nearly all the other and more important differences between man and the Quadrumana are manifestly adaptive in their nature, and relate chiefly to the erect position of man; such as the structure of his hand, foot,
The family of Seals offers a good illustration of the small importance of adaptive characters for classification.
These animals differ from all other Carnivora in the form of their bodies and in the structure of their limbs, far more than does man from the higher apes; yet in most systems, from that of Cuvier to the most recent one by Mr. Flower (4.
'Proceedings Zoological Society,' 1863, p.
4.
), seals are ranked as a mere family in the Order of the Carnivora.
If man had not been his own classifier, he would never have thought of founding a separate order for his own reception.
It would be beyond my limits, and quite beyond my knowledge, even to name the innumerable points of structure in which man agrees with the other Primates.
Our great anatomist and philosopher, Prof.
Huxley, has fully discussed this subject (5.
'Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature,' 1863, p.
70, et passim.
), and concludes that man in all parts of his organization differs less from the higher apes, than these do from the lower members of the same group.
Consequently there "is no justification for placing man in a distinct order".
In an early part of this work I brought forward various facts, shewing how closely man agrees in constitution with the higher mammals; and this agreement must depend on our close similarity in minute structure and chemical composition.
I gave, as instances, our liability to the same diseases, and to the attacks of allied parasites; our tastes in common for the same stimulants, and the similar effects produced by them, as well as by various drugs, and other such facts.
As small unimportant points of resemblance between man and the Quadrumana are not commonly noticed in systematic works, and as, when numerous, they clearly reveal our relationship, I will specify a few such points.
The relative position of our features is manifestly the same; and the various emotions are displayed by nearly similar movements of the muscles and skin, chiefly above the eyebrows and round the mouth.
Some few expressions are, indeed, almost the same, as in the weeping of certain kinds of monkeys and in the laughing noise made by others, during which the corners of the mouth are drawn backwards, and the lower eyelids wrinkled.
The external ears are curiously alike.
In man the nose is much more prominent than in most monkeys; but we may trace the commencement of an aquiline curvature in the nose of the Hoolock Gibbon; and this in the Semnopithecus nasica is carried to a ridiculous extreme.
The faces of many monkeys are ornamented with beards, whiskers, or moustaches.
The hair on the head grows to a great length in some species of Semnopithecus (6.
Isidore Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, 'Hist.
Nat.
Gen.
' tom.
ii.
1859, p.
217.
); and in the Bonnet monkey (Macacus radiatus) it radiates from a point on the crown, with a parting down the middle.
It is commonly said that the forehead gives to man his noble and intellectual appearance; but the thick hair on the head of the Bonnet monkey terminates downwards abruptly, and is succeeded by hair so short and fine that at a little distance the forehead,
It has been erroneously asserted that eyebrows are not present in any monkey.
In the species just named the degree of nakedness of the forehead differs in different individuals; and Eschricht states (7.
'ber die Richtung der Haare,' etc.
, Mller's 'Archiv fur Anat.
und Phys.
' 1837, s.
51.
) that in our children the limit between the hairy scalp and the naked forehead is sometimes not well defined; so that here we seem to have a trifling case of reversion to a progenitor, in whom the forehead had not as yet become quite naked.
It is well known that the hair on our arms tends to converge from above and below to a point at the elbow.
This curious arrangement, so unlike that in most of the lower mammals, is common to the gorilla, chimpanzee, orang, some species of Hylobates, and even to some few American monkeys.
But in Hylobates agilis the hair on the fore-arm is directed downwards or towards the wrist in the ordinary manner; and in H. lar it is nearly erect, with only a very slight forward inclination; so that in this latter species it is in a transitional state.
It can hardly be doubted that with most mammals the thickness of the hair on the back and its direction, is adapted to throw off the rain; even the transverse hairs on the fore-legs of a dog may serve for this end when he is coiled up asleep.
Mr. Wallace, who has carefully studied the habits of the orang, remarks that the convergence of the hair towards the elbow on the arms of the orang may be explained as serving to throw off the rain, for this animal during rainy weather sits with its arms
According to Livingstone, the gorilla also "sits in pelting rain with his hands over his head".
(8.
Quoted by Reade, 'The African Sketch Book,' vol i.
1873, p.
152.
) If the above explanation is correct, as seems probable, the direction of the hair on our own arms offers a curious record of our former state; for no one supposes that it is now of any use in throwing off the rain; nor, in our present erect condition, is
It would, however, be rash to trust too much to the principle of adaptation in regard to the direction of the hair in man or his early progenitors; for it is impossible to study the figures given by Eschricht of the arrangement of the hair on the human
The points of convergence seem to stand in some relation to those points in the embryo which are last closed in during development.
There appears, also, to exist some relation between the arrangement of the hair on the limbs, and the course of the medullary arteries.
(9.
On the hair in Hylobates, see 'Natural History of Mammals,' by C.L. Martin, 1841, p.
415.
Also, Isidore Geoffroy on the American monkeys and other kinds, 'Hist.
Nat.
Gen.
' vol.
ii.
1859, pp.
216, 243.
Eschricht, ibid.
s.
46, 55, 61.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
619.
Wallace, 'Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection,' 1870, p.
344.
) It must not be supposed that the resemblances between man and certain apes in the above and in many other points--such as in having a naked forehead, long tresses on the head, etc.
,--are all necessarily the result of unbroken inheritance from a common progenitor, or of subsequent reversion.
Many of these resemblances are more probably due to analogous variation, which follows, as I have elsewhere attempted to shew (10.
'Origin of Species,' 5th edit.
1869, p.
194.
'The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
1868, p.
348.
), from co-descended organisms having a similar constitution, and having been acted on by like causes inducing similar modifications.
With respect to the similar direction of the hair on the fore-arms of man and certain monkeys, as this character is common to almost all the anthropomorphous apes, it may probably be attributed to inheritance; but this is not certain, as some very distinct
Although, as we have now seen, man has no just right to form a separate Order for his own reception, he may perhaps claim a distinct Sub-order or Family.
Prof.
Huxley, in his last work (11.
'An Introduction to the Classification of Animals,' 1869, p.
99.
), divides the primates into three Sub-orders; namely, the Anthropidae with man alone, the Simiadae including monkeys of all kinds, and the Lemuridae with the diversified genera of lemurs.
As far as differences in certain important points of structure are concerned, man may no doubt rightly claim the rank of a Sub-order; and this rank is too low, if we look chiefly to his mental faculties.
Nevertheless, from a genealogical point of view it appears that this rank is too high, and that man ought to form merely a Family, or possibly even only a Sub- family.
If we imagine three lines of descent proceeding from a common stock, it is quite conceivable that two of them might after the lapse of ages be so slightly changed as still to remain as species of the same genus, whilst the third line might become so
But in this case it is almost certain that the third line would still retain through inheritance numerous small points of resemblance with the other two.
Here, then, would occur the difficulty, at present insoluble, how much weight we ought to assign in our classifications to strongly-marked differences in some few points,--that is, to the amount of modification undergone; and how much to close resemblance
To attach much weight to the few but strong differences is the most obvious and perhaps the safest course, though it appears more correct to pay great attention to the many small resemblances, as giving a truly natural classification.
In forming a judgment on this head with reference to man, we must glance at the classification of the Simiadae.
This family is divided by almost all naturalists into the Catarrhine group, or Old World monkeys, all of which are characterised (as their name expresses) by the peculiar structure of their nostrils, and by having four premolars in each jaw; and into the
Some other small differences might be mentioned.
Now man unquestionably belongs in his dentition, in the structure of his nostrils, and some other respects, to the Catarrhine or Old World division; nor does he resemble the Platyrrhines more closely than the Catarrhines in any characters, excepting in a
It is therefore against all probability that some New World species should have formerly varied and produced a man-like creature, with all the distinctive characters proper to the Old World division; losing at the same time all its own distinctive
There can, consequently, hardly be a doubt that man is an off-shoot from the Old World Simian stem; and that under a genealogical point of view he must be classed with the Catarrhine division.
(12.
This is nearly the same classification as that provisionally adopted by Mr. St. George Mivart, ('Transactions, Philosophical Society," 1867, p.
300), who, after separating the Lemuridae, divides the remainder of the Primates into the Hominidae, the Simiadae which answer to the Catarrhines, the Cebidae, and the Hapalidae,--these two latter groups answering to the Platyrrhines.
Mr. Mivart still abides by the same view; see 'Nature,' 1871, p.
481.
) The anthropomorphous apes, namely the gorilla, chimpanzee, orang, and hylobates, are by most naturalists separated from the other Old World monkeys, as a distinct sub-group.
I am aware that Gratiolet, relying on the structure of the brain, does not admit the existence of this sub-group, and no doubt it is a broken one.
Thus the orang, as Mr. St. G. Mivart remarks, "is one of the most peculiar and aberrant forms to be found in the Order".
(13.
'Transactions, Zoolog.
Soc.
' vol.
vi.
1867, p.
214.
) The remaining non-anthropomorphous Old World monkeys, are again divided by some naturalists into two or three smaller sub-groups; the genus Semnopithecus, with its peculiar sacculated stomach, being the type of one sub-group.
But it appears from M. Gaudry's wonderful discoveries in Attica, that during the Miocene period a form existed there, which connected Semnopithecus and Macacus; and this probably illustrates the manner in which the other and higher groups were once blended
If the anthropomorphous apes be admitted to form a natural sub-group, then as man agrees with them, not only in all those characters which he possesses in common with the whole Catarrhine group, but in other peculiar characters, such as the absence of a
It is not probable that, through the law of analogous variation, a member of one of the other lower sub-groups should have given rise to a man-like creature, resembling the higher anthropomorphous apes in so many respects.
No doubt man, in comparison with most of his allies, has undergone an extraordinary amount of modification, chiefly in consequence of the great development of his brain and his erect position; nevertheless, we should bear in mind that he "is but one of
(14.
Mr. St. G. Mivart, 'Transactions of the Philosophical Society,' 1867, p.
410.
) Every naturalist, who believes in the principle of evolution, will grant that the two main divisions of the Simiadae, namely the Catarrhine and Platyrrhine monkeys, with their sub-groups, have all proceeded from some one extremely ancient progenitor.
The early descendants of this progenitor, before they had diverged to any considerable extent from each other, would still have formed a single natural group; but some of the species or incipient genera would have already begun to indicate by their
Hence the members of this supposed ancient group would not have been so uniform in their dentition, or in the structure of their nostrils, as are the existing Catarrhine monkeys in one way and the Platyrrhines in another way, but would have resembled in
Messrs.
Murie and Mivart on the Lemuroidea, 'Transactions, Zoological Society,' vol.
vii, 1869, p.
5.
), and to an extraordinary degree in their dentition.
The Catarrhine and Platyrrhine monkeys agree in a multitude of characters, as is shewn by their unquestionably belonging to one and the same Order.
The many characters which they possess in common can hardly have been independently acquired by so many distinct species; so that these characters must have been inherited.
But a naturalist would undoubtedly have ranked as an ape or a monkey, an ancient form which possessed many characters common to the Catarrhine and Platyrrhine monkeys, other characters in an intermediate condition, and some few, perhaps, distinct from
And as man from a genealogical point of view belongs to the Catarrhine or Old World stock, we must conclude, however much the conclusion may revolt our pride, that our early progenitors would have been properly thus designated.
(16.
Haeckel has come to this same conclusion.
See 'ber die Entstehung des Menschengeschlechts,' in Virchow's 'Sammlung.
gemein.
wissen.
Vortrge,' 1868, s.
61.
Also his 'Natrliche Schpfungsgeschichte,' 1868, in which he gives in detail his views on the genealogy of man.
) But we must not fall into the error of supposing that the early progenitor of the whole Simian stock, including man, was identical with, or even closely resembled, any existing ape or monkey.
ON THE BIRTHPLACE AND ANTIQUITY OF MAN.
We are naturally led to enquire, where was the birthplace of man at that stage of descent when our progenitors diverged from the Catarrhine stock?
The fact that they belonged to this stock clearly shews that they inhabited the Old World; but not Australia nor any oceanic island, as we may infer from the laws of geographical distribution.
In each great region of the world the living mammals are closely related to the extinct species of the same region.
It is therefore probable that Africa was formerly inhabited by extinct apes closely allied to the gorilla and chimpanzee; and as these two species are now man's nearest allies, it is somewhat more probable that our early progenitors lived on the African
But it is useless to speculate on this subject; for two or three anthropomorphous apes, one the Dryopithecus (17.
Dr. C. Forsyth Major, 'Sur les Singes fossiles trouvs en Italie:' 'Soc.
Ital.
des Sc.
Nat.
' tom.
xv.
1872.
) of Lartet, nearly as large as a man, and closely allied to Hylobates, existed in Europe during the Miocene age; and since so remote a period the earth has certainly undergone many great revolutions, and there has been ample time for migration on the
At the period and place, whenever and wherever it was, when man first lost his hairy covering, he probably inhabited a hot country; a circumstance favourable for the frugiferous diet on which, judging from analogy, he subsisted.
We are far from knowing how long ago it was when man first diverged from the Catarrhine stock; but it may have occurred at an epoch as remote as the Eocene period; for that the higher apes had diverged from the lower apes as early as the Upper Miocene
We are also quite ignorant at how rapid a rate organisms, whether high or low in the scale, may be modified under favourable circumstances; we know, however, that some have retained the same form during an enormous lapse of time.
From what we see going on under domestication, we learn that some of the co-descendants of the same species may be not at all, some a little, and some greatly changed, all within the same period.
Thus it may have been with man, who has undergone a great amount of modification in certain characters in comparison with the higher apes.
The great break in the organic chain between man and his nearest allies, which cannot be bridged over by any extinct or living species, has often been advanced as a grave objection to the belief that man is descended from some lower form; but this
Breaks often occur in all parts of the series, some being wide, sharp and defined, others less so in various degrees; as between the orang and its nearest allies--between the Tarsius and the other Lemuridae--between the elephant, and in a more striking
But these breaks depend merely on the number of related forms which have become extinct.
At some future period, not very distant as measured by centuries, the civilised races of man will almost certainly exterminate, and replace, the savage races throughout the world.
At the same time the anthropomorphous apes, as Professor Schaaffhausen has remarked (18.
'Anthropological Review,' April 1867, p.
236.
), will no doubt be exterminated.
The break between man and his nearest allies will then be wider, for it will intervene between man in a more civilised state, as we may hope, even than the Caucasian, and some ape as low as a baboon, instead of as now between the negro or Australian and
With respect to the absence of fossil remains, serving to connect man with his ape-like progenitors, no one will lay much stress on this fact who reads Sir C. Lyell's discussion (19.
'Elements of Geology,' 1865, pp.
583- 585.
'Antiquity of Man,' 1863, p.
145.
), where he shews that in all the vertebrate classes the discovery of fossil remains has been a very slow and fortuitous process.
Nor should it be forgotten that those regions which are the most likely to afford remains connecting man with some extinct ape- like creature, have not as yet been searched by geologists.
LOWER STAGES IN THE GENEALOGY OF MAN.
We have seen that man appears to have diverged from the Catarrhine or Old World division of the Simiadae, after these had diverged from the New World division.
We will now endeavour to follow the remote traces of his genealogy, trusting principally to the mutual affinities between the various classes and orders, with some slight reference to the periods, as far as ascertained, of their successive appearance on
The Lemuridae stand below and near to the Simiadae, and constitute a very distinct family of the primates, or, according to Haeckel and others, a distinct Order.
This group is diversified and broken to an extraordinary degree, and includes many aberrant forms.
It has, therefore, probably suffered much extinction.
Most of the remnants survive on islands, such as Madagascar and the Malayan archipelago, where they have not been exposed to so severe a competition as they would have been on well-stocked continents.
This group likewise presents many gradations, leading, as Huxley remarks (20.
'Man's Place in Nature,' p.
105.
), "insensibly from the crown and summit of the animal creation down to creatures from which there is but a step, as it seems, to the lowest, smallest, and least intelligent of the placental mammalia".
From these various considerations it is probable that the Simiadae were originally developed from the progenitors of the existing Lemuridae; and these in their turn from forms standing very low in the mammalian series.
The Marsupials stand in many important characters below the placental mammals.
They appeared at an earlier geological period, and their range was formerly much more extensive than at present.
Hence the Placentata are generally supposed to have been derived from the Implacentata or Marsupials; not, however, from forms closely resembling the existing Marsupials, but from their early progenitors.
The Monotremata are plainly allied to the Marsupials, forming a third and still lower division in the great mammalian series.
They are represented at the present day solely by the Ornithorhynchus and Echidna; and these two forms may be safely considered as relics of a much larger group, representatives of which have been preserved in Australia through some favourable concurrence
The Monotremata are eminently interesting, as leading in several important points of structure towards the class of reptiles.
In attempting to trace the genealogy of the Mammalia, and therefore of man, lower down in the series, we become involved in greater and greater obscurity; but as a most capable judge, Mr. Parker, has remarked, we have good reason to believe, that no true
He who wishes to see what ingenuity and knowledge can effect, may consult Prof.
Haeckel's works.
(21.
Elaborate tables are given in his 'Generelle Morphologie' (B.
ii.
s.
cliii.
and s.
425); and with more especial reference to man in his 'Natrliche Schpfungsgeschichte,' 1868.
Prof.
Huxley, in reviewing this latter work ('The Academy,' 1869, p.
42) says, that he considers the phylum or lines of descent of the Vertebrata to be admirably discussed by Haeckel, although he differs on some points.
He expresses, also, his high estimate of the general tenor and spirit of the whole work.
) I will content myself with a few general remarks.
Every evolutionist will admit that the five great vertebrate classes, namely, mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fishes, are descended from some one prototype; for they have much in common, especially during their embryonic state.
As the class of fishes is the most lowly organised, and appeared before the others, we may conclude that all the members of the vertebrate kingdom are derived from some fishlike animal.
The belief that animals so distinct as a monkey, an elephant, a humming-bird, a snake, a frog, and a fish, etc.
, could all have sprung from the same parents, will appear monstrous to those who have not attended to the recent progress of natural history.
For this belief implies the former existence of links binding closely together all these forms, now so utterly unlike.
Nevertheless, it is certain that groups of animals have existed, or do now exist, which serve to connect several of the great vertebrate classes more or less closely.
We have seen that the Ornithorhynchus graduates towards reptiles; and Prof.
Huxley has discovered, and is confirmed by Mr. Cope and others, that the Dinosaurians are in many important characters intermediate between certain reptiles and certain birds--the birds referred to being the ostrich-tribe (itself evidently a
Again, according to Prof.
Owen (22.
'Palaeontology' 1860, p.
199.
), the Ichthyosaurians--great sea-lizards furnished with paddles--present many affinities with fishes, or rather, according to Huxley, with amphibians; a class which, including in its highest division frogs and toads, is plainly allied to the Ganoid
These latter fishes swarmed during the earlier geological periods, and were constructed on what is called a generalised type, that is, they presented diversified affinities with other groups of organisms.
The Lepidosiren is also so closely allied to amphibians and fishes, that naturalists long disputed in which of these two classes to rank it; it, and also some few Ganoid fishes, have been preserved from utter extinction by inhabiting rivers, which are
Lastly, one single member of the immense and diversified class of fishes, namely, the lancelet or amphioxus, is so different from all other fishes, that Haeckel maintains that it ought to form a distinct class in the vertebrate kingdom.
This fish is remarkable for its negative characters; it can hardly be said to possess a brain, vertebral column, or heart, etc.
; so that it was classed by the older naturalists amongst the worms.
Many years ago Prof.
Goodsir perceived that the lancelet presented some affinities with the Ascidians, which are invertebrate, hermaphrodite, marine creatures permanently attached to a support.
They hardly appear like animals, and consist of a simple, tough, leathery sack, with two small projecting orifices.
They belong to the Mulluscoida of Huxley--a lower division of the great kingdom of the Mollusca; but they have recently been placed by some naturalists amongst the Vermes or worms.
Their larvae somewhat resemble tadpoles in shape (23.
At the Falkland Islands I had the satisfaction of seeing, in April, 1833, and therefore some years before any other naturalist, the locomotive larvae of a compound Ascidian, closely allied to Synoicum, but apparently generically distinct from it.
The tail was about five times as long as the oblong head, and terminated in a very fine filament.
It was, as sketched by me under a simple microscope, plainly divided by transverse opaque partitions, which I presume represent the great cells figured by Kovalevsky.
At an early stage of development the tail was closely coiled round the head of the larva.
), and have the power of swimming freely about.
Mr. Kovalevsky (24.
'Memoires de l'Acad.
des Sciences de St. Petersbourg,' tom.
x.
No.
15, 1866.
) has lately observed that the larvae of Ascidians are related to the Vertebrata, in their manner of development, in the relative position of the nervous system, and in possessing a structure closely like the chorda dorsalis of vertebrate animals; and in
Kupffer.
M. Kovalevsky writes to me from Naples, that he has now carried these observations yet further, and should his results be well established, the whole will form a discovery of the very greatest value.
Thus, if we may rely on embryology, ever the safest guide in classification, it seems that we have at last gained a clue to the source whence the Vertebrata were derived.
(25.
But I am bound to add that some competent judges dispute this conclusion; for instance, M. Giard, in a series of papers in the 'Archives de Zoologie Experimentale,' for 1872.
Nevertheless, this naturalist remarks, p.
281, "L'organisation de la larve ascidienne en dehors de toute hypothse et de toute thorie, nous montre comment la nature peut produire la disposition fondamentale du type vertbr (l'existence d'une corde dorsale) chez un invertbr par la seule
) We should then be justified in believing that at an extremely remote period a group of animals existed, resembling in many respects the larvae of our present Ascidians, which diverged into two great branches--the one retrograding in development and
We have thus far endeavoured rudely to trace the genealogy of the Vertebrata by the aid of their mutual affinities.
We will now look to man as he exists; and we shall, I think, be able partially to restore the structure of our early progenitors, during successive periods, but not in due order of time.
This can be effected by means of the rudiments which man still retains, by the characters which occasionally make their appearance in him through reversion, and by the aid of the principles of morphology and embryology.
The various facts, to which I shall here allude, have been given in the previous chapters.
The early progenitors of man must have been once covered with hair, both sexes having beards; their ears were probably pointed, and capable of movement; and their bodies were provided with a tail, having the proper muscles.
Their limbs and bodies were also acted on by many muscles which now only occasionally reappear, but are normally present in the Quadrumana.
At this or some earlier period, the great artery and nerve of the humerus ran through a supra-condyloid foramen.
The intestine gave forth a much larger diverticulum or caecum than that now existing.
The foot was then prehensile, judging from the condition of the great toe in the foetus; and our progenitors, no doubt, were arboreal in their habits, and frequented some warm, forest-clad land.
The males had great canine teeth, which served them as formidable weapons.
At a much earlier period the uterus was double; the excreta were voided through a cloaca; and the eye was protected by a third eyelid or nictitating membrane.
At a still earlier period the progenitors of man must have been aquatic in their habits; for morphology plainly tells us that our lungs consist of a modified swim-bladder, which once served as a float.
The clefts on the neck in the embryo of man shew where the branchiae once existed.
In the lunar or weekly recurrent periods of some of our functions we apparently still retain traces of our primordial birthplace, a shore washed by the tides.
At about this same early period the true kidneys were replaced by the corpora wolffiana.
The heart existed as a simple pulsating vessel; and the chorda dorsalis took the place of a vertebral column.
These early ancestors of man, thus seen in the dim recesses of time, must have been as simply, or even still more simply organised than the lancelet or amphioxus.
There is one other point deserving a fuller notice.
It has long been known that in the vertebrate kingdom one sex bears rudiments of various accessory parts, appertaining to the reproductive system, which properly belong to the opposite sex; and it has now been ascertained that at a very early embryonic
Hence some remote progenitor of the whole vertebrate kingdom appears to have been hermaphrodite or androgynous.
(26.
This is the conclusion of Prof.
Gegenbaur, one of the highest authorities in comparative anatomy: see 'Grundzge der vergleich.
Anat.
' 1870, s.
876.
The result has been arrived at chiefly from the study of the Amphibia; but it appears from the researches of Waldeyer (as quoted in 'Journal of Anat.
and Phys.
' 1869, p.
161), that the sexual organs of even "the higher vertebrata are, in their early condition, hermaphrodite".
Similar views have long been held by some authors, though until recently without a firm basis.
) But here we encounter a singular difficulty.
In the mammalian class the males possess rudiments of a uterus with the adjacent passage, in their vesiculae prostaticae; they bear also rudiments of mammae, and some male Marsupials have traces of a marsupial sack.
(27.
The male Thylacinus offers the best instance.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
771.
) Other analogous facts could be added.
Are we, then, to suppose that some extremely ancient mammal continued androgynous, after it had acquired the chief distinctions of its class, and therefore after it had diverged from the lower classes of the vertebrate kingdom?
This seems very improbable, for we have to look to fishes, the lowest of all the classes, to find any still existent androgynous forms.
(28.
Hermaphroditism has been observed in several species of Serranus, as well as in some other fishes, where it is either normal and symmetrical, or abnormal and unilateral.
Dr. Zouteveen has given me references on this subject, more especially to a paper by Prof.
Halbertsma, in the 'Transact.
of the Dutch Acad.
of Sciences,' vol.
xvi.
Dr. Gunther doubts the fact, but it has now been recorded by too many good observers to be any longer disputed.
Dr. M. Lessona writes to me, that he has verified the observations made by Cavolini on Serranus.
Prof.
Ercolani has recently shewn ('Accad.
delle Scienze,' Bologna, Dec.
28, 1871) that eels are androgynous.
) That various accessory parts, proper to each sex, are found in a rudimentary condition in the opposite sex, may be explained by such organs having been gradually acquired by the one sex, and then transmitted in a more or less imperfect state to the
When we treat of sexual selection, we shall meet with innumerable instances of this form of transmission,--as in the case of the spurs, plumes, and brilliant colours, acquired for battle or ornament by male birds, and inherited by the females in an
The possession by male mammals of functionally imperfect mammary organs is, in some respects, especially curious.
The Monotremata have the proper milk-secreting glands with orifices, but no nipples; and as these animals stand at the very base of the mammalian series, it is probable that the progenitors of the class also had milk-secreting glands, but no nipples.
This conclusion is supported by what is known of their manner of development; for Professor Turner informs me, on the authority of Kolliker and Langer, that in the embryo the mammary glands can be distinctly traced before the nipples are in the least
The Marsupials differ from the Monotremata by possessing nipples; so that probably these organs were first acquired by the Marsupials, after they had diverged from, and risen above, the Monotremata, and were then transmitted to the placental mammals.
(29.
Prof.
Gegenbaur has shewn ('Jenische Zeitschrift,' Bd.
vii.
p.
212) that two distinct types of nipples prevail throughout the several mammalian orders, but that it is quite intelligible how both could have been derived from the nipples of the Marsupials, and the latter from those of the Monotremata.
See, also, a memoir by Dr. Max Huss, on the mammary glands, ibid.
B. viii.
p.
176.
) No one will suppose that the marsupials still remained androgynous, after they had approximately acquired their present structure.
How then are we to account for male mammals possessing mammae?
It is possible that they were first developed in the females and then transferred to the males, but from what follows this is hardly probable.
It may be suggested, as another view, that long after the progenitors of the whole mammalian class had ceased to be androgynous, both sexes yielded milk, and thus nourished their young; and in the case of the Marsupials, that both sexes carried their young
This will not appear altogether improbable, if we reflect that the males of existing syngnathous fishes receive the eggs of the females in their abdominal pouches, hatch them, and afterwards, as some believe, nourish the young (30.
Mr. Lockwood believes (as quoted in 'Quart.
Journal of Science,' April 1868, p.
269), from what he has observed of the development of Hippocampus, that the walls of the abdominal pouch of the male in some way afford nourishment.
On male fishes hatching the ova in their mouths, see a very interesting paper by Prof.
Wyman, in 'Proc.
Boston Soc.
of Nat.
Hist.
' Sept.
15, 1857; also Prof.
Turner, in 'Journal of Anatomy and Physiology,' Nov.
1, 1866, p.
78.
Dr. Gunther has likewise described similar cases.
);-- that certain other male fishes hatch the eggs within their mouths or branchial cavities;--that certain male toads take the chaplets of eggs from the females, and wind them round their own thighs, keeping them there until the tadpoles are born;--that
But the above suggestion first occurred to me from mammary glands of male mammals being so much more perfectly developed than the rudiments of the other accessory reproductive parts, which are found in the one sex though proper to the other.
The mammary glands and nipples, as they exist in male mammals, can indeed hardly be called rudimentary; they are merely not fully developed, and not functionally active.
They are sympathetically affected under the influence of certain diseases, like the same organs in the female.
They often secrete a few drops of milk at birth and at puberty: this latter fact occurred in the curious case, before referred to, where a young man possessed two pairs of mammae.
In man and some other male mammals these organs have been known occasionally to become so well developed during maturity as to yield a fair supply of milk.
Now if we suppose that during a former prolonged period male mammals aided the females in nursing their offspring (31.
Mlle.
C. Royer has suggested a similar view in her 'Origine de l'homme,' etc.
, 1870.
), and that afterwards from some cause (as from the production of a smaller number of young) the males ceased to give this aid, disuse of the organs during maturity would lead to their becoming inactive; and from two well-known principles of inheritance,
But at an earlier age these organs would be left unaffected, so that they would be almost equally well developed in the young of both sexes.
CONCLUSION.
Von Baer has defined advancement or progress in the organic scale better than any one else, as resting on the amount of differentiation and specialisation of the several parts of a being,--when arrived at maturity, as I should be inclined to add.
Now as organisms have become slowly adapted to diversified lines of life by means of natural selection, their parts will have become more and more differentiated and specialised for various functions from the advantage gained by the division of
The same part appears often to have been modified first for one purpose, and then long afterwards for some other and quite distinct purpose; and thus all the parts are rendered more and more complex.
But each organism still retains the general type of structure of the progenitor from which it was aboriginally derived.
In accordance with this view it seems, if we turn to geological evidence, that organisation on the whole has advanced throughout the world by slow and interrupted steps.
In the great kingdom of the Vertebrata it has culminated in man.
It must not, however, be supposed that groups of organic beings are always supplanted, and disappear as soon as they have given birth to other and more perfect groups.
The latter, though victorious over their predecessors, may not have become better adapted for all places in the economy of nature.
Some old forms appear to have survived from inhabiting protected sites, where they have not been exposed to very severe competition; and these often aid us in constructing our genealogies, by giving us a fair idea of former and lost populations.
But we must not fall into the error of looking at the existing members of any lowly-organised group as perfect representatives of their ancient predecessors.
The most ancient progenitors in the kingdom of the Vertebrata, at which we are able to obtain an obscure glance, apparently consisted of a group of marine animals (32.
The inhabitants of the seashore must be greatly affected by the tides; animals living either about the MEAN high-water mark, or about the MEAN low-water mark, pass through a complete cycle of tidal changes in a fortnight.
Consequently, their food supply will undergo marked changes week by week.
The vital functions of such animals, living under these conditions for many generations, can hardly fail to run their course in regular weekly periods.
Now it is a mysterious fact that in the higher and now terrestrial Vertebrata, as well as in other classes, many normal and abnormal processes have one or more whole weeks as their periods; this would be rendered intelligible if the Vertebrata are
Many instances of such periodic processes might be given, as the gestation of mammals, the duration of fevers, etc.
The hatching of eggs affords also a good example, for, according to Mr. Bartlett ('Land and Water,' Jan.
7, 1871), the eggs of the pigeon are hatched in two weeks; those of the fowl in three; those of the duck in four; those of the goose in five; and those of the ostrich in seven weeks.
As far as we can judge, a recurrent period, if approximately of the right duration for any process or function, would not, when once gained, be liable to change; consequently it might be thus transmitted through almost any number of generations.
But if the function changed, the period would have to change, and would be apt to change almost abruptly by a whole week.
This conclusion, if sound, is highly remarkable; for the period of gestation in each mammal, and the hatching of each bird's eggs, and many other vital processes, thus betray to us the primordial birthplace of these animals.
), resembling the larvae of existing Ascidians.
These animals probably gave rise to a group of fishes, as lowly organised as the lancelet; and from these the Ganoids, and other fishes like the Lepidosiren, must have been developed.
From such fish a very small advance would carry us on to the Amphibians.
We have seen that birds and reptiles were once intimately connected together; and the Monotremata now connect mammals with reptiles in a slight degree.
But no one can at present say by what line of descent the three higher and related classes, namely, mammals, birds, and reptiles, were derived from the two lower vertebrate classes, namely, amphibians and fishes.
In the class of mammals the steps are not difficult to conceive which led from the ancient Monotremata to the ancient Marsupials; and from these to the early progenitors of the placental mammals.
We may thus ascend to the Lemuridae; and the interval is not very wide from these to the Simiadae.
The Simiadae then branched off into two great stems, the New World and Old World monkeys; and from the latter, at a remote period, Man, the wonder and glory of the Universe, proceeded.
Thus we have given to man a pedigree of prodigious length, but not, it may be said, of noble quality.
The world, it has often been remarked, appears as if it had long been preparing for the advent of man: and this, in one sense is strictly true, for he owes his birth to a long line of progenitors.
If any single link in this chain had never existed, man would not have been exactly what he now is.
Unless we wilfully close our eyes, we may, with our present knowledge, approximately recognise our parentage; nor need we feel ashamed of it.
The most humble organism is something much higher than the inorganic dust under our feet; and no one with an unbiassed mind can study any living creature, however humble, without being struck with enthusiasm at its marvellous structure and properties.
CHAPTER VII.
ON THE RACES OF MAN.
The nature and value of specific characters--Application to the races of man--Arguments in favour of, and opposed to, ranking the so-called races of man as distinct species--Sub-species--Monogenists and polygenists-- Convergence of character--Numerous
It is not my intention here to describe the several so-called races of men; but I am about to enquire what is the value of the differences between them under a classificatory point of view, and how they have originated.
In determining whether two or more allied forms ought to be ranked as species or varieties, naturalists are practically guided by the following considerations; namely, the amount of difference between them, and whether such differences relate to few or
Constancy of character is what is chiefly valued and sought for by naturalists.
Whenever it can be shewn, or rendered probable, that the forms in question have remained distinct for a long period, this becomes an argument of much weight in favour of treating them as species.
Even a slight degree of sterility between any two forms when first crossed, or in their offspring, is generally considered as a decisive test of their specific distinctness; and their continued persistence without blending within the same area, is usually
Independently of fusion from intercrossing, the complete absence, in a well-investigated region, of varieties linking together any two closely- allied forms, is probably the most important of all the criterions of their specific distinctness; and this is a
Geographical distribution is often brought into play unconsciously and sometimes consciously; so that forms living in two widely separated areas, in which most of the other inhabitants are specifically distinct, are themselves usually looked at as
Now let us apply these generally-admitted principles to the races of man, viewing him in the same spirit as a naturalist would any other animal.
In regard to the amount of difference between the races, we must make some allowance for our nice powers of discrimination gained by the long habit of observing ourselves.
In India, as Elphinstone remarks, although a newly- arrived European cannot at first distinguish the various native races, yet they soon appear to him extremely dissimilar (1.
'History of India,' 1841, vol.
i.
p.
323.
Father Ripa makes exactly the same remark with respect to the Chinese.
); and the Hindoo cannot at first perceive any difference between the several European nations.
Even the most distinct races of man are much more like each other in form than would at first be supposed; certain negro tribes must be excepted, whilst others, as Dr. Rohlfs writes to me, and as I have myself seen, have Caucasian features.
This general similarity is well shewn by the French photographs in the Collection Anthropologique du Museum de Paris of the men belonging to various races, the greater number of which might pass for Europeans, as many persons to whom I have shewn them have
Nevertheless, these men, if seen alive, would undoubtedly appear very distinct, so that we are clearly much influenced in our judgment by the mere colour of the skin and hair, by slight differences in the features, and by expression.
There is, however, no doubt that the various races, when carefully compared and measured, differ much from each other,--as in the texture of the hair, the relative proportions of all parts of the body (2.
A vast number of measurements of Whites, Blacks, and Indians, are given in the 'Investigations in the Military and Anthropolog.
Statistics of American Soldiers,' by B.A. Gould, 1869, pp.
298-358; 'On the capacity of the lungs,' p.
471.
See also the numerous and valuable tables, by Dr. Weisbach, from the observations of Dr. Scherzer and Dr. Schwarz, in the 'Reise der Novara: Anthropolog.
Theil,' 1867.
), the capacity of the lungs, the form and capacity of the skull, and even in the convolutions of the brain.
(3.
See, for instance, Mr. Marshall's account of the brain of a Bushwoman, in 'Philosophical Transactions,' 1864, p.
519.
) But it would be an endless task to specify the numerous points of difference.
The races differ also in constitution, in acclimatisation and in liability to certain diseases.
Their mental characteristics are likewise very distinct; chiefly as it would appear in their emotional, but partly in their intellectual faculties.
Every one who has had the opportunity of comparison, must have been struck with the contrast between the taciturn, even morose, aborigines of S. America and the light-hearted, talkative negroes.
There is a nearly similar contrast between the Malays and the Papuans (4.
Wallace, 'The Malay Archipelago,' vol.
ii.
1869, p.
178.
), who live under the same physical conditions, and are separated from each other only by a narrow space of sea.
We will first consider the arguments which may be advanced in favour of classing the races of man as distinct species, and then the arguments on the other side.
If a naturalist, who had never before seen a Negro, Hottentot, Australian, or Mongolian, were to compare them, he would at once perceive that they differed in a multitude of characters, some of slight and some of considerable importance.
On enquiry he would find that they were adapted to live under widely different climates, and that they differed somewhat in bodily constitution and mental disposition.
If he were then told that hundreds of similar specimens could be brought from the same countries, he would assuredly declare that they were as good species as many to which he had been in the habit of affixing specific names.
This conclusion would be greatly strengthened as soon as he had ascertained that these forms had all retained the same character for many centuries; and that negroes, apparently identical with existing negroes, had lived at least 4000 years ago.
(5.
With respect to the figures in the famous Egyptian caves of Abou-Simbel, M. Pouchet says ('The Plurality of the Human Races,' Eng.
translat.
, 1864, p.
50), that he was far from finding recognisable representations of the dozen or more nations which some authors believe that they can recognise.
Even some of the most strongly- marked races cannot be identified with that degree of unanimity which might have been expected from what has been written on the subject.
Thus Messrs.
Nott and Gliddon ('Types of Mankind,' p.
148), state that Rameses II.
, or the Great, has features superbly European; whereas Knox, another firm believer in the specific distinctness of the races of man ('Races of Man,' 1850, p.
201), speaking of young Memnon (the same as Rameses II.
, as I am informed by Mr. Birch), insists in the strongest manner that he is identical in character with the Jews of Antwerp.
Again, when I looked at the statue of Amunoph III.
, I agreed with two officers of the establishment, both competent judges, that he had a strongly-marked negro type of features; but Messrs.
Nott and Gliddon (ibid.
p.
146, fig.
53), describe him as a hybrid, but not of "negro intermixture".
) He would also hear, on the authority of an excellent observer, Dr. Lund (6.
As quoted by Nott and Gliddon, 'Types of Mankind,' 1854, p.
439.
They give also corroborative evidence; but C. Vogt thinks that the subject requires further investigation.
), that the human skulls found in the caves of Brazil, entombed with many extinct mammals, belonged to the same type as that now prevailing throughout the American Continent.
Our naturalist would then perhaps turn to geographical distribution, and he would probably declare that those forms must be distinct species, which differ not only in appearance, but are fitted for hot, as well as damp or dry countries, and for the Arctic
He might appeal to the fact that no species in the group next to man--namely, the Quadrumana, can resist a low temperature, or any considerable change of climate; and that the species which come nearest to man have never been reared to maturity, even under
He would be deeply impressed with the fact, first noticed by Agassiz (7.
'Diversity of Origin of the Human Races,' in the 'Christian Examiner,' July 1850.
), that the different races of man are distributed over the world in the same zoological provinces, as those inhabited by undoubtedly distinct species and genera of mammals.
This is manifestly the case with the Australian, Mongolian, and Negro races of man; in a less well-marked manner with the Hottentots; but plainly with the Papuans and Malays, who are separated, as Mr. Wallace has shewn, by nearly the same line which
The Aborigines of America range throughout the Continent; and this at first appears opposed to the above rule, for most of the productions of the Southern and Northern halves differ widely: yet some few living forms, as the opossum, range from the one into
The Esquimaux, like other Arctic animals, extend round the whole polar regions.
It should be observed that the amount of difference between the mammals of the several zoological provinces does not correspond with the degree of separation between the latter; so that it can hardly be considered as an anomaly that the Negro differs more,
Man, it may be added, does not appear to have aboriginally inhabited any oceanic island; and in this respect, he resembles the other members of his class.
In determining whether the supposed varieties of the same kind of domestic animal should be ranked as such, or as specifically distinct, that is, whether any of them are descended from distinct wild species, every naturalist would lay much stress on the
All the more stress would be laid on this fact, as it would be an exceptional one; for I am informed by Mr. Denny that the most different kinds of dogs, fowls, and pigeons, in England, are infested by the same species of Pediculi or lice.
Now Mr. A. Murray has carefully examined the Pediculi collected in different countries from the different races of man (8.
'Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,' vol.
xxii, 1861, p.
567.
); and he finds that they differ, not only in colour, but in the structure of their claws and limbs.
In every case in which many specimens were obtained the differences were constant.
The surgeon of a whaling ship in the Pacific assured me that when the Pediculi, with which some Sandwich Islanders on board swarmed, strayed on to the bodies of the English sailors, they died in the course of three or four days.
These Pediculi were darker coloured, and appeared different from those proper to the natives of Chiloe in South America, of which he gave me specimens.
These, again, appeared larger and much softer than European lice.
Mr. Murray procured four kinds from Africa, namely, from the Negroes of the Eastern and Western coasts, from the Hottentots and Kaffirs; two kinds from the natives of Australia; two from North and two from South America.
In these latter cases it may be presumed that the Pediculi came from natives inhabiting different districts.
With insects slight structural differences, if constant, are generally esteemed of specific value: and the fact of the races of man being infested by parasites, which appear to be specifically distinct, might fairly be urged as an argument that the races
Our supposed naturalist having proceeded thus far in his investigation, would next enquire whether the races of men, when crossed, were in any degree sterile.
He might consult the work (9.
'On the Phenomena of Hybridity in the Genus Homo,' Eng.
translat.
, 1864.
) of Professor Broca, a cautious and philosophical observer, and in this he would find good evidence that some races were quite fertile together, but evidence of an opposite nature in regard to other races.
Thus it has been asserted that the native women of Australia and Tasmania rarely produce children to European men; the evidence, however, on this head has now been shewn to be almost valueless.
The half-castes are killed by the pure blacks: and an account has lately been published of eleven half-caste youths murdered and burnt at the same time, whose remains were found by the police.
(10.
See the interesting letter by Mr. T.A. Murray, in the 'Anthropological Review,' April 1868, p.
liii.
In this letter Count Strzelecki's statement that Australian women who have borne children to a white man, are afterwards sterile with their own race, is disproved.
M. A. de Quatrefages has also collected (Revue des Cours Scientifiques, March, 1869, p.
239), much evidence that Australians and Europeans are not sterile when crossed.
) Again, it has often been said that when mulattoes intermarry, they produce few children; on the other hand, Dr. Bachman, of Charleston (11.
'An Examination of Prof.
Agassiz's Sketch of the Nat.
Provinces of the Animal World,' Charleston, 1855, p.
44.
), positively asserts that he has known mulatto families which have intermarried for several generations, and have continued on an average as fertile as either pure whites or pure blacks.
Enquiries formerly made by Sir C. Lyell on this subject led him, as he informs me, to the same conclusion.
(12.
Dr. Rohlfs writes to me that he found the mixed races in the Great Sahara, derived from Arabs, Berbers, and Negroes of three tribes, extraordinarily fertile.
On the other hand, Mr. Winwood Reade informs me that the Negroes on the Gold Coast, though admiring white men and mulattoes, have a maxim that mulattoes should not intermarry, as the children are few and sickly.
This belief, as Mr. Reade remarks, deserves attention, as white men have visited and resided on the Gold Coast for four hundred years, so that the natives have had ample time to gain knowledge through experience.
) In the United States the census for the year 1854 included, according to Dr. Bachman, 405,751 mulattoes; and this number, considering all the circumstances of the case, seems small; but it may partly be accounted for by the degraded and anomalous
A certain amount of absorption of mulattoes into negroes must always be in progress; and this would lead to an apparent diminution of the former.
The inferior vitality of mulattoes is spoken of in a trustworthy work (13.
'Military and Anthropological Statistics of American Soldiers,' by B.A. Gould, 1869, p.
319.
) as a well-known phenomenon; and this, although a different consideration from their lessened fertility, may perhaps be advanced as a proof of the specific distinctness of the parent races.
No doubt both animal and vegetable hybrids, when produced from extremely distinct species, are liable to premature death; but the parents of mulattoes cannot be put under the category of extremely distinct species.
The common Mule, so notorious for long life and vigour, and yet so sterile, shews how little necessary connection there is in hybrids between lessened fertility and vitality; other analogous cases could be cited.
Even if it should hereafter be proved that all the races of men were perfectly fertile together, he who was inclined from other reasons to rank them as distinct species, might with justice argue that fertility and sterility are not safe criterions of
We know that these qualities are easily affected by changed conditions of life, or by close inter-breeding, and that they are governed by highly complex laws, for instance, that of the unequal fertility of converse crosses between the same two species.
With forms which must be ranked as undoubted species, a perfect series exists from those which are absolutely sterile when crossed, to those which are almost or completely fertile.
The degrees of sterility do not coincide strictly with the degrees of difference between the parents in external structure or habits of life.
Man in many respects may be compared with those animals which have long been domesticated, and a large body of evidence can be advanced in favour of the Pallasian doctrine (14.
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
p.
109.
I may here remind the reader that the sterility of species when crossed is not a specially-acquired quality, but, like the incapacity of certain trees to be grafted together, is incidental on other acquired differences.
The nature of these differences is unknown, but they relate more especially to the reproductive system, and much less so to external structure or to ordinary differences in constitution.
One important element in the sterility of crossed species apparently lies in one or both having been long habituated to fixed conditions; for we know that changed conditions have a special influence on the reproductive system, and we have good reason to
It has elsewhere been shewn by me (ibid.
vol.
ii.
p.
185, and 'Origin of Species,' 5th edit.
p.
317), that the sterility of crossed species has not been acquired through natural selection: we can see that when two forms have already been rendered very sterile, it is scarcely possible that their sterility should be augmented by the preservation or
But there is even a higher grade of sterility than this.
Both Gartner and Kolreuter have proved that in genera of plants, including many species, a series can be formed from species which, when crossed, yield fewer and fewer seeds, to species which never produce a single seed, but yet are affected by the pollen
It is here manifestly impossible to select the more sterile individuals, which have already ceased to yield seeds; so that the acme of sterility, when the germen alone is affected, cannot have been gained through selection.
This acme, and no doubt the other grades of sterility, are the incidental results of certain unknown differences in the constitution of the reproductive system of the species which are crossed.
), that domestication tends to eliminate the sterility which is so general a result of the crossing of species in a state of nature.
From these several considerations, it may be justly urged that the perfect fertility of the intercrossed races of man, if established, would not absolutely preclude us from ranking them as distinct species.
Independently of fertility, the characters presented by the offspring from a cross have been thought to indicate whether or not the parent-forms ought to be ranked as species or varieties; but after carefully studying the evidence, I have come to the
The ordinary result of a cross is the production of a blended or intermediate form; but in certain cases some of the offspring take closely after one parent-form, and some after the other.
This is especially apt to occur when the parents differ in characters which first appeared as sudden variations or monstrosities.
(15.
'The Variation of Animals,' etc.
, vol.
ii.
p.
92.
) I refer to this point, because Dr. Rohlfs informs me that he has frequently seen in Africa the offspring of negroes crossed with members of other races, either completely black or completely white, or rarely piebald.
On the other hand, it is notorious that in America mulattoes commonly present an intermediate appearance.
We have now seen that a naturalist might feel himself fully justified in ranking the races of man as distinct species; for he has found that they are distinguished by many differences in structure and constitution, some being of importance.
These differences have, also, remained nearly constant for very long periods of time.
Our naturalist will have been in some degree influenced by the enormous range of man, which is a great anomaly in the class of mammals, if mankind be viewed as a single species.
He will have been struck with the distribution of the several so-called races, which accords with that of other undoubtedly distinct species of mammals.
Finally, he might urge that the mutual fertility of all the races has not as yet been fully proved, and even if proved would not be an absolute proof of their specific identity.
On the other side of the question, if our supposed naturalist were to enquire whether the forms of man keep distinct like ordinary species, when mingled together in large numbers in the same country, he would immediately discover that this was by no means
In Brazil he would behold an immense mongrel population of Negroes and Portuguese; in Chiloe, and other parts of South America, he would behold the whole population consisting of Indians and Spaniards blended in various degrees.
(16.
M. de Quatrefages has given ('Anthropological Review,' Jan.
1869, p.
22), an interesting account of the success and energy of the Paulistas in Brazil, who are a much crossed race of Portuguese and Indians, with a mixture of the blood of other races.
) In many parts of the same continent he would meet with the most complex crosses between Negroes, Indians, and Europeans; and judging from the vegetable kingdom, such triple crosses afford the severest test of the mutual fertility of the parent forms.
In one island of the Pacific he would find a small population of mingled Polynesian and English blood; and in the Fiji Archipelago a population of Polynesian and Negritos crossed in all degrees.
Many analogous cases could be added; for instance, in Africa.
Hence the races of man are not sufficiently distinct to inhabit the same country without fusion; and the absence of fusion affords the usual and best test of specific distinctness.
Our naturalist would likewise be much disturbed as soon as he perceived that the distinctive characters of all the races were highly variable.
This fact strikes every one on first beholding the negro slaves in Brazil, who have been imported from all parts of Africa.
The same remark holds good with the Polynesians, and with many other races.
It may be doubted whether any character can be named which is distinctive of a race and is constant.
Savages, even within the limits of the same tribe, are not nearly so uniform in character, as has been often asserted.
Hottentot women offer certain peculiarities, more strongly marked than those occurring in any other race, but these are known not to be of constant occurrence.
In the several American tribes, colour and hairiness differ considerably; as does colour to a certain degree, and the shape of the features greatly, in the Negroes of Africa.
The shape of the skull varies much in some races (17.
For instance, with the aborigines of America and Australia, Prof.
Huxley says ('Transact.
Internat.
Congress of Prehist.
Arch.
' 1868, p.
105), that the skulls of many South Germans and Swiss are "as short and as broad as those of the Tartars," etc.
); and so it is with every other character.
Now all naturalists have learnt by dearly bought experience, how rash it is to attempt to define species by the aid of inconstant characters.
But the most weighty of all the arguments against treating the races of man as distinct species, is that they graduate into each other, independently in many cases, as far as we can judge, of their having intercrossed.
Man has been studied more carefully than any other animal, and yet there is the greatest possible diversity amongst capable judges whether he should be classed as a single species or race, or as two (Virey), as three (Jacquinot), as four (Kant), five
(18.
See a good discussion on this subject in Waitz, 'Introduction to Anthropology,' Eng.
translat.
, 1863, pp.
198-208, 227.
I have taken some of the above statements from H. Tuttle's 'Origin and Antiquity of Physical Man,' Boston, 1866, p.
35.
) This diversity of judgment does not prove that the races ought not to be ranked as species, but it shews that they graduate into each other, and that it is hardly possible to discover clear distinctive characters between them.
Every naturalist who has had the misfortune to undertake the description of a group of highly varying organisms, has encountered cases (I speak after experience) precisely like that of man; and if of a cautious disposition, he will end by uniting all the
Cases of this kind occur in the Order which includes man, namely in certain genera of monkeys; whilst in other genera, as in Cercopithecus, most of the species can be determined with certainty.
In the American genus Cebus, the various forms are ranked by some naturalists as species, by others as mere geographical races.
Now if numerous specimens of Cebus were collected from all parts of South America, and those forms which at present appear to be specifically distinct, were found to graduate into each other by close steps, they would usually be ranked as mere varieties or
Nevertheless, it must be confessed that there are forms, at least in the vegetable kingdom (19.
Prof.
Nageli has carefully described several striking cases in his 'Botanische Mittheilungen,' B. ii.
1866, ss.
294-369.
Prof.
Asa Gray has made analogous remarks on some intermediate forms in the Compositae of N. America.
), which we cannot avoid naming as species, but which are connected together by numberless gradations, independently of intercrossing.
Some naturalists have lately employed the term "sub-species" to designate forms which possess many of the characteristics of true species, but which hardly deserve so high a rank.
Now if we reflect on the weighty arguments above given, for raising the races of man to the dignity of species, and the insuperable difficulties on the other side in defining them, it seems that the term "sub-species" might here be used with propriety.
But from long habit the term "race" will perhaps always be employed.
The choice of terms is only so far important in that it is desirable to use, as far as possible, the same terms for the same degrees of difference.
Unfortunately this can rarely be done: for the larger genera generally include closely- allied forms, which can be distinguished only with much difficulty, whilst the smaller genera within the same family include forms that are perfectly distinct; yet all
So again, species within the same large genus by no means resemble each other to the same degree: on the contrary, some of them can generally be arranged in little groups round other species, like satellites round planets.
(20.
'Origin of Species,' 5th edit.
p.
68.
) The question whether mankind consists of one or several species has of late years been much discussed by anthropologists, who are divided into the two schools of monogenists and polygenists.
Those who do not admit the principle of evolution, must look at species as separate creations, or in some manner as distinct entities; and they must decide what forms of man they will consider as species by the analogy of the method commonly pursued in
But it is a hopeless endeavour to decide this point, until some definition of the term "species" is generally accepted; and the definition must not include an indeterminate element such as an act of creation.
We might as well attempt without any definition to decide whether a certain number of houses should be called a village, town, or city.
We have a practical illustration of the difficulty in the never-ending doubts whether many closely-allied mammals, birds, insects, and plants, which represent each other respectively in North America and Europe, should be ranked as species or geographical
Those naturalists, on the other hand, who admit the principle of evolution, and this is now admitted by the majority of rising men, will feel no doubt that all the races of man are descended from a single primitive stock; whether or not they may think fit
(21.
See Prof.
Huxley to this effect in the 'Fortnightly Review,' 1865, p.
275.
) With our domestic animals the question whether the various races have arisen from one or more species is somewhat different.
Although it may be admitted that all the races, as well as all the natural species within the same genus, have sprung from the same primitive stock, yet it is a fit subject for discussion, whether all the domestic races of the dog, for instance, have
With man no such question can arise, for he cannot be said to have been domesticated at any particular period.
During an early stage in the divergence of the races of man from a common stock, the differences between the races and their number must have been small; consequently as far as their distinguishing characters are concerned, they then had less claim to rank
Nevertheless, so arbitrary is the term of species, that such early races would perhaps have been ranked by some naturalists as distinct species, if their differences, although extremely slight, had been more constant than they are at present, and had not
It is however possible, though far from probable, that the early progenitors of man might formerly have diverged much in character, until they became more unlike each other than any now existing races; but that subsequently, as suggested by Vogt (22.
'Lectures on Man,' Eng.
translat.
, 1864, p.
468.
), they converged in character.
When man selects the offspring of two distinct species for the same object, he sometimes induces a considerable amount of convergence, as far as general appearance is concerned.
This is the case, as shewn by von Nathusius (23.
'Die Rassen des Schweines,' 1860, s.
46.
'Vorstudien fr Geschichte,' etc.
, Schweinesschdel, 1864, s.
104.
With respect to cattle, see M. de Quatrefages, 'Unit de l'Espce Humaine,' 1861, p.
119.
), with the improved breeds of the pig, which are descended from two distinct species; and in a less marked manner with the improved breeds of cattle.
A great anatomist, Gratiolet, maintains that the anthropomorphous apes do not form a natural sub-group; but that the orang is a highly developed gibbon or semnopithecus, the chimpanzee a highly developed macacus, and the gorilla a highly developed
If this conclusion, which rests almost exclusively on brain-characters, be admitted, we should have a case of convergence at least in external characters, for the anthropomorphous apes are certainly more like each other in many points, than they are to
All analogical resemblances, as of a whale to a fish, may indeed be said to be cases of convergence; but this term has never been applied to superficial and adaptive resemblances.
It would, however, be extremely rash to attribute to convergence close similarity of character in many points of structure amongst the modified descendants of widely distinct beings.
The form of a crystal is determined solely by the molecular forces, and it is not surprising that dissimilar substances should sometimes assume the same form; but with organic beings we should bear in mind that the form of each depends on an infinity of
It appears incredible that the modified descendants of two organisms, if these differed from each other in a marked manner, should ever afterwards converge so closely as to lead to a near approach to identity throughout their whole organisation.
In the case of the convergent races of pigs above referred to, evidence of their descent from two primitive stocks is, according to von Nathusius, still plainly retained, in certain bones of their skulls.
If the races of man had descended, as is supposed by some naturalists, from two or more species, which differed from each other as much, or nearly as much, as does the orang from the gorilla, it can hardly be doubted that marked differences in the
Although the existing races of man differ in many respects, as in colour, hair, shape of skull, proportions of the body, etc.
, yet if their whole structure be taken into consideration they are found to resemble each other closely in a multitude of points.
Many of these are of so unimportant or of so singular a nature, that it is extremely improbable that they should have been independently acquired by aboriginally distinct species or races.
The same remark holds good with equal or greater force with respect to the numerous points of mental similarity between the most distinct races of man.
The American aborigines, Negroes and Europeans are as different from each other in mind as any three races that can be named; yet I was incessantly struck, whilst living with the Fuegians on board the "Beagle," with the many little traits of character,
He who will read Mr. Tylor's and Sir J. Lubbock's interesting works (24.
Tylor's 'Early History of Mankind,' 1865: with respect to gesture- language, see p.
54.
Lubbock's 'Prehistoric Times,' 2nd edit.
1869.
) can hardly fail to be deeply impressed with the close similarity between the men of all races in tastes, dispositions and habits.
This is shewn by the pleasure which they all take in dancing, rude music, acting, painting, tattooing, and otherwise decorating themselves; in their mutual comprehension of gesture-language, by the same expression in their features, and by the same
This similarity, or rather identity, is striking, when contrasted with the different expressions and cries made by distinct species of monkeys.
There is good evidence that the art of shooting with bows and arrows has not been handed down from any common progenitor of mankind, yet as Westropp and Nilsson have remarked (25.
'On Analogous Forms of Implements,' in 'Memoirs of Anthropological Society' by H.M. Westropp.
'The Primitive Inhabitants of Scandinavia,' Eng.
translat.
, edited by Sir J. Lubbock, 1868, p.
104.
), the stone arrow-heads, brought from the most distant parts of the world, and manufactured at the most remote periods, are almost identical; and this fact can only be accounted for by the various races having similar inventive or mental powers.
The same observation has been made by archaeologists (26.
Westropp 'On Cromlechs,' etc.
, 'Journal of Ethnological Soc.
' as given in 'Scientific Opinion,' June 2nd, 1869, p.
3.
) with respect to certain widely-prevalent ornaments, such as zig-zags, etc.
; and with respect to various simple beliefs and customs, such as the burying of the dead under megalithic structures.
I remember observing in South America (27.
'Journal of Researches: Voyage of the "Beagle,"' p.
46.
), that there, as in so many other parts of the world, men have generally chosen the summits of lofty hills, to throw up piles of stones, either as a record of some remarkable event, or for burying their dead.
Now when naturalists observe a close agreement in numerous small details of habits, tastes, and dispositions between two or more domestic races, or between nearly-allied natural forms, they use this fact as an argument that they are descended from a common
The same argument may be applied with much force to the races of man.
As it is improbable that the numerous and unimportant points of resemblance between the several races of man in bodily structure and mental faculties (I do not here refer to similar customs) should all have been independently acquired, they must have been
We thus gain some insight into the early state of man, before he had spread step by step over the face of the earth.
The spreading of man to regions widely separated by the sea, no doubt, preceded any great amount of divergence of character in the several races; for otherwise we should sometimes meet with the same race in distinct continents; and this is never the case.
Sir J. Lubbock, after comparing the arts now practised by savages in all parts of the world, specifies those which man could not have known, when he first wandered from his original birthplace; for if once learnt they would never have been forgotten.
(28.
'Prehistoric Times,' 1869, p.
574.
) He thus shews that "the spear, which is but a development of the knife-point, and the club, which is but a long hammer, are the only things left".
He admits, however, that the art of making fire probably had been already discovered, for it is common to all the races now existing, and was known to the ancient cave-inhabitants of Europe.
Perhaps the art of making rude canoes or rafts was likewise known; but as man existed at a remote epoch, when the land in many places stood at a very different level to what it does now, he would have been able, without the aid of canoes, to have spread
Sir J. Lubbock further remarks how improbable it is that our earliest ancestors could have "counted as high as ten, considering that so many races now in existence cannot get beyond four".
Nevertheless, at this early period, the intellectual and social faculties of man could hardly have been inferior in any extreme degree to those possessed at present by the lowest savages; otherwise primeval man could not have been so eminently successful
From the fundamental differences between certain languages, some philologists have inferred that when man first became widely diffused, he was not a speaking animal; but it may be suspected that languages, far less perfect than any now spoken, aided by
Without the use of some language, however imperfect, it appears doubtful whether man's intellect could have risen to the standard implied by his dominant position at an early period.
Whether primeval man, when he possessed but few arts, and those of the rudest kind, and when his power of language was extremely imperfect, would have deserved to be called man, must depend on the definition which we employ.
In a series of forms graduating insensibly from some ape-like creature to man as he now exists, it would be impossible to fix on any definite point where the term "man" ought to be used.
But this is a matter of very little importance.
So again, it is almost a matter of indifference whether the so-called races of man are thus designated, or are ranked as species or sub-species; but the latter term appears the more appropriate.
Finally, we may conclude that when the principle of evolution is generally accepted, as it surely will be before long, the dispute between the monogenists and the polygenists will die a silent and unobserved death.
One other question ought not to be passed over without notice, namely, whether, as is sometimes assumed, each sub-species or race of man has sprung from a single pair of progenitors.
With our domestic animals a new race can readily be formed by carefully matching the varying offspring from a single pair, or even from a single individual possessing some new character; but most of our races have been formed, not intentionally from a
If in one country stronger and heavier horses, and in another country lighter and fleeter ones, were habitually preferred, we may feel sure that two distinct sub-breeds would be produced in the course of time, without any one pair having been separated and
Many races have been thus formed, and their manner of formation is closely analogous to that of natural species.
We know, also, that the horses taken to the Falkland Islands have, during successive generations, become smaller and weaker, whilst those which have run wild on the Pampas have acquired larger and coarser heads; and such changes are manifestly due, not to
The new sub- breeds in such cases are not descended from any single pair, but from many individuals which have varied in different degrees, but in the same general manner; and we may conclude that the races of man have been similarly produced, the
But to this latter subject we shall presently return.
ON THE EXTINCTION OF THE RACES OF MAN.
The partial or complete extinction of many races and sub-races of man is historically known.
Humboldt saw in South America a parrot which was the sole living creature that could speak a word of the language of a lost tribe.
Ancient monuments and stone implements found in all parts of the world, about which no tradition has been preserved by the present inhabitants, indicate much extinction.
Some small and broken tribes, remnants of former races, still survive in isolated and generally mountainous districts.
In Europe the ancient races were all, according to Shaaffhausen (29.
Translation in 'Anthropological Review,' Oct.
1868, p.
431.
), "lower in the scale than the rudest living savages"; they must therefore have differed, to a certain extent, from any existing race.
The remains described by Professor Broca from Les Eyzies, though they unfortunately appear to have belonged to a single family, indicate a race with a most singular combination of low or simious, and of high characteristics.
This race is "entirely different from any other, ancient or modern, that we have heard of".
(30.
'Transactions, International Congress of Prehistoric Archaeology' 1868, pp.
172-175.
See also Broca (tr.
) in 'Anthropological Review,' Oct.
1868, p.
410.
) It differed, therefore, from the quaternary race of the caverns of Belgium.
Man can long resist conditions which appear extremely unfavourable for his existence.
(31.
Dr. Gerland, 'Ueber das Aussterben der Naturvlker,' 1868, s.
82.
) He has long lived in the extreme regions of the North, with no wood for his canoes or implements, and with only blubber as fuel, and melted snow as drink.
In the southern extremity of America the Fuegians survive without the protection of clothes, or of any building worthy to be called a hovel.
In South Africa the aborigines wander over arid plains, where dangerous beasts abound.
Man can withstand the deadly influence of the Terai at the foot of the Himalaya, and the pestilential shores of tropical Africa.
Extinction follows chiefly from the competition of tribe with tribe, and race with race.
Various checks are always in action, serving to keep down the numbers of each savage tribe,--such as periodical famines, nomadic habits and the consequent deaths of infants, prolonged suckling, wars, accidents, sickness, licentiousness, the stealing of
If any one of these checks increases in power, even slightly, the tribe thus affected tends to decrease; and when of two adjoining tribes one becomes less numerous and less powerful than the other, the contest is soon settled by war, slaughter,
Even when a weaker tribe is not thus abruptly swept away, if it once begins to decrease, it generally goes on decreasing until it becomes extinct.
(32.
Gerland (ibid.
s.
12) gives facts in support of this statement.
) When civilised nations come into contact with barbarians the struggle is short, except where a deadly climate gives its aid to the native race.
Of the causes which lead to the victory of civilised nations, some are plain and simple, others complex and obscure.
We can see that the cultivation of the land will be fatal in many ways to savages, for they cannot, or will not, change their habits.
New diseases and vices have in some cases proved highly destructive; and it appears that a new disease often causes much death, until those who are most susceptible to its destructive influence are gradually weeded out (33.
See remarks to this effect in Sir H. Holland's 'Medical Notes and Reflections,' 1839, p.
390.
); and so it may be with the evil effects from spirituous liquors, as well as with the unconquerably strong taste for them shewn by so many savages.
It further appears, mysterious as is the fact, that the first meeting of distinct and separated people generates disease.
(34.
I have collected ('Journal of Researches: Voyage of the "Beagle,"' p.
435) a good many cases bearing on this subject; see also Gerland, ibid.
s.
8.
Poeppig speaks of the "breath of civilisation as poisonous to savages".
) Mr. Sproat, who in Vancouver Island closely attended to the subject of extinction, believed that changed habits of life, consequent on the advent of Europeans, induces much ill health.
He lays, also, great stress on the apparently trifling cause that the natives become "bewildered and dull by the new life around them; they lose the motives for exertion, and get no new ones in their place".
(35.
Sproat, 'Scenes and Studies of Savage Life,' 1868, p.
284.
) The grade of their civilisation seems to be a most important element in the success of competing nations.
A few centuries ago Europe feared the inroads of Eastern barbarians; now any such fear would be ridiculous.
It is a more curious fact, as Mr. Bagehot has remarked, that savages did not formerly waste away before the classical nations, as they now do before modern civilised nations; had they done so, the old moralists would have mused over the event; but there is
(36.
Bagehot, 'Physics and Politics,' 'Fortnightly Review,' April 1, 1868, p.
455.
) The most potent of all the causes of extinction, appears in many cases to be lessened fertility and ill-health, especially amongst the children, arising from changed conditions of life, notwithstanding that the new conditions may not be injurious in
I am much indebted to Mr. H.H. Howorth for having called my attention to this subject, and for having given me information respecting it.
I have collected the following cases.
When Tasmania was first colonised the natives were roughly estimated by some at 7000 and by others at 20,000.
Their number was soon greatly reduced, chiefly by fighting with the English and with each other.
After the famous hunt by all the colonists, when the remaining natives delivered themselves up to the government, they consisted only of 120 individuals (37.
All the statements here given are taken from 'The Last of the Tasmanians,' by J. Bonwick, 1870.
), who were in 1832 transported to Flinders Island.
This island, situated between Tasmania and Australia, is forty miles long, and from twelve to eighteen miles broad: it seems healthy, and the natives were well treated.
Nevertheless, they suffered greatly in health.
In 1834 they consisted (Bonwick, p.
250) of forty-seven adult males, forty-eight adult females, and sixteen children, or in all of 111 souls.
In 1835 only one hundred were left.
As they continued rapidly to decrease, and as they themselves thought that they should not perish so quickly elsewhere, they were removed in 1847 to Oyster Cove in the southern part of Tasmania.
They then consisted (Dec.
20th, 1847) of fourteen men, twenty-two women and ten children.
(38.
This is the statement of the Governor of Tasmania, Sir W. Denison, 'Varieties of Vice-Regal Life,' 1870, vol.
i.
p.
67.
) But the change of site did no good.
Disease and death still pursued them, and in 1864 one man (who died in 1869), and three elderly women alone survived.
The infertility of the women is even a more remarkable fact than the liability of all to ill-health and death.
At the time when only nine women were left at Oyster Cove, they told Mr. Bonwick (p.
386), that only two had ever borne children: and these two had together produced only three children!
With respect to the cause of this extraordinary state of things, Dr. Story remarks that death followed the attempts to civilise the natives.
"If left to themselves to roam as they were wont and undisturbed, they would have reared more children, and there would have been less mortality".
Another careful observer of the natives, Mr. Davis, remarks, "The births have been few and the deaths numerous.
This may have been in a great measure owing to their change of living and food; but more so to their banishment from the mainland of Van Diemen's Land, and consequent depression of spirits" (Bonwick, pp.
388, 390).
Similar facts have been observed in two widely different parts of Australia.
The celebrated explorer, Mr. Gregory, told Mr. Bonwick, that in Queensland "the want of reproduction was being already felt with the blacks, even in the most recently settled parts, and that decay would set in".
Of thirteen aborigines from Shark's Bay who visited Murchison River, twelve died of consumption within three months.
(39.
For these cases, see Bonwick's 'Daily Life of the Tasmanians,' 1870, p.
90: and the 'Last of the Tasmanians,' 1870, p.
386.
) The decrease of the Maories of New Zealand has been carefully investigated by Mr. Fenton, in an admirable Report, from which all the following statements, with one exception, are taken.
(40.
'Observations on the Aboriginal Inhabitants of New Zealand,' published by the Government, 1859.
) The decrease in number since 1830 is admitted by every one, including the natives themselves, and is still steadily progressing.
Although it has hitherto been found impossible to take an actual census of the natives, their numbers were carefully estimated by residents in many districts.
The result seems trustworthy, and shows that during the fourteen years, previous to 1858, the decrease was 19.
42 per cent.
Some of the tribes, thus carefully examined, lived above a hundred miles apart, some on the coast, some inland; and their means of subsistence and habits differed to a certain extent (p.
28).
The total number in 1858 was believed to be 53,700, and in 1872, after a second interval of fourteen years, another census was taken, and the number is given as only 36,359, shewing a decrease of 32.
29 per cent!
(41.
'New Zealand,' by Alex.
Kennedy, 1873, p.
47.
) Mr. Fenton, after shewing in detail the insufficiency of the various causes, usually assigned in explanation of this extraordinary decrease, such as new diseases, the profligacy of the women, drunkenness, wars, etc.
, concludes on weighty grounds that it depends chiefly on the unproductiveness of the women, and on the extraordinary mortality of the young children (pp.
31, 34).
In proof of this he shews (p.
33) that in 1844 there was one non-adult for every 2.
57 adults; whereas in 1858 there was only one non-adult for every 3.
27 adults.
The mortality of the adults is also great.
He adduces as a further cause of the decrease the inequality of the sexes; for fewer females are born than males.
To this latter point, depending perhaps on a widely distinct cause, I shall return in a future chapter.
Mr. Fenton contrasts with astonishment the decrease in New Zealand with the increase in Ireland; countries not very dissimilar in climate, and where the inhabitants now follow nearly similar habits.
The Maories themselves (p.
35) "attribute their decadence, in some measure, to the introduction of new food and clothing, and the attendant change of habits"; and it will be seen, when we consider the influence of changed conditions on fertility, that they are probably right.
The diminution began between the years 1830 and 1840; and Mr. Fenton shews (p.
40) that about 1830, the art of manufacturing putrid corn (maize), by long steeping in water, was discovered and largely practised; and this proves that a change of habits was beginning amongst the natives, even when New Zealand was only thinly inhabited
When I visited the Bay of Islands in 1835, the dress and food of the inhabitants had already been much modified: they raised potatoes, maize, and other agricultural produce, and exchanged them for English manufactured goods and tobacco.
It is evident from many statements in the life of Bishop Patteson (42.
'Life of J.C. Patteson,' by C.M. Younge, 1874; see more especially vol.
i.
p.
530.
), that the Melanesians of the New Hebrides and neighbouring archipelagoes, suffered to an extraordinary degree in health, and perished in large numbers, when they were removed to New Zealand, Norfolk Island, and other salubrious places, in order to be
The decrease of the native population of the Sandwich Islands is as notorious as that of New Zealand.
It has been roughly estimated by those best capable of judging, that when Cook discovered the Islands in 1779, the population amounted to about 300,000.
According to a loose census in 1823, the numbers then were 142,050.
In 1832, and at several subsequent periods, an accurate census was officially taken, but I have been able to obtain only the following returns: Native Population Annual rate of decrease per cent.
, assuming it to (Except during 1832 and have been uniform between 1836, when the few the successive censuses; foreigners in the islands these censuses being taken Year were included.
) at irregular intervals.
1832 130,313 4.
46 1836 108,579 2.
47 1853 71,019 0.
81 1860 67,084 2.
18 1866 58,765 2.
17 1872 51,531 We here see that in the interval of forty years, between 1832 and 1872, the population has decreased no less than sixty-eight per cent.
!
This has been attributed by most writers to the profligacy of the women, to former bloody wars, and to the severe labour imposed on conquered tribes and to newly introduced diseases, which have been on several occasions extremely destructive.
No doubt these and other such causes have been highly efficient, and may account for the extraordinary rate of decrease between the years 1832 and 1836; but the most potent of all the causes seems to be lessened fertility.
According to Dr. Ruschenberger of the U.S. Navy, who visited these islands between 1835 and 1837, in one district of Hawaii, only twenty-five men out of 1134, and in another district only ten out of 637, had a family with as many as three children.
Of eighty married women, only thirty-nine had ever borne children; and "the official report gives an average of half a child to each married couple in the whole island".
This is almost exactly the same average as with the Tasmanians at Oyster Cove.
Jarves, who published his History in 1843, says that "families who have three children are freed from all taxes; those having more, are rewarded by gifts of land and other encouragements".
This unparalleled enactment by the government well shews how infertile the race had become.
The Rev.
A. Bishop stated in the Hawaiian 'Spectator' in 1839, that a large proportion of the children die at early ages, and Bishop Staley informs me that this is still the case, just as in New Zealand.
This has been attributed to the neglect of the children by the women, but it is probably in large part due to innate weakness of constitution in the children, in relation to the lessened fertility of their parents.
There is, moreover, a further resemblance to the case of New Zealand, in the fact that there is a large excess of male over female births: the census of 1872 gives 31,650 males to 25,247 females of all ages, that is 125.
36 males for every 100 females; whereas in all civilised countries the females exceed the males.
No doubt the profligacy of the women may in part account for their small fertility; but their changed habits of life is a much more probable cause, and which will at the same time account for the increased mortality, especially of the children.
The islands were visited by Cook in 1779, Vancouver in 1794, and often subsequently by whalers.
In 1819 missionaries arrived, and found that idolatry had been already abolished, and other changes effected by the king.
After this period there was a rapid change in almost all the habits of life of the natives, and they soon became "the most civilised of the Pacific Islanders".
One of my informants, Mr. Coan, who was born on the islands, remarks that the natives have undergone a greater change in their habits of life in the course of fifty years than Englishmen during a thousand years.
From information received from Bishop Staley, it does not appear that the poorer classes have ever much changed their diet, although many new kinds of fruit have been introduced, and the sugar-cane is in universal use.
Owing, however, to their passion for imitating Europeans, they altered their manner of dressing at an early period, and the use of alcoholic drinks became very general.
Although these changes appear inconsiderable, I can well believe, from what is known with respect to animals, that they might suffice to lessen the fertility of the natives.
(43.
The foregoing statements are taken chiefly from the following works: Jarves' 'History of the Hawaiian Islands,' 1843, pp.
400-407.
Cheever, 'Life in the Sandwich Islands,' 1851, p.
277.
Ruschenberger is quoted by Bonwick, 'Last of the Tasmanians,' 1870, p.
378.
Bishop is quoted by Sir E. Belcher, 'Voyage Round the World,' 1843, vol.
i.
p.
272.
I owe the census of the several years to the kindness of Mr. Coan, at the request of Dr. Youmans of New York; and in most cases I have compared the Youmans figures with those given in several of the above-named works.
I have omitted the census for 1850, as I have seen two widely different numbers given.
) Lastly, Mr. Macnamara states (44.
'The Indian Medical Gazette,' Nov.
1, 1871, p.
240.
) that the low and degraded inhabitants of the Andaman Islands, on the eastern side of the Gulf of Bengal, are "eminently susceptible to any change of climate: in fact, take them away from their island homes, and they are almost certain to die, and that
He further states that the inhabitants of the Valley of Nepal, which is extremely hot in summer, and also the various hill-tribes of India, suffer from dysentery and fever when on the plains; and they die if they attempt to pass the whole year there.
We thus see that many of the wilder races of man are apt to suffer much in health when subjected to changed conditions or habits of life, and not exclusively from being transported to a new climate.
Mere alterations in habits, which do not appear injurious in themselves, seem to have this same effect; and in several cases the children are particularly liable to suffer.
It has often been said, as Mr. Macnamara remarks, that man can resist with impunity the greatest diversities of climate and other changes; but this is true only of the civilised races.
Man in his wild condition seems to be in this respect almost as susceptible as his nearest allies, the anthropoid apes, which have never yet survived long, when removed from their native country.
Lessened fertility from changed conditions, as in the case of the Tasmanians, Maories, Sandwich Islanders, and apparently the Australians, is still more interesting than their liability to ill-health and death; for even a slight degree of infertility,
The diminution of fertility may be explained in some cases by the profligacy of the women (as until lately with the Tahitians), but Mr. Fenton has shewn that this explanation by no means suffices with the New Zealanders, nor does it with the Tasmanians.
In the paper above quoted, Mr. Macnamara gives reasons for believing that the inhabitants of districts subject to malaria are apt to be sterile; but this cannot apply in several of the above cases.
Some writers have suggested that the aborigines of islands have suffered in fertility and health from long continued inter-breeding; but in the above cases infertility has coincided too closely with the arrival of Europeans for us to admit this
Nor have we at present any reason to believe that man is highly sensitive to the evil effects of inter-breeding, especially in areas so large as New Zealand, and the Sandwich archipelago with its diversified stations.
On the contrary, it is known that the present inhabitants of Norfolk Island are nearly all cousins or near relations, as are the Todas in India, and the inhabitants of some of the Western Islands of Scotland; and yet they seem not to have suffered in
(45.
On the close relationship of the Norfolk Islanders, Sir W. Denison, 'Varieties of Vice-Regal Life,' vol.
i.
1870, p.
410.
For the Todas, see Col.
Marshall's work 1873, p.
110.
For the Western Islands of Scotland, Dr. Mitchell, 'Edinburgh Medical Journal,' March to June, 1865.
) A much more probable view is suggested by the analogy of the lower animals.
The reproductive system can be shewn to be susceptible to an extraordinary degree (though why we know not) to changed conditions of life; and this susceptibility leads both to beneficial and to evil results.
A large collection of facts on this subject is given in chap.
xviii.
of vol.
ii.
of my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication.
' I can here give only the briefest abstract; and every one interested in the subject may consult the above work.
Very slight changes increase the health, vigour, and fertility of most or all organic beings, whilst other changes are known to render a large number of animals sterile.
One of the most familiar cases, is that of tamed elephants not breeding in India; though they often breed in Ava, where the females are allowed to roam about the forests to some extent, and are thus placed under more natural conditions.
The case of various American monkeys, both sexes of which have been kept for many years together in their own countries, and yet have very rarely or never bred, is a more apposite instance, because of their relationship to man.
It is remarkable how slight a change in the conditions often induces sterility in a wild animal when captured; and this is the more strange as all our domesticated animals have become more fertile than they were in a state of nature; and some of them can
(46.
For the evidence on this head, see 'Variation of Animals,' etc.
, vol.
ii.
p.
111.
) Certain groups of animals are much more liable than others to be affected by captivity; and generally all the species of the same group are affected in the same manner.
But sometimes a single species in a group is rendered sterile, whilst the others are not so; on the other hand, a single species may retain its fertility whilst most of the others fail to breed.
The males and females of some species when confined, or when allowed to live almost, but not quite free, in their native country, never unite; others thus circumstanced frequently unite but never produce offspring; others again produce some offspring, but
Seeing how general is this law of the susceptibility of the reproductive system to changed conditions of life, and that it holds good with our nearest allies, the Quadrumana, I can hardly doubt that it applies to man in his primeval state.
Hence if savages of any race are induced suddenly to change their habits of life, they become more or less sterile, and their young offspring suffer in health, in the same manner and from the same cause, as do the elephant and hunting-leopard in India,
We can see why it is that aborigines, who have long inhabited islands, and who must have been long exposed to nearly uniform conditions, should be specially affected by any change in their habits, as seems to be the case.
Civilised races can certainly resist changes of all kinds far better than savages; and in this respect they resemble domesticated animals, for though the latter sometimes suffer in health (for instance European dogs in India), yet they are rarely rendered
(47.
'Variation of Animals,' etc.
, vol.
ii.
p.
16.
) The immunity of civilised races and domesticated animals is probably due to their having been subjected to a greater extent, and therefore having grown somewhat more accustomed, to diversified or varying conditions, than the majority of wild animals; and
It appears that a cross with civilised races at once gives to an aboriginal race an immunity from the evil consequences of changed conditions.
Thus the crossed offspring from the Tahitians and English, when settled in Pitcairn Island, increased so rapidly that the island was soon overstocked; and in June 1856 they were removed to Norfolk Island.
They then consisted of 60 married persons and 134 children, making a total of 194.
Here they likewise increased so rapidly, that although sixteen of them returned to Pitcairn Island in 1859, they numbered in January 1868, 300 souls; the males and females being in exactly equal numbers.
What a contrast does this case present with that of the Tasmanians; the Norfolk Islanders INCREASED in only twelve and a half years from 194 to 300; whereas the Tasmanians DECREASED during fifteen years from 120 to 46, of which latter number only ten were
(48.
These details are taken from 'The Mutineers of the "Bounty,"' by Lady Belcher, 1870; and from 'Pitcairn Island,' ordered to be printed by the House of Commons, May 29, 1863.
The following statements about the Sandwich Islanders are from the 'Honolulu Gazette,' and from Mr. Coan.
) So again in the interval between the census of 1866 and 1872 the natives of full blood in the Sandwich Islands decreased by 8081, whilst the half- castes, who are believed to be healthier, increased by 847; but I do not know whether the latter number
The cases which I have here given all relate to aborigines, who have been subjected to new conditions as the result of the immigration of civilised men.
But sterility and ill-health would probably follow, if savages were compelled by any cause, such as the inroad of a conquering tribe, to desert their homes and to change their habits.
It is an interesting circumstance that the chief check to wild animals becoming domesticated, which implies the power of their breeding freely when first captured, and one chief check to wild men, when brought into contact with civilisation, surviving to
Finally, although the gradual decrease and ultimate extinction of the races of man is a highly complex problem, depending on many causes which differ in different places and at different times; it is the same problem as that presented by the extinction of
The New Zealander seems conscious of this parallelism, for he compares his future fate with that of the native rat now almost exterminated by the European rat.
Though the difficulty is great to our imagination, and really great, if we wish to ascertain the precise causes and their manner of action, it ought not to be so to our reason, as long as we keep steadily in mind that the increase of each species and each
ON THE FORMATION OF THE RACES OF MAN.
In some cases the crossing of distinct races has led to the formation of a new race.
The singular fact that the Europeans and Hindoos, who belong to the same Aryan stock, and speak a language fundamentally the same, differ widely in appearance, whilst Europeans differ but little from Jews, who belong to the Semitic stock, and speak quite
'On Anthropology,' translation, 'Anthropological Review,' Jan.
1868, p.
38.
), through certain Aryan branches having been largely crossed by indigenous tribes during their wide diffusion.
When two races in close contact cross, the first result is a heterogeneous mixture: thus Mr. Hunter, in describing the Santali or hill- tribes of India, says that hundreds of imperceptible gradations may be traced "from the black, squat tribes of the
(50.
'The Annals of Rural Bengal,' 1868, p.
134.
) Whether a heterogeneous people, such as the inhabitants of some of the Polynesian islands, formed by the crossing of two distinct races, with few or no pure members left, would ever become homogeneous, is not known from direct evidence.
But as with our domesticated animals, a cross-breed can certainly be fixed and made uniform by careful selection (51.
'The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
p.
95.
) in the course of a few generations, we may infer that the free intercrossing of a heterogeneous mixture during a long descent would supply the place of selection, and overcome any tendency to reversion; so that the crossed race would ultimately become
Of all the differences between the races of man, the colour of the skin is the most conspicuous and one of the best marked.
It was formerly thought that differences of this kind could be accounted for by long exposure to different climates; but Pallas first shewed that this is not tenable, and he has since been followed by almost all anthropologists.
(52.
Pallas, 'Act.
Acad.
St. Petersburg,' 1780, part ii.
p.
69.
He was followed by Rudolphi, in his 'Beytrage zur Anthropologie,' 1812.
An excellent summary of the evidence is given by Godron, 'De l'Espce,' 1859, vol.
ii.
p.
246, etc.
) This view has been rejected chiefly because the distribution of the variously coloured races, most of whom must have long inhabited their present homes, does not coincide with corresponding differences of climate.
Some little weight may be given to such cases as that of the Dutch families, who, as we hear on excellent authority (53.
Sir Andrew Smith, as quoted by Knox, 'Races of Man,' 1850, p.
473.
), have not undergone the least change of colour after residing for three centuries in South Africa.
An argument on the same side may likewise be drawn from the uniform appearance in various parts of the world of gipsies and Jews, though the uniformity of the latter has been somewhat exaggerated.
(54.
See De Quatrefages on this head, 'Revue des Cours Scientifiques,' Oct.
17, 1868, p.
731.
) A very damp or a very dry atmosphere has been supposed to be more influential in modifying the colour of the skin than mere heat; but as D'Orbigny in South America, and Livingstone in Africa, arrived at diametrically opposite conclusions with respect to
(55.
Livingstone's 'Travels and Researches in S. Africa,' 1857, pp.
338, 339.
D'Orbigny, as quoted by Godron, 'De l'Espece,' vol.
ii.
p.
266.
) Various facts, which I have given elsewhere, prove that the colour of the skin and hair is sometimes correlated in a surprising manner with a complete immunity from the action of certain vegetable poisons, and from the attacks of certain parasites.
Hence it occurred to me, that negroes and other dark races might have acquired their dark tints by the darker individuals escaping from the deadly influence of the miasma of their native countries, during a long series of generations.
I afterwards found that this same idea had long ago occurred to Dr. Wells.
(56.
See a paper read before the Royal Soc.
in 1813, and published in his Essays in 1818.
I have given an account of Dr. Wells' views in the Historical Sketch (p.
xvi.
) to my 'Origin of Species.
' Various cases of colour correlated with constitutional peculiarities are given in my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
pp.
227, 335.
) It has long been known that negroes, and even mulattoes, are almost completely exempt from the yellow-fever, so destructive in tropical America.
(57.
See, for instance, Nott and Gliddon, 'Types of Mankind,' p.
68.
) They likewise escape to a large extent the fatal intermittent fevers, that prevail along at least 2600 miles of the shores of Africa, and which annually cause one-fifth of the white settlers to die, and another fifth to return home invalided.
(58.
Major Tulloch, in a paper read before the Statistical Society, April 20, 1840, and given in the 'Athenaeum,' 1840, p.
353.
) This immunity in the negro seems to be partly inherent, depending on some unknown peculiarity of constitution, and partly the result of acclimatisation.
Pouchet (59.
'The Plurality of the Human Race' (translat.
), 1864, p.
60.
) states that the negro regiments recruited near the Soudan, and borrowed from the Viceroy of Egypt for the Mexican war, escaped the yellow-fever almost equally with the negroes originally brought from various parts of Africa and accustomed to the climate
That acclimatisation plays a part, is shewn by the many cases in which negroes have become somewhat liable to tropical fevers, after having resided for some time in a colder climate.
(60.
Quatrefages, 'Unit de l'Espce Humaine,' 1861, p.
205.
Waitz, 'Introduction to Anthropology,' translat.
, vol.
i.
1863, p.
124.
Livingstone gives analogous cases in his 'Travels.
') The nature of the climate under which the white races have long resided, likewise has some influence on them; for during the fearful epidemic of yellow fever in Demerara during 1837, Dr. Blair found that the death-rate of the immigrants was proportional
With the negro the immunity, as far as it is the result of acclimatisation, implies exposure during a prodigious length of time; for the aborigines of tropical America who have resided there from time immemorial, are not exempt from yellow fever; and the
H.B. Tristram states, that there are districts in Northern Africa which the native inhabitants are compelled annually to leave, though the negroes can remain with safety.
That the immunity of the negro is in any degree correlated with the colour of his skin is a mere conjecture: it may be correlated with some difference in his blood, nervous system, or other tissues.
Nevertheless, from the facts above alluded to, and from some connection apparently existing between complexion and a tendency to consumption, the conjecture seemed to me not improbable.
Consequently I endeavoured, with but little success (61.
In the spring of 1862 I obtained permission from the Director-General of the Medical department of the Army, to transmit to the surgeons of the various regiments on foreign service a blank table, with the following appended remarks, but I have received no
"As several well-marked cases have been recorded with our domestic animals of a relation between the colour of the dermal appendages and the constitution; and it being notorious that there is some limited degree of relation between the colour of the races
Namely, whether there is any relation in Europeans between the colour of their hair, and their liability to the diseases of tropical countries.
If the surgeons of the several regiments, when stationed in unhealthy tropical districts, would be so good as first to count, as a standard of comparison, how many men, in the force whence the sick are drawn, have dark and light-coloured hair, and hair of
Perhaps no such relation would be discovered, but the investigation is well worth making.
In case any positive result were obtained, it might be of some practical use in selecting men for any particular service.
Theoretically the result would be of high interest, as indicating one means by which a race of men inhabiting from a remote period an unhealthy tropical climate, might have become dark-coloured by the better preservation of dark-haired or dark-complexioned
), to ascertain how far it holds good.
The late Dr. Daniell, who had long lived on the West Coast of Africa, told me that he did not believe in any such relation.
He was himself unusually fair, and had withstood the climate in a wonderful manner.
When he first arrived as a boy on the coast, an old and experienced negro chief predicted from his appearance that this would prove the case.
Dr. Nicholson, of Antigua, after having attended to this subject, writes to me that dark- coloured Europeans escape the yellow fever more than those that are light- coloured.
Mr. J.M. Harris altogether denies that Europeans with dark hair withstand a hot climate better than other men: on the contrary, experience has taught him in making a selection of men for service on the coast of Africa, to choose those with red hair.
(62.
'Anthropological Review,' Jan.
1866, p.
xxi.
Dr. Sharpe also says, with respect to India ('Man a Special Creation,' 1873, p.
118), "that it has been noticed by some medical officers that Europeans with light hair and florid complexions suffer less from diseases of tropical countries than persons with dark hair and sallow complexions; and, so far as I know, there appear to be
On the other hand, Mr. Heddle, of Sierra Leone, "who has had more clerks killed under him than any other man," by the climate of the West African Coast (W.
Reade, 'African Sketch Book,' vol.
ii.
p.
522), holds a directly opposite view, as does Capt.
Burton.
) As far, therefore, as these slight indications go, there seems no foundation for the hypothesis, that blackness has resulted from the darker and darker individuals having survived better during long exposure to fever-generating miasma.
Dr. Sharpe remarks (63.
'Man a Special Creation,' 1873, p.
119.
), that a tropical sun, which burns and blisters a white skin, does not injure a black one at all; and, as he adds, this is not due to habit in the individual, for children only six or eight months old are often carried about naked, and are not affected.
I have been assured by a medical man, that some years ago during each summer, but not during the winter, his hands became marked with light brown patches, like, although larger than freckles, and that these patches were never affected by sun-burning,
With the lower animals there is, also, a constitutional difference in liability to the action of the sun between those parts of the skin clothed with white hair and other parts.
(64.
'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
pp.
336, 337.
) Whether the saving of the skin from being thus burnt is of sufficient importance to account for a dark tint having been gradually acquired by man through natural selection, I am unable to judge.
If it be so, we should have to assume that the natives of tropical America have lived there for a much shorter time than the Negroes in Africa, or the Papuans in the southern parts of the Malay archipelago, just as the lighter-coloured Hindoos have resided
Although with our present knowledge we cannot account for the differences of colour in the races of man, through any advantage thus gained, or from the direct action of climate; yet we must not quite ignore the latter agency, for there is good reason to
(65.
See, for instance, Quatrefages ('Revue des Cours Scientifiques,' Oct.
10, 1868, p.
724) on the effects of residence in Abyssinia and Arabia, and other analogous cases.
Dr. Rolle ('Der Mensch, seine Abstammung,' etc.
, 1865, s.
99) states, on the authority of Khanikof, that the greater number of German families settled in Georgia, have acquired in the course of two generations dark hair and eyes.
Mr. D. Forbes informs me that the Quichuas in the Andes vary greatly in colour, according to the position of the valleys inhabited by them.
) We have seen in the second chapter that the conditions of life affect the development of the bodily frame in a direct manner, and that the effects are transmitted.
Thus, as is generally admitted, the European settlers in the United States undergo a slight but extraordinary rapid change of appearance.
Their bodies and limbs become elongated; and I hear from Col.
Bernys that during the late war in the United States, good evidence was afforded of this fact by the ridiculous appearance presented by the German regiments, when dressed in ready-made clothes manufactured for the American market, and which were much too
There is, also, a considerable body of evidence shewing that in the Southern States the house-slaves of the third generation present a markedly different appearance from the field-slaves.
(66.
Harlan, 'Medical Researches,' p.
532.
Quatrefages ('Unit de l'Espce Humaine,' 1861, p.
128) has collected much evidence on this head.
) If, however, we look to the races of man as distributed over the world, we must infer that their characteristic differences cannot be accounted for by the direct action of different conditions of life, even after exposure to them for an enormous period
The Esquimaux live exclusively on animal food; they are clothed in thick fur, and are exposed to intense cold and to prolonged darkness; yet they do not differ in any extreme degree from the inhabitants of Southern China, who live entirely on vegetable
The unclothed Fuegians live on the marine productions of their inhospitable shores; the Botocudos of Brazil wander about the hot forests of the interior and live chiefly on vegetable productions; yet these tribes resemble each other so closely that the
The Botocudos again, as well as the other inhabitants of tropical America, are wholly different from the Negroes who inhabit the opposite shores of the Atlantic, are exposed to a nearly similar climate, and follow nearly the same habits of life.
Nor can the differences between the races of man be accounted for by the inherited effects of the increased or decreased use of parts, except to a quite insignificant degree.
Men who habitually live in canoes, may have their legs somewhat stunted; those who inhabit lofty regions may have their chests enlarged; and those who constantly use certain sense-organs may have the cavities in which they are lodged somewhat increased in
With civilised nations, the reduced size of the jaws from lessened use--the habitual play of different muscles serving to express different emotions--and the increased size of the brain from greater intellectual activity, have together produced a
(67.
See Prof.
Schaaffhausen, translat.
, in 'Anthropological Review,' Oct.
1868, p.
429.
) Increased bodily stature, without any corresponding increase in the size of the brain, may (judging from the previously adduced case of rabbits), have given to some races an elongated skull of the dolichocephalic type.
Lastly, the little-understood principle of correlated development has sometimes come into action, as in the case of great muscular development and strongly projecting supra-orbital ridges.
The colour of the skin and hair are plainly correlated, as is the texture of the hair with its colour in the Mandans of North America.
(68.
Mr. Catlin states ('N.
American Indians,' 3rd ed.
, 1842, vol.
i.
p.
49) that in the whole tribe of the Mandans, about one in ten or twelve of the members, of all ages and both sexes, have bright silvery grey hair, which is hereditary.
Now this hair is as coarse and harsh as that of a horse's mane, whilst the hair of other colours is fine and soft.
) The colour also of the skin, and the odour emitted by it, are likewise in some manner connected.
With the breeds of sheep the number of hairs within a given space and the number of excretory pores are related.
(69.
On the odour of the skin, Godron, 'Sur l'Espce,' tom.
ii.
p.
217.
On the pores in the skin, Dr. Wilckens, 'Die Aufgaben der Landwirth.
Zootechnik,' 1869, s.
7.
) If we may judge from the analogy of our domesticated animals, many modifications of structure in man probably come under this principle of correlated development.
We have now seen that the external characteristic differences between the races of man cannot be accounted for in a satisfactory manner by the direct action of the conditions of life, nor by the effects of the continued use of parts, nor through the
We are therefore led to enquire whether slight individual differences, to which man is eminently liable, may not have been preserved and augmented during a long series of generations through natural selection.
But here we are at once met by the objection that beneficial variations alone can be thus preserved; and as far as we are enabled to judge, although always liable to err on this head, none of the differences between the races of man are of any direct or
The intellectual and moral or social faculties must of course be excepted from this remark.
The great variability of all the external differences between the races of man, likewise indicates that they cannot be of much importance; for if important, they would long ago have been either fixed and preserved, or eliminated.
In this respect man resembles those forms, called by naturalists protean or polymorphic, which have remained extremely variable, owing, as it seems, to such variations being of an indifferent nature, and to their having thus escaped the action of natural
We have thus far been baffled in all our attempts to account for the differences between the races of man; but there remains one important agency, namely Sexual Selection, which appears to have acted powerfully on man, as on many other animals.
I do not intend to assert that sexual selection will account for all the differences between the races.
An unexplained residuum is left, about which we can only say, in our ignorance, that as individuals are continually born with, for instance, heads a little rounder or narrower, and with noses a little longer or shorter, such slight differences might become
Such variations come under the provisional class, alluded to in our second chapter, which for want of a better term are often called spontaneous.
Nor do I pretend that the effects of sexual selection can be indicated with scientific precision; but it can be shewn that it would be an inexplicable fact if man had not been modified by this agency, which appears to have acted powerfully on innumerable
It can further be shewn that the differences between the races of man, as in colour, hairiness, form of features, etc.
, are of a kind which might have been expected to come under the influence of sexual selection.
But in order to treat this subject properly, I have found it necessary to pass the whole animal kingdom in review.
I have therefore devoted to it the Second Part of this work.
At the close I shall return to man, and, after attempting to shew how far he has been modified through sexual selection, will give a brief summary of the chapters in this First Part.
NOTE ON THE RESEMBLANCES AND DIFFERENCES IN THE STRUCTURE AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE BRAIN IN MAN AND APES BY PROFESSOR HUXLEY, F.R.S. The controversy respecting the nature and the extent of the differences in the structure of the brain in man and the
It was originally asserted and re-asserted, with singular pertinacity, that the brain of all the apes, even the highest, differs from that of man, in the absence of such conspicuous structures as the posterior lobes of the cerebral hemispheres, with the
But the truth that the three structures in question are as well developed in apes' as in human brains, or even better; and that it is characteristic of all the Primates (if we exclude the Lemurs) to have these parts well developed, stands at present on as
Moreover, it is admitted by every one of the long series of anatomists who, of late years, have paid special attention to the arrangement of the complicated sulci and gyri which appear upon the surface of the cerebral hemispheres in man and the higher
Every principal gyrus and sulcus of a chimpanzee's brain is clearly represented in that of a man, so that the terminology which applies to the one answers for the other.
On this point there is no difference of opinion.
Some years since, Professor Bischoff published a memoir (70.
'Die Grosshirn-Windungen des Menschen;' 'Abhandlungen der K. Bayerischen Akademie,' B. x.
1868.
) on the cerebral convolutions of man and apes; and as the purpose of my learned colleague was certainly not to diminish the value of the differences between apes and men in this respect, I am glad to make a citation from him.
"That the apes, and especially the orang, chimpanzee and gorilla, come very close to man in their organisation, much nearer than to any other animal, is a well known fact, disputed by nobody.
Looking at the matter from the point of view of organisation alone, no one probably would ever have disputed the view of Linnaeus, that man should be placed, merely as a peculiar species, at the head of the mammalia and of those apes.
Both shew, in all their organs, so close an affinity, that the most exact anatomical investigation is needed in order to demonstrate those differences which really exist.
So it is with the brains.
The brains of man, the orang, the chimpanzee, the gorilla, in spite of all the important differences which they present, come very close to one another" (loc.
cit.
p.
101).
There remains, then, no dispute as to the resemblance in fundamental characters, between the ape's brain and man's: nor any as to the wonderfully close similarity between the chimpanzee, orang and man, in even the details of the arrangement of the gyri and
Nor, turning to the differences between the brains of the highest apes and that of man, is there any serious question as to the nature and extent of these differences.
It is admitted that the man's cerebral hemispheres are absolutely and relatively larger than those of the orang and chimpanzee; that his frontal lobes are less excavated by the upward protrusion of the roof of the orbits; that his gyri and sulci are, as a
And it is admitted that, as a rule, in man, the temporo-occipital or "external perpendicular" fissure, which is usually so strongly marked a feature of the ape's brain is but faintly marked.
But it is also clear, that none of these differences constitutes a sharp demarcation between the man's and the ape's brain.
In respect to the external perpendicular fissure of Gratiolet, in the human brain for instance, Professor Turner remarks: (71.
'Convolutions of the Human Cerebrum Topographically Considered,' 1866, p.
12.
) "In some brains it appears simply as an indentation of the margin of the hemisphere, but, in others, it extends for some distance more or less transversely outwards.
I saw it in the right hemisphere of a female brain pass more than two inches outwards; and on another specimen, also the right hemisphere, it proceeded for four-tenths of an inch outwards, and then extended downwards, as far as the lower margin of the
The imperfect definition of this fissure in the majority of human brains, as compared with its remarkable distinctness in the brain of most Quadrumana, is owing to the presence, in the former, of certain superficial, well marked, secondary convolutions
The closer the first of these bridging gyri lies to the longitudinal fissure, the shorter is the external parieto-occipital fissure" (loc.
cit.
p.
12).
The obliteration of the external perpendicular fissure of Gratiolet, therefore, is not a constant character of the human brain.
On the other hand, its full development is not a constant character of the higher ape's brain.
For, in the chimpanzee, the more or less extensive obliteration of the external perpendicular sulcus by "bridging convolutions," on one side or the other, has been noted over and over again by Prof.
Rolleston, Mr. Marshall, M. Broca and Professor Turner.
At the conclusion of a special paper on this subject the latter writes: (72.
Notes more especially on the bridging convolutions in the Brain of the Chimpanzee, 'Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,' 1865-6.
) "The three specimens of the brain of a chimpanzee, just described, prove, that the generalisation which Gratiolet has attempted to draw of the complete absence of the first connecting convolution and the concealment of the second, as essentially
In only one specimen did the brain, in these particulars, follow the law which Gratiolet has expressed.
As regards the presence of the superior bridging convolution, I am inclined to think that it has existed in one hemisphere, at least, in a majority of the brains of this animal which have, up to this time, been figured or described.
The superficial position of the second bridging convolution is evidently less frequent, and has as yet, I believe, only been seen in the brain (A) recorded in this communication.
The asymmetrical arrangement in the convolutions of the two hemispheres, which previous observers have referred to in their descriptions, is also well illustrated in these specimens" (pp.
8, 9).
Even were the presence of the temporo-occipital, or external perpendicular, sulcus, a mark of distinction between the higher apes and man, the value of such a distinctive character would be rendered very doubtful by the structure of the brain in the
In fact, while the temporo-occipital is one of the most constant of sulci in the Catarrhine, or Old World, apes, it is never very strongly developed in the New World apes; it is absent in the smaller Platyrrhini; rudimentary in Pithecia (73.
Flower, 'On the Anatomy of Pithecia Monachus,' 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' 1862.
); and more or less obliterated by bridging convolutions in Ateles.
A character which is thus variable within the limits of a single group can have no great taxonomic value.
It is further established, that the degree of asymmetry of the convolution of the two sides in the human brain is subject to much individual variation; and that, in those individuals of the Bushman race who have been examined, the gyri and sulci of the two
This is particularly the case in the brain of a young male chimpanzee figured by M. Broca.
('L'ordre des Primates,' p.
165, fig.
11.
) Again, as respects the question of absolute size, it is established that the difference between the largest and the smallest healthy human brain is greater than the difference between the smallest healthy human brain and the largest chimpanzee's or
Moreover, there is one circumstance in which the orang's and chimpanzee's brains resemble man's, but in which they differ from the lower apes, and that is the presence of two corpora candicantia--the Cynomorpha having but one.
In view of these facts I do not hesitate in this year 1874, to repeat and insist upon the proposition which I enunciated in 1863: (74.
'Man's Place in Nature,' p.
102.
) "So far as cerebral structure goes, therefore, it is clear that man differs less from the chimpanzee or the orang, than these do even from the monkeys, and that the difference between the brain of the chimpanzee and of man is almost insignificant when
In the paper to which I have referred, Professor Bischoff does not deny the second part of this statement, but he first makes the irrelevant remark that it is not wonderful if the brains of an orang and a Lemur are very different; and secondly, goes on to
To which I reply, firstly, that whether this assertion be true or false, it has nothing whatever to do with the proposition enunciated in 'Man's Place in Nature,' which refers not to the development of the convolutions alone, but to the structure of the
If Professor Bischoff had taken the trouble to refer to p.
96 of the work he criticises, in fact, he would have found the following passage: "And it is a remarkable circumstance that though, so far as our present knowledge extends, there IS one true structural break in the series of forms of Simian brains, this
Every Lemur which has yet been examined, in fact, has its cerebellum partially visible from above; and its posterior lobe, with the contained posterior cornu and hippocampus minor, more or less rudimentary.
Every marmoset, American monkey, Old World monkey, baboon or manlike ape, on the contrary, has its cerebellum entirely hidden, posteriorly, by the cerebral lobes, and possesses a large posterior cornu with a well-developed hippocampus minor".
This statement was a strictly accurate account of what was known when it was made; and it does not appear to me to be more than apparently weakened by the subsequent discovery of the relatively small development of the posterior lobes in the Siamang and in
Notwithstanding the exceptional brevity of the posterior lobes in these two species, no one will pretend that their brains, in the slightest degree, approach those of the Lemurs.
And if, instead of putting Hapale out of its natural place, as Professor Bischoff most unaccountably does, we write the series of animals he has chosen to mention as follows: Homo, Pithecus, Troglodytes, Hylobates, Semnopithecus, Cynocephalus,
Professor Bischoff ignores the fact that long before he wrote, Gratiolet had suggested the separation of the Lemurs from the other Primates on the very ground of the difference in their cerebral characters; and that Professor Flower had made the following
'Transactions of the Zoological Society,' vol.
v.
1862.
) "And it is especially remarkable that, in the development of the posterior lobes, there is no approximation to the Lemurine, short hemisphered brain, in those monkeys which are commonly supposed to approach this family in other respects, viz.
the lower members of the Platyrrhine group".
So far as the structure of the adult brain is concerned, then, the very considerable additions to our knowledge, which have been made by the researches of so many investigators, during the past ten years, fully justify the statement which I made in 1863.
But it has been said, that, admitting the similarity between the adult brains of man and apes, they are nevertheless, in reality, widely different, because they exhibit fundamental differences in the mode of their development.
No one would be more ready than I to admit the force of this argument, if such fundamental differences of development really exist.
But I deny that they do exist.
On the contrary, there is a fundamental agreement in the development of the brain in men and apes.
Gratiolet originated the statement that there is a fundamental difference in the development of the brains of apes and that of man--consisting in this; that, in the apes, the sulci which first make their appearance are situated on the posterior region of
(76.
Chez tous les singes, les plis postrieurs se developpent les premiers; les plis antrieurs se developpent plus tard, aussi la vertbre occipitale et la parietale sont-elles relativement tres-grandes chez le foetus.
L'Homme prsente une exception remarquable quant a l'poque de l'apparition des plis frontaux, qui sont les premiers indiqus; mais le dveloppement general du lobe frontal, envisag seulement par rapport a son volume, suit les mmes lois que dans
39, Tab.
iv, fig.
3.
) This general statement is based upon two observations, the one of a Gibbon almost ready to be born, in which the posterior gyri were "well developed," while those of the frontal lobes were "hardly indicated" (77.
Gratiolet's words are (loc.
cit.
p.
39): "Dans le foetus dont il s'agit les plis crbraux posterieurs sont bien developps, tandis que les plis du lobe frontal sont a peine indiqus".
The figure, however (Pl.
iv, fig.
3), shews the fissure of Rolando, and one of the frontal sulci plainly enough.
Nevertheless, M. Alix, in his 'Notice sur les travaux anthropologiques de Gratiolet' ('Mem.
de la Societ d'Anthropologie de Paris,' 1868, page 32), writes thus: "Gratiolet a eu entre les mains le cerveau d'un foetus de Gibbon, singe eminemment suprieur, et tellement rapproch de l'orang, que des naturalistes tres-comptents l'ont rang
M. Huxley, par exemple, n'hesite pas sur ce point.
Eh bien, c'est sur le cerveau d'un foetus de Gibbon que Gratiolet a vu LES CIRCONVOLUTIONS DU LOBE TEMPORO-SPHENOIDAL DJ DEVELOPPES LORSQU'IL N'EXISTENT PAS ENCORE DE PLIS SUR LE LOBE FRONTAL.
Il etait donc bien autoris a dire que, chez l'homme les circonvolutions apparaissent d'a en w, tandis que chez les singes elles se developpent d'w en a".
), and the other of a human foetus at the 22nd or 23rd week of uterogestation, in which Gratiolet notes that the insula was uncovered, but that nevertheless "des incisures sement de lobe anterieur, une scissure peu profonde indique la separation du lobe
Le reste de la surface crbrale est encore absolument lisse".
Three views of this brain are given in Plate II, figs.
1, 2, 3, of the work cited, shewing the upper, lateral and inferior views of the hemispheres, but not the inner view.
It is worthy of note that the figure by no means bears out Gratiolet's description, inasmuch as the fissure (antero- temporal) on the posterior half of the face of the hemisphere is more marked than any of those vaguely indicated in the anterior half.
If the figure is correct, it in no way justifies Gratiolet's conclusion: "Il y a donc entre ces cerveaux [those of a Callithrix and of a Gibbon] et celui du foetus humain une diffrence fondamental.
Chez celui-ci, longtemps avant que les plis temporaux apparaissent, les plis frontaux, ESSAYENT d'exister".
Since Gratiolet's time, however, the development of the gyri and sulci of the brain has been made the subject of renewed investigation by Schmidt, Bischoff, Pansch (78.
'Ueber die typische Anordnung der Furchen und Windungen auf den Grosshirn-Hemisphren des Menschen und der Affen,' 'Archiv fr Anthropologie,' iii.
1868.
), and more particularly by Ecker (79.
'Zur Entwicklungs Geschichte der Furchen und Windungen der Grosshirn- Hemisphren im Foetus des Menschen,' 'Archiv fr Anthropologie,' iii.
1868.
), whose work is not only the latest, but by far the most complete, memoir on the subject.
The final results of their inquiries may be summed up as follows:-- 1.
In the human foetus, the sylvian fissure is formed in the course of the third month of uterogestation.
In this, and in the fourth month, the cerebral hemispheres are smooth and rounded (with the exception of the sylvian depression), and they project backwards far beyond the cerebellum.
2.
The sulci, properly so called, begin to appear in the interval between the end of the fourth and the beginning of the sixth month of foetal life, but Ecker is careful to point out that, not only the time, but the order, of their appearance is subject to
In no case, however, are either the frontal or the temporal sulci the earliest.
The first which appears, in fact, lies on the inner face of the hemisphere (whence doubtless Gratiolet, who does not seem to have examined that face in his foetus, overlooked it), and is either the internal perpendicular (occipito-parietal), or the
As a rule the occipito- parietal is the earlier of the two.
3.
At the latter part of this period, another sulcus, the "posterio- parietal," or "Fissure of Rolando" is developed, and it is followed, in the course of the sixth month, by the other principal sulci of the frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital lobes.
There is, however, no clear evidence that one of these constantly appears before the other; and it is remarkable that, in the brain at the period described and figured by Ecker (loc.
cit.
pp.
212-213, Taf.
II, figs.
1, 2, 3, 4), the antero-temporal sulcus (scissure parallele) so characteristic of the ape's brain, is as well, if not better developed than the fissure of Rolando, and is much more marked than the proper frontal sulci.
Taking the facts as they now stand, it appears to me that the order of the appearance of the sulci and gyri in the foetal human brain is in perfect harmony with the general doctrine of evolution, and with the view that man has been evolved from some
Von Baer taught us, half a century ago, that, in the course of their development, allied animals put on at first, the characters of the greater groups to which they belong, and, by degrees, assume those which restrict them within the limits of their
It is quite correct to say that a frog passes through the condition of a fish, inasmuch as at one period of its life the tadpole has all the characters of a fish, and if it went no further, would have to be grouped among fishes.
But it is equally true that a tadpole is very different from any known fish.
In like manner, the brain of a human foetus, at the fifth month, may correctly be said to be, not only the brain of an ape, but that of an Arctopithecine or marmoset-like ape; for its hemispheres, with their great posterior lobster, and with no sulci but
But it is equally true, as Gratiolet remarks, that, in its widely open sylvian fissure, it differs from the brain of any actual marmoset.
No doubt it would be much more similar to the brain of an advanced foetus of a marmoset.
But we know nothing whatever of the development of the brain in the marmosets.
In the Platyrrhini proper, the only observation with which I am acquainted is due to Pansch, who found in the brain of a foetal Cebus Apella, in addition to the sylvian fissure and the deep calcarine fissure, only a very shallow antero-temporal fissure
Now this fact, taken together with the circumstance that the antero- temporal sulcus is present in such Platyrrhini as the Saimiri, which present mere traces of sulci on the anterior half of the exterior of the cerebral hemispheres, or none at all,
But, it by no means follows, that the rule which may hold good for the Platyrrhini extends to the Catarrhini.
We have no information whatever respecting the development of the brain in the Cynomorpha; and, as regards the Anthropomorpha, nothing but the account of the brain of the Gibbon, near birth, already referred to.
At the present moment there is not a shadow of evidence to shew that the sulci of a chimpanzee's, or orang's, brain do not appear in the same order as a man's.
Gratiolet opens his preface with the aphorism: "Il est dangereux dans les sciences de conclure trop vite".
I fear he must have forgotten this sound maxim by the time he had reached the discussion of the differences between men and apes, in the body of his work.
No doubt, the excellent author of one of the most remarkable contributions to the just understanding of the mammalian brain which has ever been made, would have been the first to admit the insufficiency of his data had he lived to profit by the advance of
The misfortune is that his conclusions have been employed by persons incompetent to appreciate their foundation, as arguments in favour of obscurantism.
(80.
For example, M. l'Abbe Lecomte in his terrible pamphlet, 'Le Darwinisme et l'origine de l'Homme,' 1873.
) But it is important to remark that, whether Gratiolet was right or wrong in his hypothesis respecting the relative order of appearance of the temporal and frontal sulci, the fact remains; that before either temporal or frontal sulci, appear, the foetal
PART II.
SEXUAL SELECTION.
CHAPTER VIII.
PRINCIPLES OF SEXUAL SELECTION.
Secondary sexual characters--Sexual selection--Manner of action--Excess of males--Polygamy--The male alone generally modified through sexual selection--Eagerness of the male--Variability of the male--Choice exerted by the female--Sexual compared with
With animals which have their sexes separated, the males necessarily differ from the females in their organs of reproduction; and these are the primary sexual characters.
But the sexes often differ in what Hunter has called secondary sexual characters, which are not directly connected with the act of reproduction; for instance, the male possesses certain organs of sense or locomotion, of which the female is quite destitute,
These latter organs, of infinitely diversified kinds, graduate into those which are commonly ranked as primary, and in some cases can hardly be distinguished from them; we see instances of this in the complex appendages at the apex of the abdomen in male
Unless indeed we confine the term "primary" to the reproductive glands, it is scarcely possible to decide which ought to be called primary and which secondary.
The female often differs from the male in having organs for the nourishment or protection of her young, such as the mammary glands of mammals, and the abdominal sacks of the marsupials.
In some few cases also the male possesses similar organs, which are wanting in the female, such as the receptacles for the ova in certain male fishes, and those temporarily developed in certain male frogs.
The females of most bees are provided with a special apparatus for collecting and carrying pollen, and their ovipositor is modified into a sting for the defence of the larvae and the community.
Many similar cases could be given, but they do not here concern us.
There are, however, other sexual differences quite unconnected with the primary reproductive organs, and it is with these that we are more especially concerned--such as the greater size, strength, and pugnacity of the male, his weapons of offence or means
Besides the primary and secondary sexual differences, such as the foregoing, the males and females of some animals differ in structures related to different habits of life, and not at all, or only indirectly, to the reproductive functions.
Thus the females of certain flies (Culicidae and Tabanidae) are blood-suckers, whilst the males, living on flowers, have mouths destitute of mandibles.
(1.
Westwood, 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
ii.
1840, p.
541.
For the statement about Tanais, mentioned below, I am indebted to Fritz Muller.
) The males of certain moths and of some crustaceans (e.
g.
Tanais) have imperfect, closed mouths, and cannot feed.
The complemental males of certain Cirripedes live like epiphytic plants either on the female or the hermaphrodite form, and are destitute of a mouth and of prehensile limbs.
In these cases it is the male which has been modified, and has lost certain important organs, which the females possess.
In other cases it is the female which has lost such parts; for instance, the female glow-worm is destitute of wings, as also are many female moths, some of which never leave their cocoons.
Many female parasitic crustaceans have lost their natatory legs.
In some weevil- beetles (Curculionidae) there is a great difference between the male and female in the length of the rostrum or snout (2.
Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction to Entomology,' vol.
iii.
1826, p.
309.
); but the meaning of this and of many analogous differences, is not at all understood.
Differences of structure between the two sexes in relation to different habits of life are generally confined to the lower animals; but with some few birds the beak of the male differs from that of the female.
In the Huia of New Zealand the difference is wonderfully great, and we hear from Dr. Buller (3.
'Birds of New Zealand,' 1872, p.
66.
) that the male uses his strong beak in chiselling the larvae of insects out of decayed wood, whilst the female probes the softer parts with her far longer, much curved and pliant beak: and thus they mutually aid each other.
In most cases, differences of structure between the sexes are more or less directly connected with the propagation of the species: thus a female, which has to nourish a multitude of ova, requires more food than the male, and consequently requires special
A male animal, which lives for a very short time, might lose its organs for procuring food through disuse, without detriment; but he would retain his locomotive organs in a perfect state, so that he might reach the female.
The female, on the other hand, might safely lose her organs for flying, swimming, or walking, if she gradually acquired habits which rendered such powers useless.
We are, however, here concerned only with sexual selection.
This depends on the advantage which certain individuals have over others of the same sex and species solely in respect of reproduction.
When, as in the cases above mentioned, the two sexes differ in structure in relation to different habits of life, they have no doubt been modified through natural selection, and by inheritance limited to one and the same sex.
So again the primary sexual organs, and those for nourishing or protecting the young, come under the same influence; for those individuals which generated or nourished their offspring best, would leave, ceteris paribus, the greatest number to inherit their
As the male has to find the female, he requires organs of sense and locomotion, but if these organs are necessary for the other purposes of life, as is generally the case, they will have been developed through natural selection.
When the male has found the female, he sometimes absolutely requires prehensile organs to hold her; thus Dr. Wallace informs me that the males of certain moths cannot unite with the females if their tarsi or feet are broken.
The males of many oceanic crustaceans, when adult, have their legs and antennae modified in an extraordinary manner for the prehension of the female; hence we may suspect that it is because these animals are washed about by the waves of the open sea, that
Some animals extremely low in the scale have been modified for this same purpose; thus the males of certain parasitic worms, when fully grown, have the lower surface of the terminal part of their bodies roughened like a rasp, and with this they coil round
(4.
M. Perrier advances this case ('Revue Scientifique,' Feb.
1, 1873, p.
865) as one fatal to the belief in sexual election, inasmuch as he supposes that I attribute all the differences between the sexes to sexual selection.
This distinguished naturalist, therefore, like so many other Frenchmen, has not taken the trouble to understand even the first principles of sexual selection.
An English naturalist insists that the claspers of certain male animals could not have been developed through the choice of the female!
Had I not met with this remark, I should not have thought it possible for any one to have read this chapter and to have imagined that I maintain that the choice of the female had anything to do with the development of the prehensile organs in the male.
) When the two sexes follow exactly the same habits of life, and the male has the sensory or locomotive organs more highly developed than those of the female, it may be that the perfection of these is indispensable to the male for finding the female; but
Since in such cases the males have acquired their present structure, not from being better fitted to survive in the struggle for existence, but from having gained an advantage over other males, and from having transmitted this advantage to their male
It was the importance of this distinction which led me to designate this form of selection as Sexual Selection.
So again, if the chief service rendered to the male by his prehensile organs is to prevent the escape of the female before the arrival of other males, or when assaulted by them, these organs will have been perfected through sexual selection, that is by the
But in most cases of this kind it is impossible to distinguish between the effects of natural and sexual selection.
Whole chapters could be filled with details on the differences between the sexes in their sensory, locomotive, and prehensile organs.
As, however, these structures are not more interesting than others adapted for the ordinary purposes of life I shall pass them over almost entirely, giving only a few instances under each class.
There are many other structures and instincts which must have been developed through sexual selection--such as the weapons of offence and the means of defence of the males for fighting with and driving away their rivals--their courage and pugnacity--their
It is clear that these characters are the result of sexual and not of ordinary selection, since unarmed, unornamented, or unattractive males would succeed equally well in the battle for life and in leaving a numerous progeny, but for the presence of better
We may infer that this would be the case, because the females, which are unarmed and unornamented, are able to survive and procreate their kind.
Secondary sexual characters of the kind just referred to, will be fully discussed in the following chapters, as being in many respects interesting, but especially as depending on the will, choice, and rivalry of the individuals of either sex.
When we behold two males fighting for the possession of the female, or several male birds displaying their gorgeous plumage, and performing strange antics before an assembled body of females, we cannot doubt that, though led by instinct, they know what
Just as man can improve the breeds of his game-cocks by the selection of those birds which are victorious in the cockpit, so it appears that the strongest and most vigorous males, or those provided with the best weapons, have prevailed under nature, and
A slight degree of variability leading to some advantage, however slight, in reiterated deadly contests would suffice for the work of sexual selection; and it is certain that secondary sexual characters are eminently variable.
Just as man can give beauty, according to his standard of taste, to his male poultry, or more strictly can modify the beauty originally acquired by the parent species, can give to the Sebright bantam a new and elegant plumage, an erect and peculiar
No doubt this implies powers of discrimination and taste on the part of the female which will at first appear extremely improbable; but by the facts to be adduced hereafter, I hope to be able to shew that the females actually have these powers.
When, however, it is said that the lower animals have a sense of beauty, it must not be supposed that such sense is comparable with that of a cultivated man, with his multiform and complex associated ideas.
A more just comparison would be between the taste for the beautiful in animals, and that in the lowest savages, who admire and deck themselves with any brilliant, glittering, or curious object.
From our ignorance on several points, the precise manner in which sexual selection acts is somewhat uncertain.
Nevertheless if those naturalists who already believe in the mutability of species, will read the following chapters, they will, I think, agree with me, that sexual selection has played an important part in the history of the organic world.
It is certain that amongst almost all animals there is a struggle between the males for the possession of the female.
This fact is so notorious that it would be superfluous to give instances.
Hence the females have the opportunity of selecting one out of several males, on the supposition that their mental capacity suffices for the exertion of a choice.
In many cases special circumstances tend to make the struggle between the males particularly severe.
Thus the males of our migratory birds generally arrive at their places of breeding before the females, so that many males are ready to contend for each female.
I am informed by Mr. Jenner Weir, that the bird-catchers assert that this is invariably the case with the nightingale and blackcap, and with respect to the latter he can himself confirm the statement.
Mr. Swaysland of Brighton has been in the habit, during the last forty years, of catching our migratory birds on their first arrival, and he has never known the females of any species to arrive before their males.
During one spring he shot thirty-nine males of Ray's wagtail (Budytes Raii) before he saw a single female.
Mr. Gould has ascertained by the dissection of those snipes which arrive the first in this country, that the males come before the females.
And the like holds good with most of the migratory birds of the United States.
(5.
J.A. Allen, on the 'Mammals and Winter Birds of Florida,' Bulletin of Comparative Zoology, Harvard College, p.
268.
) The majority of the male salmon in our rivers, on coming up from the sea, are ready to breed before the females.
So it appears to be with frogs and toads.
Throughout the great class of insects the males almost always are the first to emerge from the pupal state, so that they generally abound for a time before any females can be seen.
(6.
Even with those plants in which the sexes are separate, the male flowers are generally mature before the female.
As first shewn by C.K. Sprengel, many hermaphrodite plants are dichogamous; that is, their male and female organs are not ready at the same time, so that they cannot be self-fertilised.
Now in such flowers, the pollen is in general matured before the stigma, though there are exceptional cases in which the female organs are beforehand.
) The cause of this difference between the males and females in their periods of arrival and maturity is sufficiently obvious.
Those males which annually first migrated into any country, or which in the spring were first ready to breed, or were the most eager, would leave the largest number of offspring; and these would tend to inherit similar instincts and constitutions.
It must be borne in mind that it would have been impossible to change very materially the time of sexual maturity in the females, without at the same time interfering with the period of the production of the young--a period which must be determined by the
On the whole there can be no doubt that with almost all animals, in which the sexes are separate, there is a constantly recurrent struggle between the males for the possession of the females.
Our difficulty in regard to sexual selection lies in understanding how it is that the males which conquer other males, or those which prove the most attractive to the females, leave a greater number of offspring to inherit their superiority than their
Unless this result does follow, the characters which give to certain males an advantage over others, could not be perfected and augmented through sexual selection.
When the sexes exist in exactly equal numbers, the worst- endowed males will (except where polygamy prevails), ultimately find females, and leave as many offspring, as well fitted for their general habits of life, as the best-endowed males.
From various facts and considerations, I formerly inferred that with most animals, in which secondary sexual characters are well developed, the males considerably exceeded the females in number; but this is not by any means always true.
If the males were to the females as two to one, or as three to two, or even in a somewhat lower ratio, the whole affair would be simple; for the better-armed or more attractive males would leave the largest number of offspring.
But after investigating, as far as possible, the numerical proportion of the sexes, I do not believe that any great inequality in number commonly exists.
In most cases sexual selection appears to have been effective in the following manner.
Let us take any species, a bird for instance, and divide the females inhabiting a district into two equal bodies, the one consisting of the more vigorous and better-nourished individuals, and the other of the less vigorous and healthy.
The former, there can be little doubt, would be ready to breed in the spring before the others; and this is the opinion of Mr. Jenner Weir, who has carefully attended to the habits of birds during many years.
There can also be no doubt that the most vigorous, best- nourished and earliest breeders would on an average succeed in rearing the largest number of fine offspring.
(7.
Here is excellent evidence on the character of the offspring from an experienced ornithologist.
Mr. J.A. Allen, in speaking ('Mammals and Winter Birds of E. Florida,' p.
229) of the later broods, after the accidental destruction of the first, says, that these "are found to be smaller and paler-coloured than those hatched earlier in the season.
In cases where several broods are reared each year, as a general rule the birds of the earlier broods seem in all respects the most perfect and vigorous".
) The males, as we have seen, are generally ready to breed before the females; the strongest, and with some species the best armed of the males, drive away the weaker; and the former would then unite with the more vigorous and better-nourished females,
(8.
Hermann Mller has come to this same conclusion with respect to those female bees which are the first to emerge from the pupa each year.
See his remarkable essay, 'Anwendung der Darwin'schen Lehre auf Bienen,' 'Verh.
d.
V. Jahrg.
' xxix.
p.
45.
) Such vigorous pairs would surely rear a larger number of offspring than the retarded females, which would be compelled to unite with the conquered and less powerful males, supposing the sexes to be numerically equal; and this is all that is wanted to
But in very many cases the males which conquer their rivals, do not obtain possession of the females, independently of the choice of the latter.
The courtship of animals is by no means so simple and short an affair as might be thought.
The females are most excited by, or prefer pairing with, the more ornamented males, or those which are the best songsters, or play the best antics; but it is obviously probable that they would at the same time prefer the more vigorous and lively males, and
(9.
With respect to poultry, I have received information, hereafter to be given, to this effect.
Even with birds, such as pigeons, which pair for life, the female, as I hear from Mr. Jenner Weir, will desert her mate if he is injured or grows weak.
) Thus the more vigorous females, which are the first to breed, will have the choice of many males; and though they may not always select the strongest or best armed, they will select those which are vigorous and well armed, and in other respects the most
Both sexes, therefore, of such early pairs would as above explained, have an advantage over others in rearing offspring; and this apparently has sufficed during a long course of generations to add not only to the strength and fighting powers of the males,
In the converse and much rarer case of the males selecting particular females, it is plain that those which were the most vigorous and had conquered others, would have the freest choice; and it is almost certain that they would select vigorous as well as
Such pairs would have an advantage in rearing offspring, more especially if the male had the power to defend the female during the pairing-season as occurs with some of the higher animals, or aided her in providing for the young.
The same principles would apply if each sex preferred and selected certain individuals of the opposite sex; supposing that they selected not only the more attractive, but likewise the more vigorous individuals.
NUMERICAL PROPORTION OF THE TWO SEXES.
I have remarked that sexual selection would be a simple affair if the males were considerably more numerous than the females.
Hence I was led to investigate, as far as I could, the proportions between the two sexes of as many animals as possible; but the materials are scanty.
I will here give only a brief abstract of the results, retaining the details for a supplementary discussion, so as not to interfere with the course of my argument.
Domesticated animals alone afford the means of ascertaining the proportional numbers at birth; but no records have been specially kept for this purpose.
By indirect means, however, I have collected a considerable body of statistics, from which it appears that with most of our domestic animals the sexes are nearly equal at birth.
Thus 25,560 births of race- horses have been recorded during twenty-one years, and the male births were to the female births as 99.
7 to 100.
In greyhounds the inequality is greater than with any other animal, for out of 6878 births during twelve years, the male births were to the female as 110.
1 to 100.
It is, however, in some degree doubtful whether it is safe to infer that the proportion would be the same under natural conditions as under domestication; for slight and unknown differences in the conditions affect the proportion of the sexes.
Thus with mankind, the male births in England are as 104.
5, in Russia as 108.
9, and with the Jews of Livonia as 120, to 100 female births.
But I shall recur to this curious point of the excess of male births in the supplement to this chapter.
At the Cape of Good Hope, however, male children of European extraction have been born during several years in the proportion of between 90 and 99 to 100 female children.
For our present purpose we are concerned with the proportions of the sexes, not only at birth, but also at maturity, and this adds another element of doubt; for it is a well-ascertained fact that with man the number of males dying before or during birth,
So it almost certainly is with male lambs, and probably with some other animals.
The males of some species kill one another by fighting; or they drive one another about until they become greatly emaciated.
They must also be often exposed to various dangers, whilst wandering about in eager search for the females.
In many kinds of fish the males are much smaller than the females, and they are believed often to be devoured by the latter, or by other fishes.
The females of some birds appear to die earlier than the males; they are also liable to be destroyed on their nests, or whilst in charge of their young.
With insects the female larvae are often larger than those of the males, and would consequently be more likely to be devoured.
In some cases the mature females are less active and less rapid in their movements than the males, and could not escape so well from danger.
Hence, with animals in a state of nature, we must rely on mere estimation, in order to judge of the proportions of the sexes at maturity; and this is but little trustworthy, except when the inequality is strongly marked.
Nevertheless, as far as a judgment can be formed, we may conclude from the facts given in the supplement, that the males of some few mammals, of many birds, of some fish and insects, are considerably more numerous than the females.
The proportion between the sexes fluctuates slightly during successive years: thus with race-horses, for every 100 mares born the stallions varied from 107.
1 in one year to 92.
6 in another year, and with greyhounds from 116.
3 to 95.
3.
But had larger numbers been tabulated throughout an area more extensive than England, these fluctuations would probably have disappeared; and such as they are, would hardly suffice to lead to effective sexual selection in a state of nature.
Nevertheless, in the cases of some few wild animals, as shewn in the supplement, the proportions seem to fluctuate either during different seasons or in different localities in a sufficient degree to lead to such selection.
For it should be observed that any advantage, gained during certain years or in certain localities by those males which were able to conquer their rivals, or were the most attractive to the females, would probably be transmitted to the offspring, and would
During the succeeding seasons, when, from the equality of the sexes, every male was able to procure a female, the stronger or more attractive males previously produced would still have at least as good a chance of leaving offspring as the weaker or less
POLYGAMY.
The practice of polygamy leads to the same results as would follow from an actual inequality in the number of the sexes; for if each male secures two or more females, many males cannot pair; and the latter assuredly will be the weaker or less attractive
Many mammals and some few birds are polygamous, but with animals belonging to the lower classes I have found no evidence of this habit.
The intellectual powers of such animals are, perhaps, not sufficient to lead them to collect and guard a harem of females.
That some relation exists between polygamy and the development of secondary sexual characters, appears nearly certain; and this supports the view that a numerical preponderance of males would be eminently favourable to the action of sexual selection.
Nevertheless many animals, which are strictly monogamous, especially birds, display strongly-marked secondary sexual characters; whilst some few animals, which are polygamous, do not have such characters.
We will first briefly run through the mammals, and then turn to birds.
The gorilla seems to be polygamous, and the male differs considerably from the female; so it is with some baboons, which live in herds containing twice as many adult females as males.
In South America the Mycetes caraya presents well-marked sexual differences, in colour, beard, and vocal organs; and the male generally lives with two or three wives: the male of the Cebus capucinus differs somewhat from the female, and appears to be
(10.
On the Gorilla, Savage and Wyman, 'Boston Journal of Natural History,' vol.
v.
1845-47, p.
423.
On Cynocephalus, Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. i.
1864, s.
77.
On Mycetes, Rengger, 'Naturgeschichte der Sugethiere von Paraguay,' 1830, ss.
14, 20.
On Cebus, Brehm, ibid.
s.
108.
) Little is known on this head with respect to most other monkeys, but some species are strictly monogamous.
The ruminants are eminently polygamous, and they present sexual differences more frequently than almost any other group of mammals; this holds good, especially in their weapons, but also in other characters.
Most deer, cattle, and sheep are polygamous; as are most antelopes, though some are monogamous.
Sir Andrew Smith, in speaking of the antelopes of South Africa, says that in herds of about a dozen there was rarely more than one mature male.
The Asiatic Antilope saiga appears to be the most inordinate polygamist in the world; for Pallas (11.
Pallas, 'Spicilegia Zoolog.
, Fasc.
' xii.
1777, p.
29.
Sir Andrew Smith, 'Illustrations of the Zoology of S. Africa,' 1849, pl.
29, on the Kobus.
Owen, in his 'Anatomy of Vertebrates' (vol.
iii.
1868, p.
633) gives a table shewing incidentally which species of antelopes are gregarious.
) states that the male drives away all rivals, and collects a herd of about a hundred females and kids together; the female is hornless and has softer hair, but does not otherwise differ much from the male.
The wild horse of the Falkland Islands and of the Western States of N. America is polygamous, but, except in his greater size and in the proportions of his body, differs but little from the mare.
The wild boar presents well-marked sexual characters, in his great tusks and some other points.
In Europe and in India he leads a solitary life, except during the breeding-season; but as is believed by Sir W. Elliot, who has had many opportunities in India of observing this animal, he consorts at this season with several females.
Whether this holds good in Europe is doubtful, but it is supported by some evidence.
The adult male Indian elephant, like the boar, passes much of his time in solitude; but as Dr. Campbell states, when with others, "It is rare to find more than one male with a whole herd of females"; the larger males expelling or killing the smaller and
The male differs from the female in his immense tusks, greater size, strength, and endurance; so great is the difference in these respects that the males when caught are valued at one-fifth more than the females.
(12.
Dr. Campbell, in 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1869, p.
138.
See also an interesting paper by Lieut.
Johnstone, in 'Proceedings, Asiatic Society of Bengal,' May 1868.
) The sexes of other pachydermatous animals differ very little or not at all, and, as far as known, they are not polygamists.
Nor have I heard of any species in the Orders of Cheiroptera, Edentata, Insectivora and Rodents being polygamous, excepting that amongst the Rodents, the common rat, according to some rat-catchers, lives with several females.
Nevertheless the two sexes of some sloths (Edentata) differ in the character and colour of certain patches of hair on their shoulders.
(13.
Dr. Gray, in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' 1871, p.
302.
) And many kinds of bats (Cheiroptera) present well-marked sexual differences, chiefly in the males possessing odoriferous glands and pouches, and by their being of a lighter colour.
(14.
See Dr. Dobson's excellent paper in 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' 1873, p.
241.
) In the great order of Rodents, as far as I can learn, the sexes rarely differ, and when they do so, it is but slightly in the tint of the fur.
As I hear from Sir Andrew Smith, the lion in South Africa sometimes lives with a single female, but generally with more, and, in one case, was found with as many as five females; so that he is polygamous.
As far as I can discover, he is the only polygamist amongst all the terrestrial Carnivora, and he alone presents well-marked sexual characters.
If, however, we turn to the marine Carnivora, as we shall hereafter see, the case is widely different; for many species of seals offer extraordinary sexual differences, and they are eminently polygamous.
Thus, according to Peron, the male sea-elephant of the Southern Ocean always possesses several females, and the sea-lion of Forster is said to be surrounded by from twenty to thirty females.
In the North, the male sea-bear of Steller is accompanied by even a greater number of females.
It is an interesting fact, as Dr. Gill remarks (15.
'The Eared Seals,' American Naturalist, vol.
iv.
Jan.
1871.
), that in the monogamous species, "or those living in small communities, there is little difference in size between the males and females; in the social species, or rather those of which the males have harems, the males are vastly larger than the
Amongst birds, many species, the sexes of which differ greatly from each other, are certainly monogamous.
In Great Britain we see well-marked sexual differences, for instance, in the wild-duck which pairs with a single female, the common blackbird, and the bullfinch which is said to pair for life.
I am informed by Mr. Wallace that the like is true of the Chatterers or Cotingidae of South America, and of many other birds.
In several groups I have not been able to discover whether the species are polygamous or monogamous.
Lesson says that birds of paradise, so remarkable for their sexual differences, are polygamous, but Mr. Wallace doubts whether he had sufficient evidence.
Mr. Salvin tells me he has been led to believe that humming-birds are polygamous.
The male widow-bird, remarkable for his caudal plumes, certainly seems to be a polygamist.
(16.
'The Ibis,' vol.
iii.
1861, p.
133, on the Progne Widow-bird.
See also on the Vidua axillaris, ibid.
vol.
ii.
1860, p.
211.
On the polygamy of the Capercailzie and Great Bustard, see L. Lloyd, 'Game Birds of Sweden,' 1867, pp.
19, and 182.
Montagu and Selby speak of the Black Grouse as polygamous and of the Red Grouse as monogamous.
) I have been assured by Mr. Jenner Weir and by others, that it is somewhat common for three starlings to frequent the same nest; but whether this is a case of polygamy or polyandry has not been ascertained.
The Gallinaceae exhibit almost as strongly marked sexual differences as birds of paradise or humming-birds, and many of the species are, as is well known, polygamous; others being strictly monogamous.
What a contrast is presented between the sexes of the polygamous peacock or pheasant, and the monogamous guinea-fowl or partridge!
Many similar cases could be given, as in the grouse tribe, in which the males of the polygamous capercailzie and black-cock differ greatly from the females; whilst the sexes of the monogamous red grouse and ptarmigan differ very little.
In the Cursores, except amongst the bustards, few species offer strongly-marked sexual differences, and the great bustard (Otis tarda) is said to be polygamous.
With the Grallatores, extremely few species differ sexually, but the ruff (Machetes pugnax) affords a marked exception, and this species is believed by Montagu to be a polygamist.
Hence it appears that amongst birds there often exists a close relation between polygamy and the development of strongly-marked sexual differences.
I asked Mr. Bartlett, of the Zoological Gardens, who has had very large experience with birds, whether the male tragopan (one of the Gallinaceae) was polygamous, and I was struck by his answering, "I do not know, but should think so from his splendid
It deserves notice that the instinct of pairing with a single female is easily lost under domestication.
The wild-duck is strictly monogamous, the domestic-duck highly polygamous.
The Rev.
W.D. Fox informs me that out of some half-tamed wild-ducks, on a large pond in his neighbourhood, so many mallards were shot by the gamekeeper that only one was left for every seven or eight females; yet unusually large broods were reared.
The guinea-fowl is strictly monogamous; but Mr. Fox finds that his birds succeed best when he keeps one cock to two or three hens.
Canary-birds pair in a state of nature, but the breeders in England successfully put one male to four or five females.
I have noticed these cases, as rendering it probable that wild monogamous species might readily become either temporarily or permanently polygamous.
Too little is known of the habits of reptiles and fishes to enable us to speak of their marriage arrangements.
The stickle-back (Gasterosteus), however, is said to be a polygamist (17.
Noel Humphreys, 'River Gardens,' 1857.
); and the male during the breeding-season differs conspicuously from the female.
To sum up on the means through which, as far as we can judge, sexual selection has led to the development of secondary sexual characters.
It has been shewn that the largest number of vigorous offspring will be reared from the pairing of the strongest and best-armed males, victorious in contests over other males, with the most vigorous and best-nourished females, which are the first to breed
If such females select the more attractive, and at the same time vigorous males, they will rear a larger number of offspring than the retarded females, which must pair with the less vigorous and less attractive males.
So it will be if the more vigorous males select the more attractive and at the same time healthy and vigorous females; and this will especially hold good if the male defends the female, and aids in providing food for the young.
The advantage thus gained by the more vigorous pairs in rearing a larger number of offspring has apparently sufficed to render sexual selection efficient.
But a large numerical preponderance of males over females will be still more efficient; whether the preponderance is only occasional and local, or permanent; whether it occurs at birth, or afterwards from the greater destruction of the females; or whether
THE MALE GENERALLY MORE MODIFIED THAN THE FEMALE.
Throughout the animal kingdom, when the sexes differ in external appearance, it is, with rare exceptions, the male which has been the more modified; for, generally, the female retains a closer resemblance to the young of her own species, and to other adult
The cause of this seems to lie in the males of almost all animals having stronger passions than the females.
Hence it is the males that fight together and sedulously display their charms before the females; and the victors transmit their superiority to their male offspring.
Why both sexes do not thus acquire the characters of their fathers, will be considered hereafter.
That the males of all mammals eagerly pursue the females is notorious to every one.
So it is with birds; but many cock birds do not so much pursue the hen, as display their plumage, perform strange antics, and pour forth their song in her presence.
The male in the few fish observed seems much more eager than the female; and the same is true of alligators, and apparently of Batrachians.
Throughout the enormous class of insects, as Kirby remarks, "the law is that the male shall seek the female".
(18.
Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction to Entomology,' vol.
iii.
1826, p.
342.
) Two good authorities, Mr. Blackwall and Mr. C. Spence Bate, tell me that the males of spiders and crustaceans are more active and more erratic in their habits than the females.
When the organs of sense or locomotion are present in the one sex of insects and crustaceans and absent in the other, or when, as is frequently the case, they are more highly developed in the one than in the other, it is, as far as I can discover, almost
(19.
One parasitic Hymenopterous insect (Westwood, 'Modern Class.
of Insects,' vol.
ii.
p.
160) forms an exception to the rule, as the male has rudimentary wings, and never quits the cell in which it is born, whilst the female has well-developed wings.
Audouin believes that the females of this species are impregnated by the males which are born in the same cells with them; but it is much more probable that the females visit other cells, so that close inter-breeding is thus avoided.
We shall hereafter meet in various classes, with a few exceptional cases, in which the female, instead of the male, is the seeker and wooer.
) The female, on the other hand, with the rarest exceptions, is less eager than the male.
As the illustrious Hunter (20.
'Essays and Observations,' edited by Owen, vol.
i.
1861, p.
194.
) long ago observed, she generally "requires to be courted;" she is coy, and may often be seen endeavouring for a long time to escape from the male.
Every observer of the habits of animals will be able to call to mind instances of this kind.
It is shewn by various facts, given hereafter, and by the results fairly attributable to sexual selection, that the female, though comparatively passive, generally exerts some choice and accepts one male in preference to others.
Or she may accept, as appearances would sometimes lead us to believe, not the male which is the most attractive to her, but the one which is the least distasteful.
The exertion of some choice on the part of the female seems a law almost as general as the eagerness of the male.
We are naturally led to enquire why the male, in so many and such distinct classes, has become more eager than the female, so that he searches for her, and plays the more active part in courtship.
It would be no advantage and some loss of power if each sex searched for the other; but why should the male almost always be the seeker?
The ovules of plants after fertilisation have to be nourished for a time; hence the pollen is necessarily brought to the female organs--being placed on the stigma, by means of insects or the wind, or by the spontaneous movements of the stamens; and in the
, by the locomotive power of the antherozooids.
With lowly-organised aquatic animals, permanently affixed to the same spot and having their sexes separate, the male element is invariably brought to the female; and of this we can see the reason, for even if the ova were detached before fertilisation, and
So that many of the lower animals are, in this respect, analogous with plants.
(21.
Prof.
Sachs ('Lehrbuch der Botanik,' 1870, S. 633) in speaking of the male and female reproductive cells, remarks, "verhlt sich die eine bei der Vereinigung activ,...
die andere erscheint bei der Vereinigung passiv".
) The males of affixed and aquatic animals having been led to emit their fertilising element in this way, it is natural that any of their descendants, which rose in the scale and became locomotive, should retain the same habit; and they would approach the
With some few of the lower animals, the females alone are fixed, and the males of these must be the seekers.
But it is difficult to understand why the males of species, of which the progenitors were primordially free, should invariably have acquired the habit of approaching the females, instead of being approached by them.
But in all cases, in order that the males should seek efficiently, it would be necessary that they should be endowed with strong passions; and the acquirement of such passions would naturally follow from the more eager leaving a larger number of offspring
The great eagerness of the males has thus indirectly led to their much more frequently developing secondary sexual characters than the females.
But the development of such characters would be much aided, if the males were more liable to vary than the females--as I concluded they were--after a long study of domesticated animals.
Von Nathusius, who has had very wide experience, is strongly of the same opinion.
(22.
'Vortrge uber Viehzucht,' 1872, p.
63.
) Good evidence also in favour of this conclusion can be produced by a comparison of the two sexes in mankind.
During the Novara Expedition (23.
'Reise der Novara: Anthropolog.
Theil,' 1867, ss.
216-269.
The results were calculated by Dr. Weisbach from measurements made by Drs.
K. Scherzer and Schwarz.
On the greater variability of the males of domesticated animals, see my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
1868, p.
75.
) a vast number of measurements was made of various parts of the body in different races, and the men were found in almost every case to present a greater range of variation than the women; but I shall have to recur to this subject in a future chapter.
Mr. J. Wood (24.
'Proceedings of the Royal Society,' vol.
xvi.
July 1868, pp.
519 and 524.
), who has carefully attended to the variation of the muscles in man, puts in italics the conclusion that "the greatest number of abnormalities in each subject is found in the males".
He had previously remarked that "altogether in 102 subjects, the varieties of redundancy were found to be half as many again as in females, contrasting widely with the greater frequency of deficiency in females before described".
Professor Macalister likewise remarks (25.
'Proc.
Royal Irish Academy,' vol.
x.
1868, p.
123.
) that variations in the muscles "are probably more common in males than females".
Certain muscles which are not normally present in mankind are also more frequently developed in the male than in the female sex, although exceptions to this rule are said to occur.
Dr. Burt Wilder (26.
'Massachusetts Medical Society,' vol.
ii.
No.
3, 1868, p.
9.
) has tabulated the cases of 152 individuals with supernumerary digits, of which 86 were males, and 39, or less than half, females, the remaining 27 being of unknown sex.
It should not, however, be overlooked that women would more frequently endeavour to conceal a deformity of this kind than men.
Again, Dr. L. Meyer asserts that the ears of man are more variable in form than those of a woman.
(27.
'Archiv fur Path.
Anat.
und Phys.
' 1871, p.
488.
) Lastly the temperature is more variable in man than in woman.
(28.
The conclusions recently arrived at by Dr. J. Stockton Hough, on the temperature of man, are given in the 'Pop.
Sci.
Review,' Jan.
1st, 1874, p.
97.
) The cause of the greater general variability in the male sex, than in the female is unknown, except in so far as secondary sexual characters are extraordinarily variable, and are usually confined to the males; and, as we shall presently see, this fact
Through the action of sexual and natural selection male animals have been rendered in very many instances widely different from their females; but independently of selection the two sexes, from differing constitutionally, tend to vary in a somewhat
The female has to expend much organic matter in the formation of her ova, whereas the male expends much force in fierce contests with his rivals, in wandering about in search of the female, in exerting his voice, pouring out odoriferous secretions, etc.
: and this expenditure is generally concentrated within a short period.
The great vigour of the male during the season of love seems often to intensify his colours, independently of any marked difference from the female.
(29.
Prof.
Mantegazza is inclined to believe ('Lettera a Carlo Darwin,' 'Archivio per l'Anthropologia,' 1871, p.
306) that the bright colours, common in so many male animals, are due to the presence and retention by them of the spermatic fluid; but this can hardly be the case; for many male birds, for instance young pheasants, become brightly coloured in the autumn
) In mankind, and even as low down in the organic scale as in the Lepidoptera, the temperature of the body is higher in the male than in the female, accompanied in the case of man by a slower pulse.
(30.
For mankind, see Dr. J. Stockton Hough, whose conclusions are given in the 'Popular Science Review,' 1874, p.
97.
See Girard's observations on the Lepidoptera, as given in the 'Zoological Record,' 1869, p.
347.
) On the whole the expenditure of matter and force by the two sexes is probably nearly equal, though effected in very different ways and at different rates.
From the causes just specified the two sexes can hardly fail to differ somewhat in constitution, at least during the breeding-season; and, although they may be subjected to exactly the same conditions, they will tend to vary in a different manner.
If such variations are of no service to either sex, they will not be accumulated and increased by sexual or natural selection.
Nevertheless, they may become permanent if the exciting cause acts permanently; and in accordance with a frequent form of inheritance they may be transmitted to that sex alone in which they first appeared.
In this case the two sexes will come to present permanent, yet unimportant, differences of character.
For instance, Mr. Allen shews that with a large number of birds inhabiting the northern and southern United States, the specimens from the south are darker-coloured than those from the north; and this seems to be the direct result of the difference in
, between the two regions.
Now, in some few cases, the two sexes of the same species appear to have been differently affected; in the Agelaeus phoeniceus the males have had their colours greatly intensified in the south; whereas with Cardinalis virginianus it is the females which
(31.
'Mammals and Birds of E. Florida,' pp.
234, 280, 295.
) A few exceptional cases occur in various classes of animals, in which the females instead of the males have acquired well pronounced secondary sexual characters, such as brighter colours, greater size, strength, or pugnacity.
With birds there has sometimes been a complete transposition of the ordinary characters proper to each sex; the females having become the more eager in courtship, the males remaining comparatively passive, but apparently selecting the more attractive
Certain hen birds have thus been rendered more highly coloured or otherwise ornamented, as well as more powerful and pugnacious than the cocks; these characters being transmitted to the female offspring alone.
It may be suggested that in some cases a double process of selection has been carried on; that the males have selected the more attractive females, and the latter the more attractive males.
This process, however, though it might lead to the modification of both sexes, would not make the one sex different from the other, unless indeed their tastes for the beautiful differed; but this is a supposition too improbable to be worth considering in
There are, however, many animals in which the sexes resemble each other, both being furnished with the same ornaments, which analogy would lead us to attribute to the agency of sexual selection.
In such cases it may be suggested with more plausibility, that there has been a double or mutual process of sexual selection; the more vigorous and precocious females selecting the more attractive and vigorous males, the latter rejecting all except the
But from what we know of the habits of animals, this view is hardly probable, for the male is generally eager to pair with any female.
It is more probable that the ornaments common to both sexes were acquired by one sex, generally the male, and then transmitted to the offspring of both sexes.
If, indeed, during a lengthened period the males of any species were greatly to exceed the females in number, and then during another lengthened period, but under different conditions, the reverse were to occur, a double, but not simultaneous, process of
We shall hereafter see that many animals exist, of which neither sex is brilliantly coloured or provided with special ornaments, and yet the members of both sexes or of one alone have probably acquired simple colours, such as white or black, through sexual
The absence of bright tints or other ornaments may be the result of variations of the right kind never having occurred, or of the animals themselves having preferred plain black or white.
Obscure tints have often been developed through natural selection for the sake of protection, and the acquirement through sexual selection of conspicuous colours, appears to have been sometimes checked from the danger thus incurred.
But in other cases the males during long ages may have struggled together for the possession of the females, and yet no effect will have been produced, unless a larger number of offspring were left by the more successful males to inherit their superiority,
Sexual selection acts in a less rigorous manner than natural selection.
The latter produces its effects by the life or death at all ages of the more or less successful individuals.
Death, indeed, not rarely ensues from the conflicts of rival males.
But generally the less successful male merely fails to obtain a female, or obtains a retarded and less vigorous female later in the season, or, if polygamous, obtains fewer females; so that they leave fewer, less vigorous, or no offspring.
In regard to structures acquired through ordinary or natural selection, there is in most cases, as long as the conditions of life remain the same, a limit to the amount of advantageous modification in relation to certain special purposes; but in regard to
This circumstance may partly account for the frequent and extraordinary amount of variability presented by secondary sexual characters.
Nevertheless, natural selection will determine that such characters shall not be acquired by the victorious males, if they would be highly injurious, either by expending too much of their vital powers, or by exposing them to any great danger.
The development, however, of certain structures--of the horns, for instance, in certain stags--has been carried to a wonderful extreme; and in some cases to an extreme which, as far as the general conditions of life are concerned, must be slightly
From this fact we learn that the advantages which favoured males derive from conquering other males in battle or courtship, and thus leaving a numerous progeny, are in the long run greater than those derived from rather more perfect adaptation to their
We shall further see, and it could never have been anticipated, that the power to charm the female has sometimes been more important than the power to conquer other males in battle.
LAWS OF INHERITANCE.
In order to understand how sexual selection has acted on many animals of many classes, and in the course of ages has produced a conspicuous result, it is necessary to bear in mind the laws of inheritance, as far as they are known.
Two distinct elements are included under the term "inheritance"-- the transmission, and the development of characters; but as these generally go together, the distinction is often overlooked.
We see this distinction in those characters which are transmitted through the early years of life, but are developed only at maturity or during old age.
We see the same distinction more clearly with secondary sexual characters, for these are transmitted through both sexes, though developed in one alone.
That they are present in both sexes, is manifest when two species, having strongly- marked sexual characters, are crossed, for each transmits the characters proper to its own male and female sex to the hybrid offspring of either sex.
The same fact is likewise manifest, when characters proper to the male are occasionally developed in the female when she grows old or becomes diseased, as, for instance, when the common hen assumes the flowing tail- feathers, hackles, comb, spurs, voice,
Conversely, the same thing is evident, more or less plainly, with castrated males.
Again, independently of old age or disease, characters are occasionally transferred from the male to the female, as when, in certain breeds of the fowl, spurs regularly appear in the young and healthy females.
But in truth they are simply developed in the female; for in every breed each detail in the structure of the spur is transmitted through the female to her male offspring.
Many cases will hereafter be given, where the female exhibits, more or less perfectly, characters proper to the male, in whom they must have been first developed, and then transferred to the female.
The converse case of the first development of characters in the female and of transference to the male, is less frequent; it will therefore be well to give one striking instance.
With bees the pollen- collecting apparatus is used by the female alone for gathering pollen for the larvae, yet in most of the species it is partially developed in the males to whom it is quite useless, and it is perfectly developed in the males of Bombus
(32.
H. Muller, 'Anwendung der Darwin'schen Lehre,' etc.
, Verh.
d.
n.
V. Jahrg.
, xxix.
p.
42.
) As not a single other Hymenopterous insect, not even the wasp, which is closely allied to the bee, is provided with a pollen-collecting apparatus, we have no grounds for supposing that male bees primordially collected pollen as well as the females;
Lastly, in all cases of reversion, characters are transmitted through two, three, or many more generations, and are then developed under certain unknown favourable conditions.
This important distinction between transmission and development will be best kept in mind by the aid of the hypothesis of pangenesis.
According to this hypothesis, every unit or cell of the body throws off gemmules or undeveloped atoms, which are transmitted to the offspring of both sexes, and are multiplied by self-division.
They may remain undeveloped during the early years of life or during successive generations; and their development into units or cells, like those from which they were derived, depends on their affinity for, and union with other units or cells previously
INHERITANCE AT CORRESPONDING PERIODS OF LIFE.
This tendency is well established.
A new character, appearing in a young animal, whether it lasts throughout life or is only transient, will, in general, reappear in the offspring at the same age and last for the same time.
If, on the other hand, a new character appears at maturity, or even during old age, it tends to reappear in the offspring at the same advanced age.
When deviations from this rule occur, the transmitted characters much oftener appear before, than after the corresponding age.
As I have dwelt on this subject sufficiently in another work (33.
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
1868, p.
75.
In the last chapter but one, the provisional hypothesis of pangenesis, above alluded to, is fully explained.
), I will here merely give two or three instances, for the sake of recalling the subject to the reader's mind.
In several breeds of the Fowl, the down-covered chickens, the young birds in their first true plumage, and the adults differ greatly from one another, as well as from their common parent-form, the Gallus bankiva; and these characters are faithfully
For instance, the chickens of spangled Hamburgs, whilst covered with down, have a few dark spots on the head and rump, but are not striped longitudinally, as in many other breeds; in their first true plumage, "they are beautifully pencilled," that is each
(34.
These facts are given on the high authority of a great breeder, Mr. Teebay; see Tegetmeier's 'Poultry Book,' 1868, p.
158.
On the characters of chickens of different breeds, and on the breeds of the pigeon, alluded to in the following paragraph, see 'Variation of Animals,' etc.
, vol.
i.
pp.
160, 249; vol.
ii.
p.
77.
) Hence in this breed variations have occurred at, and been transmitted to, three distinct periods of life.
The Pigeon offers a more remarkable case, because the aboriginal parent species does not undergo any change of plumage with advancing age, excepting that at maturity the breast becomes more iridescent; yet there are breeds which do not acquire their
INHERITANCE AT CORRESPONDING SEASONS OF THE YEAR.
With animals in a state of nature, innumerable instances occur of characters appearing periodically at different seasons.
We see this in the horns of the stag, and in the fur of Arctic animals which becomes thick and white during the winter.
Many birds acquire bright colours and other decorations during the breeding-season alone.
Pallas states (35.
'Novae species Quadrupedum e Glirium ordine,' 1778, p.
7.
On the transmission of colour by the horse, see 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
51.
Also vol.
ii.
p.
71, for a general discussion on 'Inheritance as limited by Sex.
'), that in Siberia domestic cattle and horses become lighter-coloured during the winter; and I have myself observed, and heard of similar strongly marked changes of colour, that is, from brownish cream-colour or reddish-brown to a perfect white, in
Although I do not know that this tendency to change the colour of the coat during different seasons is transmitted, yet it probably is so, as all shades of colour are strongly inherited by the horse.
Nor is this form of inheritance, as limited by the seasons, more remarkable than its limitation by age or sex.
INHERITANCE AS LIMITED BY SEX.
The equal transmission of characters to both sexes is the commonest form of inheritance, at least with those animals which do not present strongly- marked sexual differences, and indeed with many of these.
But characters are somewhat commonly transferred exclusively to that sex, in which they first appear.
Ample evidence on this head has been advanced in my work on 'Variation under Domestication,' but a few instances may here be given.
There are breeds of the sheep and goat, in which the horns of the male differ greatly in shape from those of the female; and these differences, acquired under domestication, are regularly transmitted to the same sex.
As a rule, it is the females alone in cats which are tortoise-shell, the corresponding colour in the males being rusty-red.
With most breeds of the fowl, the characters proper to each sex are transmitted to the same sex alone.
So general is this form of transmission that it is an anomaly when variations in certain breeds are transmitted equally to both sexes.
There are also certain sub-breeds of the fowl in which the males can hardly be distinguished from one another, whilst the females differ considerably in colour.
The sexes of the pigeon in the parent-species do not differ in any external character; nevertheless, in certain domesticated breeds the male is coloured differently from the female.
(36.
Dr. Chapuis, 'Le Pigeon Voyageur Belge,' 1865, p.
87.
Boitard et Corbie, 'Les Pigeons de Volire,' etc.
, 1824, p.
173.
See, also, on similar differences in certain breeds at Modena, 'Le variazioni dei Colombi domestici,' del Paolo Bonizzi, 1873.
) The wattle in the English Carrier pigeon, and the crop in the Pouter, are more highly developed in the male than in the female; and although these characters have been gained through long-continued selection by man, the slight differences between the
Most of our domestic races have been formed by the accumulation of many slight variations; and as some of the successive steps have been transmitted to one sex alone, and some to both sexes, we find in the different breeds of the same species all
Instances have already been given with the breeds of the fowl and pigeon, and under nature analogous cases are common.
With animals under domestication, but whether in nature I will not venture to say, one sex may lose characters proper to it, and may thus come somewhat to resemble the opposite sex; for instance, the males of some breeds of the fowl have lost their
On the other hand, the differences between the sexes may be increased under domestication, as with merino sheep, in which the ewes have lost their horns.
Again, characters proper to one sex may suddenly appear in the other sex; as in those sub-breeds of the fowl in which the hens acquire spurs whilst young; or, as in certain Polish sub-breeds, in which the females, as there is reason to believe, originally
All these cases are intelligible on the hypothesis of pangenesis; for they depend on the gemmules of certain parts, although present in both sexes, becoming, through the influence of domestication, either dormant or developed in either sex.
There is one difficult question which it will be convenient to defer to a future chapter; namely, whether a character at first developed in both sexes, could through selection be limited in its development to one sex alone.
If, for instance, a breeder observed that some of his pigeons (of which the characters are usually transferred in an equal degree to both sexes) varied into pale blue, could he by long-continued selection make a breed, in which the males alone should be of
I will here only say, that this, though perhaps not impossible, would be extremely difficult; for the natural result of breeding from the pale-blue males would be to change the whole stock of both sexes to this tint.
If, however, variations of the desired tint appeared, which were from the first limited in their development to the male sex, there would not be the least difficulty in making a breed with the two sexes of a different colour, as indeed has been effected
In a similar manner, if any variation appeared in a female pigeon, which was from the first sexually limited in its development to the females, it would be easy to make a breed with the females alone thus characterised; but if the variation was not thus
(37.
Since the publication of the first edition of this work, it has been highly satisfactory to me to find the following remarks (the 'Field,' Sept.
1872) from so experienced a breeder as Mr. Tegetmeier.
After describing some curious cases in pigeons, of the transmission of colour by one sex alone, and the formation of a sub- breed with this character, he says: "It is a singular circumstance that Mr. Darwin should have suggested the possibility of
When he did so, he was in ignorance of these facts that I have related; but it is remarkable how very closely he suggested the right method of procedure".
) ON THE RELATION BETWEEN THE PERIOD OF DEVELOPMENT OF A CHARACTER AND ITS TRANSMISSION TO ONE SEX OR TO BOTH SEXES.
Why certain characters should be inherited by both sexes, and other characters by one sex alone, namely by that sex in which the character first appeared, is in most cases quite unknown.
We cannot even conjecture why with certain sub-breeds of the pigeon, black striae, though transmitted through the female, should be developed in the male alone, whilst every other character is equally transferred to both sexes.
Why, again, with cats, the tortoise-shell colour should, with rare exceptions, be developed in the female alone.
The very same character, such as deficient or supernumerary digits, colour-blindness, etc.
, may with mankind be inherited by the males alone of one family, and in another family by the females alone, though in both cases transmitted through the opposite as well as through the same sex.
(38.
References are given in my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
p.
72.
) Although we are thus ignorant, the two following rules seem often to hold good--that variations which first appear in either sex at a late period of life, tend to be developed in the same sex alone; whilst variations which first appear early in life in
I am, however, far from supposing that this is the sole determining cause.
As I have not elsewhere discussed this subject, and it has an important bearing on sexual selection, I must here enter into lengthy and somewhat intricate details.
It is in itself probable that any character appearing at an early age would tend to be inherited equally by both sexes, for the sexes do not differ much in constitution before the power of reproduction is gained.
On the other hand, after this power has been gained and the sexes have come to differ in constitution, the gemmules (if I may again use the language of pangenesis) which are cast off from each varying part in the one sex would be much more likely to
I was first led to infer that a relation of this kind exists, from the fact that whenever and in whatever manner the adult male differs from the adult female, he differs in the same manner from the young of both sexes.
The generality of this fact is quite remarkable: it holds good with almost all mammals, birds, amphibians, and fishes; also with many crustaceans, spiders, and some few insects, such as certain orthoptera and libellulae.
In all these cases the variations, through the accumulation of which the male acquired his proper masculine characters, must have occurred at a somewhat late period of life; otherwise the young males would have been similarly characterised; and conformably
When, on the other hand, the adult male closely resembles the young of both sexes (these, with rare exceptions, being alike), he generally resembles the adult female; and in most of these cases the variations through which the young and old acquired their
But there is here room for doubt, for characters are sometimes transferred to the offspring at an earlier age than that at which they first appeared in the parents, so that the parents may have varied when adult, and have transferred their characters to
There are, moreover, many animals, in which the two sexes closely resemble each other, and yet both differ from their young: and here the characters of the adults must have been acquired late in life; nevertheless, these characters, in apparent
We must not however, overlook the possibility or even probability of successive variations of the same nature occurring, under exposure to similar conditions, simultaneously in both sexes at a rather late period of life; and in this case the variations
This latter rule seems to hold true more generally than the second one, namely, that variations which occur in either sex early in life tend to be transferred to both sexes.
As it was obviously impossible even to estimate in how large a number of cases throughout the animal kingdom these two propositions held good, it occurred to me to investigate some striking or crucial instances, and to rely on the result.
An excellent case for investigation is afforded by the Deer family.
In all the species, but one, the horns are developed only in the males, though certainly transmitted through the females, and capable of abnormal development in them.
In the reindeer, on the other hand, the female is provided with horns; so that in this species, the horns ought, according to our rule, to appear early in life, long before the two sexes are mature and have come to differ much in constitution.
In all the other species the horns ought to appear later in life, which would lead to their development in that sex alone, in which they first appeared in the progenitor of the whole Family.
Now in seven species, belonging to distinct sections of the family and inhabiting different regions, in which the stags alone bear horns, I find that the horns first appear at periods, varying from nine months after birth in the roebuck, to ten, twelve or
(39.
I am much obliged to Mr. Cupples for having made enquiries for me in regard to the Roebuck and Red Deer of Scotland from Mr. Robertson, the experienced head-forester to the Marquis of Breadalbane.
In regard to Fallow-deer, I have to thank Mr. Eyton and others for information.
For the Cervus alces of N. America, see 'Land and Water,' 1868, pp.
221 and 254; and for the C. Virginianus and strongyloceros of the same continent, see J.D. Caton, in 'Ottawa Acad.
of Nat.
Sc.
' 1868, p.
13.
For Cervus Eldi of Pegu, see Lieut.
Beaven, 'Proccedings of the Zoological Society,' 1867, p.
762.
) But with the reindeer the case is widely different; for, as I hear from Prof.
Nilsson, who kindly made special enquiries for me in Lapland, the horns appear in the young animals within four or five weeks after birth, and at the same time in both sexes.
So that here we have a structure, developed at a most unusually early age in one species of the family, and likewise common to both sexes in this one species alone.
In several kinds of antelopes, only the males are provided with horns, whilst in the greater number both sexes bear horns.
With respect to the period of development, Mr. Blyth informs me that there was at one time in the Zoological Gardens a young koodoo (Ant.
strepsiceros), of which the males alone are horned, and also the young of a closely-allied species, the eland (Ant.
oreas), in which both sexes are horned.
Now it is in strict conformity with our rule, that in the young male koodoo, although ten months old, the horns were remarkably small, considering the size ultimately attained by them; whilst in the young male eland, although only three months old, the
It is also a noticeable fact that in the prong-horned antelope (40.
Antilocapra Americana.
I have to thank Dr. Canfield for information with respect to the horns of the female: see also his paper in 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' 1866, p.
109.
Also Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
627), only a few of the females, about one in five, have horns, and these are in a rudimentary state, though sometimes above four inches long: so that as far as concerns the possession of horns by the males alone, this species is in an intermediate
Therefore in comparison with what little we know of the development of the horns in other antelopes, and from what we do know with respect to the horns of deer, cattle, etc.
, those of the prong-horned antelope appear at an intermediate period of life,--that is, not very early, as in cattle and sheep, nor very late, as in the larger deer and antelopes.
The horns of sheep, goats, and cattle, which are well developed in both sexes, though not quite equal in size, can be felt, or even seen, at birth or soon afterwards.
(41.
I have been assured that the horns of the sheep in North Wales can always be felt, and are sometimes even an inch in length, at birth.
Youatt says ('Cattle,' 1834, p.
277), that the prominence of the frontal bone in cattle penetrates the cutis at birth, and that the horny matter is soon formed over it.
) Our rule, however, seems to fail in some breeds of sheep, for instance merinos, in which the rams alone are horned; for I cannot find on enquiry (42.
I am greatly indebted to Prof.
Victor Carus for having made enquiries for me, from the highest authorities, with respect to the merino sheep of Saxony.
On the Guinea coast of Africa there is, however, a breed of sheep in which, as with merinos, the rams alone bear horns; and Mr. Winwood Reade informs me that in one case observed by him, a young ram, born on Feb.
10th, first shewed horns on March 6th, so that in this instance, in conformity with rule, the development of the horns occurred at a later period of life than in Welsh sheep, in which both sexes are horned.
), that the horns are developed later in life in this breed than in ordinary sheep in which both sexes are horned.
But with domesticated sheep the presence or absence of horns is not a firmly fixed character; for a certain proportion of the merino ewes bear small horns, and some of the rams are hornless; and in most breeds hornless ewes are occasionally produced.
Dr. W. Marshall has lately made a special study of the protuberances so common on the heads of birds (43.
'ber die knochernen Schdelhcker der Vgel,' in the 'Niederland.
Archiv fur Zoologie,' B.i.
Heft 2, 1872.
), and he comes to the following conclusion:--that with those species in which they are confined to the males, they are developed late in life; whereas with those species in which they are common to the two sexes, they are developed at a very early period.
This is certainly a striking confirmation of my two laws of inheritance.
In most of the species of the splendid family of the Pheasants, the males differ conspicuously from the females, and they acquire their ornaments at a rather late period of life.
The eared pheasant (Crossoptilon auritum), however, offers a remarkable exception, for both sexes possess the fine caudal plumes, the large ear-tufts and the crimson velvet about the head; I find that all these characters appear very early in life in
The adult male can, however, be distinguished from the adult female by the presence of spurs; and conformably with our rule, these do not begin to be developed before the age of six months, as I am assured by Mr. Bartlett, and even at this age, the two
(44.
In the common peacock (Pavo cristatus) the male alone possesses spurs, whilst both sexes of the Java Peacock (P.
muticus) offer the unusual case of being furnished with spurs.
Hence I fully expected that in the latter species they would have been developed earlier in life than in the common peacock; but M. Hegt of Amsterdam informs me, that with young birds of the previous year, of both species, compared on April 23rd, 1869,
The spurs, however, were as yet represented merely by slight knobs or elevations.
I presume that I should have been informed if any difference in the rate of development had been observed subsequently.
) The male and female Peacock differ conspicuously from each other in almost every part of their plumage, except in the elegant head-crest, which is common to both sexes; and this is developed very early in life, long before the other ornaments, which are
The wild-duck offers an analogous case, for the beautiful green speculum on the wings is common to both sexes, though duller and somewhat smaller in the female, and it is developed early in life, whilst the curled tail-feathers and other ornaments of the
(45.
In some other species of the Duck family the speculum differs in a greater degree in the two sexes; but I have not been able to discover whether its full development occurs later in life in the males of such species, than in the male of the common duck, as
With the allied Mergus cucullatus we have, however, a case of this kind: the two sexes differ conspicuously in general plumage, and to a considerable degree in the speculum, which is pure white in the male and greyish-white in the female.
Now the young males at first entirely resemble the females, and have a greyish-white speculum, which becomes pure white at an earlier age than that at which the adult male acquires his other and more strongly-marked sexual differences: see Audubon,
iii.
1835, pp.
249-250.
) Between such extreme cases of close sexual resemblance and wide dissimilarity, as those of the Crossoptilon and peacock, many intermediate ones could be given, in which the characters follow our two rules in their order of development.
As most insects emerge from the pupal state in a mature condition, it is doubtful whether the period of development can determine the transference of their characters to one or to both sexes.
But we do not know that the coloured scales, for instance, in two species of butterflies, in one of which the sexes differ in colour, whilst in the other they are alike, are developed at the same relative age in the cocoon.
Nor do we know whether all the scales are simultaneously developed on the wings of the same species of butterfly, in which certain coloured marks are confined to one sex, whilst others are common to both sexes.
A difference of this kind in the period of development is not so improbable as it may at first appear; for with the Orthoptera, which assume their adult state, not by a single metamorphosis, but by a succession of moults, the young males of some species at
Strictly analogous cases occur at the successive moults of certain male crustaceans.
We have as yet considered the transference of characters, relatively to their period of development, only in species in a natural state; we will now turn to domesticated animals, and first touch on monstrosities and diseases.
The presence of supernumerary digits, and the absence of certain phalanges, must be determined at an early embryonic period--the tendency to profuse bleeding is at least congenital, as is probably colour-blindness-- yet these peculiarities, and other
But this rule, as before remarked, does not appear to be nearly so general as the converse one, namely, that characters which appear late in life in one sex are transmitted exclusively to the same sex.
From the fact of the above abnormal peculiarities becoming attached to one sex, long before the sexual functions are active, we may infer that there must be some difference between the sexes at an extremely early age.
With respect to sexually-limited diseases, we know too little of the period at which they originate, to draw any safe conclusion.
Gout, however, seems to fall under our rule, for it is generally caused by intemperance during manhood, and is transmitted from the father to his sons in a much more marked manner than to his daughters.
In the various domestic breeds of sheep, goats, and cattle, the males differ from their respective females in the shape or development of their horns, forehead, mane, dewlap, tail, and hump on the shoulders; and these peculiarities, in accordance with our
The sexes of dogs do not differ, except that in certain breeds, especially in the Scotch deer-hound, the male is much larger and heavier than the female; and, as we shall see in a future chapter, the male goes on increasing in size to an unusually late
On the other hand, the tortoise- shell colour, which is confined to female cats, is quite distinct at birth, and this case violates the rule.
There is a breed of pigeons in which the males alone are streaked with black, and the streaks can be detected even in the nestlings; but they become more conspicuous at each successive moult, so that this case partly opposes and partly supports the rule.
With the English Carrier and Pouter pigeons, the full development of the wattle and the crop occurs rather late in life, and conformably with the rule, these characters are transmitted in full perfection to the males alone.
The following cases perhaps come within the class previously alluded to, in which both sexes have varied in the same manner at a rather late period of life, and have consequently transferred their new characters to both sexes at a corresponding late
'Das Ganze der Taubenzucht,' 1837, ss.
21, 24.
For the case of the streaked pigeons, see Dr. Chapuis, 'Le pigeon voyageur Belge,' 1865, p.
87.
), in which both sexes change their colour during two or three moults (as is likewise the case with the Almond Tumbler); nevertheless, these changes, though occurring rather late in life, are common to both sexes.
One variety of the Canary-bird, namely the London Prize, offers a nearly analogous case.
With the breeds of the Fowl the inheritance of various characters by one or both sexes, seems generally determined by the period at which such characters are developed.
Thus in all the many breeds in which the adult male differs greatly in colour from the female, as well as from the wild parent-species, he differs also from the young male, so that the newly- acquired characters must have appeared at a rather late period
On the other hand, in most of the breeds in which the two sexes resemble each other, the young are coloured in nearly the same manner as their parents, and this renders it probable that their colours first appeared early in life.
We have instances of this fact in all black and white breeds, in which the young and old of both sexes are alike; nor can it be maintained that there is something peculiar in a black or white plumage, which leads to its transference to both sexes; for the
With the so-called Cuckoo sub-breeds of the fowl, in which the feathers are transversely pencilled with dark stripes, both sexes and the chickens are coloured in nearly the same manner.
The laced plumage of the Sebright bantam is the same in both sexes, and in the young chickens the wing- feathers are distinctly, though imperfectly laced.
Spangled Hamburgs, however, offer a partial exception; for the two sexes, though not quite alike, resemble each other more closely than do the sexes of the aboriginal parent-species; yet they acquire their characteristic plumage late in life, for the
With respect to other characters besides colour, in the wild-parent species and in most of the domestic breeds, the males alone possess a well-developed comb; but in the young of the Spanish fowl it is largely developed at a very early age, and, in
In the Game breeds pugnacity is developed at a wonderfully early age, of which curious proofs could be given; and this character is transmitted to both sexes, so that the hens, from their extreme pugnacity, are now generally exhibited in separate pens.
With the Polish breeds the bony protuberance of the skull which supports the crest is partially developed even before the chickens are hatched, and the crest itself soon begins to grow, though at first feebly (47.
For full particulars and references on all these points respecting the several breeds of the Fowl, see 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
pp.
250, 256.
In regard to the higher animals, the sexual differences which have arisen under domestication are described in the same work under the head of each species.
); and in this breed the adults of both sexes are characterised by a great bony protuberance and an immense crest.
Finally, from what we have now seen of the relation which exists in many natural species and domesticated races, between the period of the development of their characters and the manner of their transmission--for example, the striking fact of the early
And secondly, that one, though apparently a less efficient cause of characters being inherited by both sexes, is their development at an early age, whilst the sexes differ but little in constitution.
It appears, however, that some difference must exist between the sexes even during a very early embryonic period, for characters developed at this age not rarely become attached to one sex.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS.
From the foregoing discussion on the various laws of inheritance, we learn that the characters of the parents often, or even generally, tend to become developed in the offspring of the same sex, at the same age, and periodically at the same season of the
But these rules, owing to unknown causes, are far from being fixed.
Hence during the modification of a species, the successive changes may readily be transmitted in different ways; some to one sex, and some to both; some to the offspring at one age, and some to the offspring at all ages.
Not only are the laws of inheritance extremely complex, but so are the causes which induce and govern variability.
The variations thus induced are preserved and accumulated by sexual selection, which is in itself an extremely complex affair, depending, as it does, on the ardour in love, the courage, and the rivalry of the males, as well as on the powers of perception,
Sexual selection will also be largely dominated by natural selection tending towards the general welfare of the species.
Hence the manner in which the individuals of either or both sexes have been affected through sexual selection cannot fail to be complex in the highest degree.
When variations occur late in life in one sex, and are transmitted to the same sex at the same age, the other sex and the young are left unmodified.
When they occur late in life, but are transmitted to both sexes at the same age, the young alone are left unmodified.
Variations, however, may occur at any period of life in one sex or in both, and be transmitted to both sexes at all ages, and then all the individuals of the species are similarly modified.
In the following chapters it will be seen that all these cases frequently occur in nature.
Sexual selection can never act on any animal before the age for reproduction arrives.
From the great eagerness of the male it has generally acted on this sex and not on the females.
The males have thus become provided with weapons for fighting with their rivals, with organs for discovering and securely holding the female, and for exciting or charming her.
When the sexes differ in these respects, it is also, as we have seen, an extremely general law that the adult male differs more or less from the young male; and we may conclude from this fact that the successive variations, by which the adult male became
Whenever some or many of the variations occurred early in life, the young males would partake more or less of the characters of the adult males; and differences of this kind between the old and young males may be observed in many species of animals.
It is probable that young male animals have often tended to vary in a manner which would not only have been of no use to them at an early age, but would have been actually injurious--as by acquiring bright colours, which would render them conspicuous to
Variations of this kind occurring in the young males would almost certainly be eliminated through natural selection.
With the adult and experienced males, on the other hand, the advantages derived from the acquisition of such characters, would more than counterbalance some exposure to danger, and some loss of vital force.
As variations which give to the male a better chance of conquering other males, or of finding, securing, or charming the opposite sex, would, if they happened to arise in the female, be of no service to her, they would not be preserved in her through
We have also good evidence with domesticated animals, that variations of all kinds are, if not carefully selected, soon lost through intercrossing and accidental deaths.
Consequently in a state of nature, if variations of the above kind chanced to arise in the female line, and to be transmitted exclusively in this line, they would be extremely liable to be lost.
If, however, the females varied and transmitted their newly acquired characters to their offspring of both sexes, the characters which were advantageous to the males would be preserved by them through sexual selection, and the two sexes would in
Lastly, the females may acquire, and apparently have often acquired by transference, characters from the male sex.
As variations occurring later in life, and transmitted to one sex alone, have incessantly been taken advantage of and accumulated through sexual selection in relation to the reproduction of the species; therefore it appears, at first sight, an
If this had occurred, the two sexes would often have been differently modified, for the sake, for instance, of capturing prey or of escaping from danger.
Differences of this kind between the two sexes do occasionally occur, especially in the lower classes.
But this implies that the two sexes follow different habits in their struggles for existence, which is a rare circumstance with the higher animals.
The case, however, is widely different with the reproductive functions, in which respect the sexes necessarily differ.
For variations in structure which are related to these functions, have often proved of value to one sex, and from having arisen at a late period of life, have been transmitted to one sex alone; and such variations, thus preserved and transmitted, have
In the following chapters, I shall treat of the secondary sexual characters in animals of all classes, and shall endeavour in each case to apply the principles explained in the present chapter.
The lowest classes will detain us for a very short time, but the higher animals, especially birds, must be treated at considerable length.
It should be borne in mind that for reasons already assigned, I intend to give only a few illustrative instances of the innumerable structures by the aid of which the male finds the female, or, when found, holds her.
On the other hand, all structures and instincts by the aid of which the male conquers other males, and by which he allures or excites the female, will be fully discussed, as these are in many ways the most interesting.
SUPPLEMENT ON THE PROPORTIONAL NUMBERS OF THE TWO SEXES IN ANIMALS BELONGING TO VARIOUS CLASSES.
As no one, as far as I can discover, has paid attention to the relative numbers of the two sexes throughout the animal kingdom, I will here give such materials as I have been able to collect, although they are extremely imperfect.
They consist in only a few instances of actual enumeration, and the numbers are not very large.
As the proportions are known with certainty only in mankind, I will first give them as a standard of comparison.
MAN.
In England during ten years (from 1857 to 1866) the average number of children born alive yearly was 707,120, in the proportion of 104.
5 males to 100 females.
But in 1857 the male births throughout England were as 105.
2, and in 1865 as 104.
0 to 100.
Looking to separate districts, in Buckinghamshire (where about 5000 children are annually born) the MEAN proportion of male to female births, during the whole period of the above ten years, was as 102.
8 to 100; whilst in N. Wales (where the average annual births are 12,873) it was as high as 106.
2 to 100.
Taking a still smaller district, viz.
, Rutlandshire (where the annual births average only 739), in 1864 the male births were as 114.
6, and in 1862 as only 97.
0 to 100; but even in this small district the average of the 7385 births during the whole ten years, was as 104.
5 to 100: that is in the same ratio as throughout England.
(48.
'Twenty-ninth Annual Report of the Registrar- General for 1866.
' In this report (p.
xii.
) a special decennial table is given.
) The proportions are sometimes slightly disturbed by unknown causes; thus Prof.
Faye states "that in some districts of Norway there has been during a decennial period a steady deficiency of boys, whilst in others the opposite condition has existed".
In France during forty-four years the male to the female births have been as 106.
2 to 100; but during this period it has occurred five times in one department, and six times in another, that the female births have exceeded the males.
In Russia the average proportion is as high as 108.
9, and in Philadelphia in the United States as 110.
5 to 100.
(49.
For Norway and Russia, see abstract of Prof.
Faye's researches, in 'British and Foreign Medico-Chirurg.
Review,' April 1867, pp.
343, 345.
For France, the 'Annuaire pour l'An 1867,' p.
213.
For Philadelphia, Dr. Stockton Hough, 'Social Science Assoc.
' 1874.
For the Cape of Good Hope, Quetelet as quoted by Dr. H.H. Zouteveen, in the Dutch Translation of this work (vol.
i.
p.
417), where much information is given on the proportion of the sexes.
) The average for Europe, deduced by Bickes from about seventy million births, is 106 males to 100 females.
On the other hand, with white children born at the Cape of Good Hope, the proportion of males is so low as to fluctuate during successive years between 90 and 99 males for every 100 females.
It is a singular fact that with Jews the proportion of male births is decidedly larger than with Christians: thus in Prussia the proportion is as 113, in Breslau as 114, and in Livonia as 120 to 100; the Christian births in these countries being the same
(50.
In regard to the Jews, see M. Thury, 'La Loi de Production des Sexes,' 1863, p.
25.
) Prof.
Faye remarks that "a still greater preponderance of males would be met with, if death struck both sexes in equal proportion in the womb and during birth.
But the fact is, that for every 100 still-born females, we have in several countries from 134.
6 to 144.
9 still-born males.
During the first four or five years of life, also, more male children die than females, for example in England, during the first year, 126 boys die for every 100 girls--a proportion which in France is still more unfavourable".
(51.
'British and Foreign Medico-Chirurg.
Review,' April 1867, p.
343.
Dr. Stark also remarks ('Tenth Annual Report of Births, Deaths, etc.
, in Scotland,' 1867, p.
xxviii.
) that "These examples may suffice to show that, at almost every stage of life, the males in Scotland have a greater liability to death and a higher death-rate than the females.
The fact, however, of this peculiarity being most strongly developed at that infantile period of life when the dress, food, and general treatment of both sexes are alike, seems to prove that the higher male death-rate is an impressed, natural, and
) Dr. Stockton Hough accounts for these facts in part by the more frequent defective development of males than of females.
We have before seen that the male sex is more variable in structure than the female; and variations in important organs would generally be injurious.
But the size of the body, and especially of the head, being greater in male than female infants is another cause: for the males are thus more liable to be injured during parturition.
Consequently the still-born males are more numerous; and, as a highly competent judge, Dr. Crichton Browne (52.
'West Riding Lunatic Asylum Reports,' vol.
i.
1871, p.
8.
Sir J. Simpson has proved that the head of the male infant exceeds that of the female by 3/8ths of an inch in circumference, and by 1/8th in transverse diameter.
Quetelet has shewn that woman is born smaller than man; see Dr. Duncan, 'Fecundity, Fertility, and Sterility,' 1871, p.
382.
), believes, male infants often suffer in health for some years after birth.
Owing to this excess in the death-rate of male children, both at birth and for some time subsequently, and owing to the exposure of grown men to various dangers, and to their tendency to emigrate, the females in all old-settled countries, where statistical
(53.
With the savage Guaranys of Paraguay, according to the accurate Azara ('Voyages dans l'Amerique merid.
' tom.
ii.
1809, pp.
60, 179), the women are to the men in the proportion of 14 to 13.
) It seems at first sight a mysterious fact that in different nations, under different conditions and climates, in Naples, Prussia, Westphalia, Holland, France, England and the United States, the excess of male over female births is less when they are
(54.
Babbage, 'Edinburgh Journal of Science,' 1829, vol.
i.
p.
88; also p.
90, on still-born children.
On illegitimate children in England, see 'Report of Registrar-General for 1866,' p.
xv.
) This has been explained by different writers in many different ways, as from the mothers being generally young, from the large proportion of first pregnancies, etc.
But we have seen that male infants, from the large size of their heads, suffer more than female infants during parturition; and as the mothers of illegitimate children must be more liable than other women to undergo bad labours, from various causes, such
, their male infants would proportionably suffer.
And this probably is the most efficient of all the causes of the proportion of males to females born alive being less amongst illegitimate children than amongst the legitimate.
With most animals the greater size of the adult male than of the female, is due to the stronger males having conquered the weaker in their struggles for the possession of the females, and no doubt it is owing to this fact that the two sexes of at least
Thus we have the curious fact that we may attribute the more frequent deaths of male than female infants, especially amongst the illegitimate, at least in part to sexual selection.
It has often been supposed that the relative age of the two parents determine the sex of the offspring; and Prof.
Leuckart (55.
Leuckart, in Wagner 'Handwrterbuch der Phys.
' B. iv.
1853, s.
774.
) has advanced what he considers sufficient evidence, with respect to man and certain domesticated animals, that this is one important though not the sole factor in the result.
So again the period of impregnation relatively to the state of the female has been thought by some to be the efficient cause; but recent observations discountenance this belief.
According to Dr. Stockton Hough (56.
'Social Science Association of Philadelphia,' 1874.
), the season of the year, the poverty or wealth of the parents, residence in the country or in cities, the crossing of foreign immigrants, etc.
, all influence the proportion of the sexes.
With mankind, polygamy has also been supposed to lead to the birth of a greater proportion of female infants; but Dr. J. Campbell (57.
'Anthropological Review,' April 1870, p.
cviii.
) carefully attended to this subject in the harems of Siam, and concludes that the proportion of male to female births is the same as from monogamous unions.
Hardly any animal has been rendered so highly polygamous as the English race-horse, and we shall immediately see that his male and female offspring are almost exactly equal in number.
I will now give the facts which I have collected with respect to the proportional numbers of the sexes of various animals; and will then briefly discuss how far selection has come into play in determining the result.
HORSES.
Mr. Tegetmeier has been so kind as to tabulate for me from the 'Racing Calendar' the births of race-horses during a period of twenty-one years, viz.
, from 1846 to 1867; 1849 being omitted, as no returns were that year published.
The total births were 25,560 (58.
During eleven years a record was kept of the number of mares which proved barren or prematurely slipped their foals; and it deserves notice, as shewing how infertile these highly- nurtured and rather closely-interbred animals have become, that not far from
Thus during 1866, 809 male colts and 816 female colts were born, and 743 mares failed to produce offspring.
During 1867, 836 males and 902 females were born, and 794 mares failed.
), consisting of 12,763 males and 12,797 females, or in the proportion of 99.
7 males to 100 females.
As these numbers are tolerably large, and as they are drawn from all parts of England, during several years, we may with much confidence conclude that with the domestic horse, or at least with the race-horse, the two sexes are produced in almost equal
The fluctuations in the proportions during successive years are closely like those which occur with mankind, when a small and thinly-populated area is considered; thus in 1856 the male horses were as 107.
1, and in 1867 as only 92.
6 to 100 females.
In the tabulated returns the proportions vary in cycles, for the males exceeded the females during six successive years; and the females exceeded the males during two periods each of four years; this, however, may be accidental; at least I can detect
DOGS.
During a period of twelve years, from 1857 to 1868, the births of a large number of greyhounds, throughout England, were sent to the 'Field' newspaper; and I am again indebted to Mr. Tegetmeier for carefully tabulating the results.
The recorded births were 6878, consisting of 3605 males and 3273 females, that is, in the proportion of 110.
1 males to 100 females.
The greatest fluctuations occurred in 1864, when the proportion was as 95.
3 males, and in 1867, as 116.
3 males to 100 females.
The above average proportion of 110.
1 to 100 is probably nearly correct in the case of the greyhound, but whether it would hold with other domesticated breeds is in some degree doubtful.
Mr. Cupples has enquired from several great breeders of dogs, and finds that all without exception believe that females are produced in excess; but he suggests that this belief may have arisen from females being less valued, and from the consequent
SHEEP.
The sexes of sheep are not ascertained by agriculturists until several months after birth, at the period when the males are castrated; so that the following returns do not give the proportions at birth.
Moreover, I find that several great breeders in Scotland, who annually raise some thousand sheep, are firmly convinced that a larger proportion of males than of females die during the first year or two.
Therefore the proportion of males would be somewhat larger at birth than at the age of castration.
This is a remarkable coincidence with what, as we have seen, occurs with mankind, and both cases probably depend on the same cause.
I have received returns from four gentlemen in England who have bred Lowland sheep, chiefly Leicesters, during the last ten to sixteen years; they amount altogether to 8965 births, consisting of 4407 males and 4558 females; that is in the proportion of 96.
7 males to 100 females.
With respect to Cheviot and black-faced sheep bred in Scotland, I have received returns from six breeders, two of them on a large scale, chiefly for the years 1867-1869, but some of the returns extend back to 1862.
The total number recorded amounts to 50,685, consisting of 25,071 males and 25,614 females or in the proportion of 97.
9 males to 100 females.
If we take the English and Scotch returns together, the total number amounts to 59,650, consisting of 29,478 males and 30,172 females, or as 97.
7 to 100.
So that with sheep at the age of castration the females are certainly in excess of the males, but probably this would not hold good at birth.
(59.
I am much indebted to Mr. Cupples for having procured for me the above returns from Scotland, as well as some of the following returns on cattle.
Mr. R. Elliot, of Laighwood, first called my attention to the premature deaths of the males, --a statement subsequently confirmed by Mr. Aitchison and others.
To this latter gentleman, and to Mr. Payan, I owe my thanks for large returns as to sheep.
) Of CATTLE I have received returns from nine gentlemen of 982 births, too few to be trusted; these consisted of 477 bull-calves and 505 cow-calves; i.
e.
, in the proportion of 94.
4 males to 100 females.
The Rev.
W.D. Fox informs me that in 1867 out of 34 calves born on a farm in Derbyshire only one was a bull.
Mr. Harrison Weir has enquired from several breeders of PIGS, and most of them estimate the male to the female births as about 7 to 6.
This same gentleman has bred RABBITS for many years, and has noticed that a far greater number of bucks are produced than does.
But estimations are of little value.
Of mammalia in a state of nature I have been able to learn very little.
In regard to the common rat, I have received conflicting statements.
Mr. R. Elliot, of Laighwood, informs me that a rat-catcher assured him that he had always found the males in great excess, even with the young in the nest.
In consequence of this, Mr. Elliot himself subsequently examined some hundred old ones, and found the statement true.
Mr. F. Buckland has bred a large number of white rats, and he also believes that the males greatly exceed the females.
In regard to Moles, it is said that "the males are much more numerous than the females" (60.
Bell, 'History of British Quadrupeds,' p.
100.
): and as the catching of these animals is a special occupation, the statement may perhaps be trusted.
Sir A. Smith, in describing an antelope of S. Africa (61.
'Illustrations of the Zoology of S. Africa,' 1849, pl.
29.
) (Kobus ellipsiprymnus), remarks, that in the herds of this and other species, the males are few in number compared with the females: the natives believe that they are born in this proportion; others believe that the younger males are expelled from the
It appears probable that the young when expelled from the herd, would often fall a prey to the many beasts of prey of the country.
BIRDS.
With respect to the FOWL, I have received only one account, namely, that out of 1001 chickens of a highly-bred stock of Cochins, reared during eight years by Mr. Stretch, 487 proved males and 514 females; i.
e.
, as 94.
7 to 100.
In regard to domestic pigeons there is good evidence either that the males are produced in excess, or that they live longer; for these birds invariably pair, and single males, as Mr. Tegetmeier informs me, can always be purchased cheaper than females.
Usually the two birds reared from the two eggs laid in the same nest are a male and a female; but Mr. Harrison Weir, who has been so large a breeder, says that he has often bred two cocks from the same nest, and seldom two hens; moreover, the hen is
With respect to birds in a state of nature, Mr. Gould and others (62.
Brehm ('Thierleben,' B. iv.
s.
990) comes to the same conclusion.
) are convinced that the males are generally the more numerous; and as the young males of many species resemble the females, the latter would naturally appear to be the more numerous.
Large numbers of pheasants are reared by Mr. Baker of Leadenhall from eggs laid by wild birds, and he informs Mr. Jenner Weir that four or five males to one female are generally produced.
An experienced observer remarks (63.
On the authority of L. Lloyd, 'Game Birds of Sweden,' 1867, pp.
12, 132.
), that in Scandinavia the broods of the capercailzie and black-cock contain more males than females; and that with the Dal-ripa (a kind of ptarmigan) more males than females attend the leks or places of courtship; but this latter circumstance is accounted
From various facts given by White of Selborne (64.
'Nat.
Hist.
of Selborne,' letter xxix.
edit.
of 1825, vol.
i.
p.
139.
), it seems clear that the males of the partridge must be in considerable excess in the south of England; and I have been assured that this is the case in Scotland.
Mr. Weir on enquiring from the dealers, who receive at certain seasons large numbers of ruffs (Machetes pugnax), was told that the males are much the more numerous.
This same naturalist has also enquired for me from the birdcatchers, who annually catch an astonishing number of various small species alive for the London market, and he was unhesitatingly answered by an old and trustworthy man, that with the chaffinch
(65.
Mr. Jenner Weir received similar information, on making enquiries during the following year.
To shew the number of living chaffinches caught, I may mention that in 1869 there was a match between two experts, and one man caught in a day 62, and another 40, male chaffinches.
The greatest number ever caught by one man in a single day was 70.
) The males of the blackbird, he likewise maintained, were by far the more numerous, whether caught by traps or by netting at night.
These statements may apparently be trusted, because this same man said that the sexes are about equal with the lark, the twite (Linaria montana), and goldfinch.
On the other hand, he is certain that with the common linnet, the females preponderate greatly, but unequally during different years; during some years he has found the females to the males as four to one.
It should, however, be borne in mind, that the chief season for catching birds does not begin till September, so that with some species partial migrations may have begun, and the flocks at this period often consist of hens alone.
Mr. Salvin paid particular attention to the sexes of the humming-birds in Central America, and is convinced that with most of the species the males are in excess; thus one year he procured 204 specimens belonging to ten species, and these consisted of 166
With two other species the females were in excess: but the proportions apparently vary either during different seasons or in different localities; for on one occasion the males of Campylopterus hemileucurus were to the females as 5 to 2, and on another
'Ibis,' vol.
ii.
p.
260, as quoted in Gould's 'Trochilidae,' 1861, p.
52.
For the foregoing proportions, I am indebted to Mr. Salvin for a table of his results.
) in exactly the reversed ratio.
As bearing on this latter point, I may add, that Mr. Powys found in Corfu and Epirus the sexes of the chaffinch keeping apart, and "the females by far the most numerous"; whilst in Palestine Mr. Tristram found "the male flocks appearing greatly to exceed
(67.
'Ibis,' 1860, p.
137; and 1867, p.
369.
) So again with the Quiscalus major, Mr. G. Taylor says, that in Florida there were "very few females in proportion to the males," (68.
'Ibis,' 1862, p.
187.
) whilst in Honduras the proportion was the other way, the species there having the character of a polygamist.
FISH.
With fish the proportional numbers of the sexes can be ascertained only by catching them in the adult or nearly adult state; and there are many difficulties in arriving at any just conclusion.
(69.
Leuckart quotes Bloch (Wagner, 'Handwrterbuch der Phys.
' B. iv.
1853, s.
775), that with fish there are twice as many males as females.
) Infertile females might readily be mistaken for males, as Dr. Gunther has remarked to me in regard to trout.
With some species the males are believed to die soon after fertilising the ova.
With many species the males are of much smaller size than the females, so that a large number of males would escape from the same net by which the females were caught.
M. Carbonnier (70.
Quoted in the 'Farmer,' March 18, 1869, p.
369.
), who has especially attended to the natural history of the pike (Esox lucius), states that many males, owing to their small size, are devoured by the larger females; and he believes that the males of almost all fish are exposed from this same cause to
Nevertheless, in the few cases in which the proportional numbers have been actually observed, the males appear to be largely in excess.
Thus Mr. R. Buist, the superintendent of the Stormontfield experiments, says that in 1865, out of 70 salmon first landed for the purpose of obtaining the ova, upwards of 60 were males.
In 1867 he again "calls attention to the vast disproportion of the males to the females.
We had at the outset at least ten males to one female".
Afterwards females sufficient for obtaining ova were procured.
He adds, "from the great proportion of the males, they are constantly fighting and tearing each other on the spawning-beds".
(71.
'The Stormontfield Piscicultural Experiments,' 1866, p.
23.
The 'Field' newspaper, June 29, 1867.
) This disproportion, no doubt, can be accounted for in part, but whether wholly is doubtful, by the males ascending the rivers before the females.
Mr. F. Buckland remarks in regard to trout, that "it is a curious fact that the males preponderate very largely in number over the females.
It INVARIABLY happens that when the first rush of fish is made to the net, there will be at least seven or eight males to one female found captive.
I cannot quite account for this; either the males are more numerous than the females, or the latter seek safety by concealment rather than flight".
He then adds, that by carefully searching the banks sufficient females for obtaining ova can be found.
(72.
'Land and Water,' 1868, p.
41.
) Mr. H. Lee informs me that out of 212 trout, taken for this purpose in Lord Portsmouth's park, 150 were males and 62 females.
The males of the Cyprinidae likewise seem to be in excess; but several members of this Family, viz.
, the carp, tench, bream and minnow, appear regularly to follow the practice, rare in the animal kingdom, of polyandry; for the female whilst spawning is always attended by two males, one on each side, and in the case of the bream by three or four males.
This fact is so well known, that it is always recommended to stock a pond with two male tenches to one female, or at least with three males to two females.
With the minnow, an excellent observer states, that on the spawning-beds the males are ten times as numerous as the females; when a female comes amongst the males, "she is immediately pressed closely by a male on each side; and when they have been in that
(73.
Yarrell, 'Hist.
British Fishes,' vol.
i.
1826, p.
307; on the Cyprinus carpio, p.
331; on the Tinca vulgaris, p.
331; on the Abramis brama, p.
336.
See, for the minnow (Leuciscus phoxinus), 'Loudon's Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
v.
1832, p.
682.
) INSECTS.
In this great Class, the Lepidoptera almost alone afford means for judging of the proportional numbers of the sexes; for they have been collected with special care by many good observers, and have been largely bred from the egg or caterpillar state.
I had hoped that some breeders of silk-moths might have kept an exact record, but after writing to France and Italy, and consulting various treatises, I cannot find that this has ever been done.
The general opinion appears to be that the sexes are nearly equal, but in Italy, as I hear from Professor Canestrini, many breeders are convinced that the females are produced in excess.
This same naturalist, however, informs me, that in the two yearly broods of the Ailanthus silk-moth (Bombyx cynthia), the males greatly preponderate in the first, whilst in the second the two sexes are nearly equal, or the females rather in excess.
In regard to Butterflies in a state of nature, several observers have been much struck by the apparently enormous preponderance of the males.
(74.
Leuckart quotes Meinecke (Wagner, 'Handwrterbuch der Phys.
' B. iv.
1853, s.
775) that the males of Butterflies are three or four times as numerous as the females.
) Thus Mr. Bates (75.
'The Naturalist on the Amazons,' vol.
ii.
1863, pp.
228, 347.
), in speaking of several species, about a hundred in number, which inhabit the upper Amazons, says that the males are much more numerous than the females, even in the proportion of a hundred to one.
In North America, Edwards, who had great experience, estimates in the genus Papilio the males to the females as four to one; and Mr. Walsh, who informed me of this statement, says that with P. turnus this is certainly the case.
In South Africa, Mr. R. Trimen found the males in excess in 19 species (76.
Four of these cases are given by Mr. Trimen in his 'Rhopalocera Africae Australis.
'); and in one of these, which swarms in open places, he estimated the number of males as fifty to one female.
With another species, in which the males are numerous in certain localities, he collected only five females during seven years.
In the island of Bourbon, M. Maillard states that the males of one species of Papilio are twenty times as numerous as the females.
(77.
Quoted by Trimen, 'Transactions of the Ent.
Society,' vol.
v.
part iv.
1866, p.
330.
) Mr. Trimen informs me that as far as he has himself seen, or heard from others, it is rare for the females of any butterfly to exceed the males in number; but three South African species perhaps offer an exception.
Mr. Wallace (78.
'Transactions, Linnean Society,' vol.
xxv.
p.
37.
) states that the females of Ornithoptera croesus, in the Malay archipelago, are more common and more easily caught than the males; but this is a rare butterfly.
I may here add, that in Hyperythra, a genus of moths, Guenee says, that from four to five females are sent in collections from India for one male.
When this subject of the proportional numbers of the sexes of insects was brought before the Entomological Society (79.
'Proceedings, Entomological Society,' Feb.
17, 1868.
), it was generally admitted that the males of most Lepidoptera, in the adult or imago state, are caught in greater numbers than the females: but this fact was attributed by various observers to the more retiring habits of the females, and to the males
This latter circumstance is well known to occur with most Lepidoptera, as well as with other insects.
So that, as M. Personnat remarks, the males of the domesticated Bombyx Yamamai, are useless at the beginning of the season, and the females at the end, from the want of mates.
(80.
Quoted by Dr. Wallace in 'Proceedings, Entomological Society,' 3rd series, vol.
v.
1867, p.
487.
) I cannot, however, persuade myself that these causes suffice to explain the great excess of males, in the above cases of certain butterflies which are extremely common in their native countries.
Mr. Stainton, who has paid very close attention during many years to the smaller moths, informs me that when he collected them in the imago state, he thought that the males were ten times as numerous as the females, but that since he has reared them on a
Several entomologists concur in this view.
Mr. Doubleday, however, and some others, take an opposite view, and are convinced that they have reared from the eggs and caterpillars a larger proportion of males than of females.
Besides the more active habits of the males, their earlier emergence from the cocoon, and in some cases their frequenting more open stations, other causes may be assigned for an apparent or real difference in the proportional numbers of the sexes of
I hear from Professor Canestrini, that it is believed by many breeders in Italy, that the female caterpillar of the silk-moth suffers more from the recent disease than the male; and Dr. Staudinger informs me that in rearing Lepidoptera more females die in
With many species the female caterpillar is larger than the male, and a collector would naturally choose the finest specimens, and thus unintentionally collect a larger number of females.
Three collectors have told me that this was their practice; but Dr. Wallace is sure that most collectors take all the specimens which they can find of the rarer kinds, which alone are worth the trouble of rearing.
Birds when surrounded by caterpillars would probably devour the largest; and Professor Canestrini informs me that in Italy some breeders believe, though on insufficient evidence, that in the first broods of the Ailanthus silk-moth, the wasps destroy a
Dr. Wallace further remarks that female caterpillars, from being larger than the males, require more time for their development, and consume more food and moisture: and thus they would be exposed during a longer time to danger from ichneumons, birds, etc.
, and in times of scarcity would perish in greater numbers.
Hence it appears quite possible that in a state of nature, fewer female Lepidoptera may reach maturity than males; and for our special object we are concerned with their relative numbers at maturity, when the sexes are ready to propagate their kind.
The manner in which the males of certain moths congregate in extraordinary numbers round a single female, apparently indicates a great excess of males, though this fact may perhaps be accounted for by the earlier emergence of the males from their cocoons.
Mr. Stainton informs me that from twelve to twenty males, may often be seen congregated round a female Elachista rufocinerea.
It is well known that if a virgin Lasiocampa quercus or Saturnia carpini be exposed in a cage, vast numbers of males collect round her, and if confined in a room will even come down the chimney to her.
Mr. Doubleday believes that he has seen from fifty to a hundred males of both these species attracted in the course of a single day by a female in confinement.
In the Isle of Wight Mr. Trimen exposed a box in which a female of the Lasiocampa had been confined on the previous day, and five males soon endeavoured to gain admittance.
In Australia, Mr. Verreaux, having placed the female of a small Bombyx in a box in his pocket, was followed by a crowd of males, so that about 200 entered the house with him.
(81.
Blanchard, 'Metamorphoses, Moeurs des Insectes,' 1868, pp.
225-226.
) Mr. Doubleday has called my attention to M. Staudinger's (82.
'Lepidopteren-Doubletten Liste,' Berlin, No.
x.
1866.
) list of Lepidoptera, which gives the prices of the males and females of 300 species or well- marked varieties of butterflies (Rhopalocera).
The prices for both sexes of the very common species are of course the same; but in 114 of the rarer species they differ; the males being in all cases, excepting one, the cheaper.
On an average of the prices of the 113 species, the price of the male to that of the female is as 100 to 149; and this apparently indicates that inversely the males exceed the females in the same proportion.
About 2000 species or varieties of moths (Heterocera) are catalogued, those with wingless females being here excluded on account of the difference in habits between the two sexes: of these 2000 species, 141 differ in price according to sex, the males of
The average price of the males of the 130 species, to that of the females, is as 100 to 143.
With respect to the butterflies in this priced list, Mr. Doubleday thinks (and no man in England has had more experience), that there is nothing in the habits of the species which can account for the difference in the prices of the two sexes, and that it
But I am bound to add that Dr. Staudinger informs me, that he is himself of a different opinion.
He thinks that the less active habits of the females and the earlier emergence of the males will account for his collectors securing a larger number of males than of females, and consequently for the lower prices of the former.
With respect to specimens reared from the caterpillar-state, Dr. Staudinger believes, as previously stated, that a greater number of females than of males die whilst confined to the cocoons.
He adds that with certain species one sex seems to preponderate over the other during certain years.
Of direct observations on the sexes of Lepidoptera, reared either from eggs or caterpillars, I have received only the few following cases: (See following table.
) So that in these eight lots of cocoons and eggs, males were produced in excess.
Taken together the proportion of males is as 122.
7 to 100 females.
But the numbers are hardly large enough to be trustworthy.
On the whole, from these various sources of evidence, all pointing in the same direction, I infer that with most species of Lepidoptera, the mature males generally exceed the females in number, whatever the proportions may be at their first emergence from
Males Females The Rev.
J. Hellins* of Exeter reared, during 1868, imagos of 73 species, which consisted of 153 137 Mr. Albert Jones of Eltham reared, during 1868, imagos of 9 species, which consisted of 159 126 During 1869 he reared imagos from 4 species consisting of 114 112
This naturalist has been so kind as to send me some results from former years, in which the females seemed to preponderate; but so many of the figures were estimates, that I found it impossible to tabulate them.
) With reference to the other Orders of insects, I have been able to collect very little reliable information.
With the stag-beetle (Lucanus cervus) "the males appear to be much more numerous than the females"; but when, as Cornelius remarked during 1867, an unusual number of these beetles appeared in one part of Germany, the females appeared to exceed the males as
With one of the Elateridae, the males are said to be much more numerous than the females, and "two or three are often found united with one female (84.
Gunther's 'Record of Zoological Literature,' 1867, p.
260.
On the excess of female Lucanus, ibid, p.
250.
On the males of Lucanus in England, Westwood,' 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
i.
p.
187.
On the Siagonium, ibid.
p.
172.
); so that here polyandry seems to prevail".
With Siagonium (Staphylinidae), in which the males are furnished with horns, "the females are far more numerous than the opposite sex".
Mr. Janson stated at the Entomological Society that the females of the bark feeding Tomicus villosus are so common as to be a plague, whilst the males are so rare as to be hardly known.
It is hardly worth while saying anything about the proportion of the sexes in certain species and even groups of insects, for the males are unknown or very rare, and the females are parthenogenetic, that is, fertile without sexual union; examples of this
(85.
Walsh in 'The American Entomologist,' vol.
i.
1869, p.
103.
F. Smith, 'Record of Zoological Lit.
' 1867, p.
328.
) In all the gall-making Cynipidae known to Mr. Walsh, the females are four or five times as numerous as the males; and so it is, as he informs me, with the gall-making Cecidomyiidae (Diptera).
With some common species of Saw-flies (Tenthredinae) Mr. F. Smith has reared hundreds of specimens from larvae of all sizes, but has never reared a single male; on the other hand, Curtis says (86.
'Farm Insects,' pp.
45-46.
), that with certain species (Athalia), bred by him, the males were to the females as six to one; whilst exactly the reverse occurred with the mature insects of the same species caught in the fields.
In the family of bees, Hermann Mller (87.
'Anwendung der Darwin'schen Lehre,' Verh.
d.
n.
Jahrg.
, xxiv.
), collected a large number of specimens of many species, and reared others from the cocoons, and counted the sexes.
He found that the males of some species greatly exceeded the females in number; in others the reverse occurred; and in others the two sexes were nearly equal.
But as in most cases the males emerge from the cocoons before the females, they are at the commencement of the breeding-season practically in excess.
Mller also observed that the relative number of the two sexes in some species differed much in different localities.
But as H. Mller has himself remarked to me, these remarks must be received with some caution, as one sex might more easily escape observation than the other.
Thus his brother Fritz Mller has noticed in Brazil that the two sexes of the same species of bee sometimes frequent different kinds of flowers.
With respect to the Orthoptera, I know hardly anything about the relative number of the sexes: Korte (88.
'Die Strich, Zug oder Wanderheuschrecke,' 1828, p.
20.
), however, says that out of 500 locusts which he examined, the males were to the females as five to six.
With the Neuroptera, Mr. Walsh states that in many, but by no means in all the species of the Odonatous group, there is a great overplus of males: in the genus Hetaerina, also, the males are generally at least four times as numerous as the females.
In certain species in the genus Gomphus the males are equally in excess, whilst in two other species, the females are twice or thrice as numerous as the males.
In some European species of Psocus thousands of females may be collected without a single male, whilst with other species of the same genus both sexes are common.
(89.
'Observations on N. American Neuroptera,' by H. Hagen and B.D. Walsh, 'Proceedings, Ent.
Soc.
Philadelphia,' Oct.
1863, pp.
168, 223, 239.
) In England, Mr. MacLachlan has captured hundreds of the female Apatania muliebris, but has never seen the male; and of Boreus hyemalis only four or five males have been seen here.
(90.
'Proceedings, Ent.
Soc.
London,' Feb.
17, 1868.
) With most of these species (excepting the Tenthredinae) there is at present no evidence that the females are subject to parthenogenesis; and thus we see how ignorant we are of the causes of the apparent discrepancy in the proportion of the two sexes.
In the other classes of the Articulata I have been able to collect still less information.
With spiders, Mr. Blackwall, who has carefully attended to this class during many years, writes to me that the males from their more erratic habits are more commonly seen, and therefore appear more numerous.
This is actually the case with a few species; but he mentions several species in six genera, in which the females appear to be much more numerous than the males.
(91.
Another great authority with respect to this class, Prof.
Thorell of Upsala ('On European Spiders,' 1869-70, part i.
p.
205), speaks as if female spiders were generally commoner than the males.
) The small size of the males in comparison with the females (a peculiarity which is sometimes carried to an extreme degree), and their widely different appearance, may account in some instances for their rarity in collections.
(92.
See, on this subject, Mr. O.P. Cambridge, as quoted in 'Quarterly Journal of Science,' 1868, page 429.
) Some of the lower Crustaceans are able to propagate their kind sexually, and this will account for the extreme rarity of the males; thus von Siebold (93.
'Beitrge zur Parthenogenesis,' p.
174.
) carefully examined no less than 13,000 specimens of Apus from twenty-one localities, and amongst these he found only 319 males.
With some other forms (as Tanais and Cypris), as Fritz Mller informs me, there is reason to believe that the males are much shorter-lived than the females; and this would explain their scarcity, supposing the two sexes to be at first equal in number.
On the other hand, Mller has invariably taken far more males than females of the Diastylidae and of Cypridina on the shores of Brazil: thus with a species in the latter genus, 63 specimens caught the same day included 57 males; but he suggests that this
With one of the higher Brazilian crabs, namely a Gelasimus, Fritz Mller found the males to be more numerous than the females.
According to the large experience of Mr. C. Spence Bate, the reverse seems to be the case with six common British crabs, the names of which he has given me.
THE PROPORTION OF THE SEXES IN RELATION TO NATURAL SELECTION.
There is reason to suspect that in some cases man has by selection indirectly influenced his own sex-producing powers.
Certain women tend to produce during their whole lives more children of one sex than of the other: and the same holds good of many animals, for instance, cows and horses; thus Mr. Wright of Yeldersley House informs me that one of his Arab mares, though put
Though I have very little evidence on this head, analogy would lead to the belief, that the tendency to produce either sex would be inherited like almost every other peculiarity, for instance, that of producing twins; and concerning the above tendency a
Col.
Marshall (94.
'The Todas,' 1873, pp.
100, 111, 194, 196.
) has recently found on careful examination that the Todas, a hill-tribe of India, consist of 112 males and 84 females of all ages--that is in a ratio of 133.
3 males to 100 females.
The Todas, who are polyandrous in their marriages, during former times invariably practised female infanticide; but this practice has now been discontinued for a considerable period.
Of the children born within late years, the males are more numerous than the females, in the proportion of 124 to 100.
Colonel Marshall accounts for this fact in the following ingenious manner.
"Let us for the purpose of illustration take three families as representing an average of the entire tribe; say that one mother gives birth to six daughters and no sons; a second mother has six sons only, whilst the third mother has three sons and three
The first mother, following the tribal custom, destroys four daughters and preserves two.
The second retains her six sons.
The third kills two daughters and keeps one, as also her three sons.
We have then from the three families, nine sons and three daughters, with which to continue the breed.
But whilst the males belong to families in which the tendency to produce sons is great, the females are of those of a converse inclination.
Thus the bias strengthens with each generation, until, as we find, families grow to have habitually more sons than daughters".
That this result would follow from the above form of infanticide seems almost certain; that is if we assume that a sex-producing tendency is inherited.
But as the above numbers are so extremely scanty, I have searched for additional evidence, but cannot decide whether what I have found is trustworthy; nevertheless the facts are, perhaps, worth giving.
The Maories of New Zealand have long practised infanticide; and Mr. Fenton (95.
'Aboriginal Inhabitants of New Zealand: Government Report,' 1859, p.
36.
) states that he "has met with instances of women who have destroyed four, six, and even seven children, mostly females.
However, the universal testimony of those best qualified to judge, is conclusive that this custom has for many years been almost extinct.
Probably the year 1835 may be named as the period of its ceasing to exist".
Now amongst the New Zealanders, as with the Todas, male births are considerably in excess.
Mr. Fenton remarks (p.
30), "One fact is certain, although the exact period of the commencement of this singular condition of the disproportion of the sexes cannot be demonstratively fixed, it is quite clear that this course of decrease was in full operation during the years
The following statements are taken from Mr. Fenton (p.
26), but as the numbers are not large, and as the census was not accurate, uniform results cannot be expected.
It should be borne in mind in this and the following cases, that the normal state of every population is an excess of women, at least in all civilised countries, chiefly owing to the greater mortality of the male sex during youth, and partly to accidents
In 1858, the native population of New Zealand was estimated as consisting of 31,667 males and 24,303 females of all ages, that is in the ratio of 130.
3 males to 100 females.
But during this same year, and in certain limited districts, the numbers were ascertained with much care, and the males of all ages were here 753 and the females 616; that is in the ratio of 122.
2 males to 100 females.
It is more important for us that during this same year of 1858, the NON-ADULT males within the same district were found to be 178, and the NON-ADULT females 142, that is in the ratio of 125.
3 to 100.
It may be added that in 1844, at which period female infanticide had only lately ceased, the NON-ADULT males in one district were 281, and the NON- ADULT females only 194, that is in the ratio of 144.
8 males to 100 females.
In the Sandwich Islands, the males exceed the females in number.
Infanticide was formerly practised there to a frightful extent, but was by no means confined to female infants, as is shewn by Mr. Ellis (96.
'Narrative of a Tour through Hawaii,' 1826, p.
298.
), and as I have been informed by Bishop Staley and the Rev.
Mr. Coan.
Nevertheless, another apparently trustworthy writer, Mr. Jarves (97.
'History of the Sandwich Islands,' 1843, p.
93.
), whose observations apply to the whole archipelago, remarks:--"Numbers of women are to be found, who confess to the murder of from three to six or eight children," and he adds, "females from being considered less useful than males were more often
From what is known to occur in other parts of the world, this statement is probable; but must be received with much caution.
The practice of infanticide ceased about the year 1819, when idolatry was abolished and missionaries settled in the Islands.
A careful census in 1839 of the adult and taxable men and women in the island of Kauai and in one district of Oahu (Jarves, p.
404), gives 4723 males and 3776 females; that is in the ratio of 125.
08 to 100.
At the same time the number of males under fourteen years in Kauai and under eighteen in Oahu was 1797, and of females of the same ages 1429; and here we have the ratio of 125.
75 males to 100 females.
In a census of all the islands in 1850 (98.
This is given in the Rev.
H.T. Cheever's 'Life in the Sandwich Islands,' 1851, p.
277.
), the males of all ages amount to 36,272, and the females to 33,128, or as 109.
49 to 100.
The males under seventeen years amounted to 10,773, and the females under the same age to 9593, or as 112.
3 to 100.
From the census of 1872, the proportion of males of all ages (including half-castes) to females, is as 125.
36 to 100.
It must be borne in mind that all these returns for the Sandwich Islands give the proportion of living males to living females, and not of the births; and judging from all civilised countries the proportion of males would have been considerably higher if
(99.
Dr. Coulter, in describing ('Journal R. Geograph.
Soc.
' vol.
v.
1835, p.
67) the state of California about the year 1830, says that the natives, reclaimed by the Spanish missionaries, have nearly all perished, or are perishing, although well treated, not driven from their native land, and kept from the use of spirits.
He attributes this, in great part, to the undoubted fact that the men greatly exceed the women in number; but he does not know whether this is due to a failure of female offspring, or to more females dying during early youth.
The latter alternative, according to all analogy, is very improbable.
He adds that "infanticide, properly so called, is not common, though very frequent recourse is had to abortion".
If Dr. Coulter is correct about infanticide, this case cannot be advanced in support of Colonel Marshall's view.
From the rapid decrease of the reclaimed natives, we may suspect that, as in the cases lately given, their fertility has been diminished from changed habits of life.
I had hoped to gain some light on this subject from the breeding of dogs; inasmuch as in most breeds, with the exception, perhaps, of greyhounds, many more female puppies are destroyed than males, just as with the Toda infants.
Mr. Cupples assures me that this is usual with Scotch deer- hounds.
Unfortunately, I know nothing of the proportion of the sexes in any breed, excepting greyhounds, and there the male births are to the females as 110.
1 to 100.
Now from enquiries made from many breeders, it seems that the females are in some respects more esteemed, though otherwise troublesome; and it does not appear that the female puppies of the best- bred dogs are systematically destroyed more than the males,
Therefore I am unable to decide whether we can, on the above principles, account for the preponderance of male births in greyhounds.
On the other hand, we have seen that with horses, cattle, and sheep, which are too valuable for the young of either sex to be destroyed, if there is any difference, the females are slightly in excess.
) From the several foregoing cases we have some reason to believe that infanticide practised in the manner above explained, tends to make a male- producing race; but I am far from supposing that this practice in the case of man, or some analogous process
There may be some unknown law leading to this result in decreasing races, which have already become somewhat infertile.
Besides the several causes previously alluded to, the greater facility of parturition amongst savages, and the less consequent injury to their male infants, would tend to increase the proportion of live-born males to females.
There does not, however, seem to be any necessary connection between savage life and a marked excess of males; that is if we may judge by the character of the scanty offspring of the lately existing Tasmanians and of the crossed offspring of the Tahitians
As the males and females of many animals differ somewhat in habits and are exposed in different degrees to danger, it is probable that in many cases, more of one sex than of the other are habitually destroyed.
But as far as I can trace out the complication of causes, an indiscriminate though large destruction of either sex would not tend to modify the sex-producing power of the species.
With strictly social animals, such as bees or ants, which produce a vast number of sterile and fertile females in comparison with the males, and to whom this preponderance is of paramount importance, we can see that those communities would flourish best
With animals living in herds or troops, in which the males come to the front and defend the herd, as with the bisons of North America and certain baboons, it is conceivable that a male- producing tendency might be gained by natural selection; for the
In the case of mankind the advantage arising from having a preponderance of men in the tribe is supposed to be one chief cause of the practice of female infanticide.
In no case, as far as we can see, would an inherited tendency to produce both sexes in equal numbers or to produce one sex in excess, be a direct advantage or disadvantage to certain individuals more than to others; for instance, an individual with a
Nevertheless, there are certain animals (for instance, fishes and cirripedes) in which two or more males appear to be necessary for the fertilisation of the female; and the males accordingly largely preponderate, but it is by no means obvious how this
I formerly thought that when a tendency to produce the two sexes in equal numbers was advantageous to the species, it would follow from natural selection, but I now see that the whole problem is so intricate that it is safer to leave its solution for the
CHAPTER IX.
SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS IN THE LOWER CLASSES OF THE ANIMAL KINGDOM.
These characters absent in the lowest classes--Brilliant colours--Mollusca --Annelids--Crustacea, secondary sexual characters strongly developed; dimorphism; colour; characters not acquired before maturity--Spiders, sexual colours of; stridulation by the
With animals belonging to the lower classes, the two sexes are not rarely united in the same individual, and therefore secondary sexual characters cannot be developed.
In many cases where the sexes are separate, both are permanently attached to some support, and the one cannot search or struggle for the other.
Moreover it is almost certain that these animals have too imperfect senses and much too low mental powers to appreciate each other's beauty or other attractions, or to feel rivalry.
Hence in these classes or sub-kingdoms, such as the Protozoa, Coelenterata, Echinodermata, Scolecida, secondary sexual characters, of the kind which we have to consider, do not occur: and this fact agrees with the belief that such characters in the higher
Nevertheless some few apparent exceptions occur; thus, as I hear from Dr. Baird, the males of certain Entozoa, or internal parasitic worms, differ slightly in colour from the females; but we have no reason to suppose that such differences have been
Contrivances by which the male holds the female, and which are indispensable for the propagation of the species, are independent of sexual selection, and have been acquired through ordinary selection.
Many of the lower animals, whether hermaphrodites or with separate sexes, are ornamented with the most brilliant tints, or are shaded and striped in an elegant manner; for instance, many corals and sea-anemones (Actiniae), some jelly-fish (Medusae,
), some Planariae, many star-fishes, Echini, Ascidians, etc.
; but we may conclude from the reasons already indicated, namely, the union of the two sexes in some of these animals, the permanently affixed condition of others, and the low mental powers of all, that such colours do not serve as a sexual attraction, and
It should be borne in mind that in no case have we sufficient evidence that colours have been thus acquired, except where one sex is much more brilliantly or conspicuously coloured than the other, and where there is no difference in habits between the
But the evidence is rendered as complete as it can ever be, only when the more ornamented individuals, almost always the males, voluntarily display their attractions before the other sex; for we cannot believe that such display is useless, and if it be
We may, however, extend this conclusion to both sexes, when coloured alike, if their colours are plainly analogous to those of one sex alone in certain other species of the same group.
How, then, are we to account for the beautiful or even gorgeous colours of many animals in the lowest classes?
It appears doubtful whether such colours often serve as a protection; but that we may easily err on this head, will be admitted by every one who reads Mr. Wallace's excellent essay on this subject.
It would not, for instance, at first occur to any one that the transparency of the Medusae, or jelly-fish, is of the highest service to them as a protection; but when we are reminded by Haeckel that not only the Medusae, but many floating Mollusca,
M. Giard is also convinced (1.
'Archives de Zoolog.
Exper.
' Oct.
1872, p.
563.
) that the bright tints of certain sponges and ascidians serve as a protection.
Conspicuous colours are likewise beneficial to many animals as a warning to their would-be devourers that they are distasteful, or that they possess some special means of defence; but this subject will be discussed more conveniently hereafter.
We can, in our ignorance of most of the lowest animals, only say that their bright tints result either from the chemical nature or the minute structure of their tissues, independently of any benefit thus derived.
Hardly any colour is finer than that of arterial blood; but there is no reason to suppose that the colour of the blood is in itself any advantage; and though it adds to the beauty of the maiden's cheek, no one will pretend that it has been acquired for
So again with many animals, especially the lower ones, the bile is richly coloured; thus, as I am informed by Mr. Hancock, the extreme beauty of the Eolidae (naked sea-slugs) is chiefly due to the biliary glands being seen through the translucent
The tints of the decaying leaves in an American forest are described by every one as gorgeous; yet no one supposes that these tints are of the least advantage to the trees.
Bearing in mind how many substances closely analogous to natural organic compounds have been recently formed by chemists, and which exhibit the most splendid colours, it would have been a strange fact if substances similarly coloured had not often
THE SUB-KINGDOM OF THE MOLLUSCA.
Throughout this great division of the animal kingdom, as far as I can discover, secondary sexual characters, such as we are here considering, never occur.
Nor could they be expected in the three lowest classes, namely, in the Ascidians, Polyzoa, and Brachiopods (constituting the Molluscoida of some authors), for most of these animals are permanently affixed to a support or have their sexes united in the same
In the Lamellibranchiata, or bivalve shells, hermaphroditism is not rare.
In the next higher class of the Gasteropoda, or univalve shells, the sexes are either united or separate.
But in the latter case the males never possess special organs for finding, securing, or charming the females, or for fighting with other males.
As I am informed by Mr. Gwyn Jeffreys, the sole external difference between the sexes consists in the shell sometimes differing a little in form; for instance, the shell of the male periwinkle (Littorina littorea) is narrower and has a more elongated spire
But differences of this nature, it may be presumed, are directly connected with the act of reproduction, or with the development of the ova.
The Gasteropoda, though capable of locomotion and furnished with imperfect eyes, do not appear to be endowed with sufficient mental powers for the members of the same sex to struggle together in rivalry, and thus to acquire secondary sexual characters.
Nevertheless with the pulmoniferous gasteropods, or land-snails, the pairing is preceded by courtship; for these animals, though hermaphrodites, are compelled by their structure to pair together.
Agassiz remarks, "Quiconque a eu l'occasion d'observer les amours des limaons, ne saurait mettre en doute la sduction deploye dans les mouvements et les allures qui prparent et accomplissent le double embrassement de ces hermaphrodites".
(2.
'De l'Espce et de la Class.
' etc.
, 1869, p.
106.
) These animals appear also susceptible of some degree of permanent attachment: an accurate observer, Mr. Lonsdale, informs me that he placed a pair of land-snails, (Helix pomatia), one of which was weakly, into a small and ill-provided garden.
After a short time the strong and healthy individual disappeared, and was traced by its track of slime over a wall into an adjoining well-stocked garden.
Mr. Lonsdale concluded that it had deserted its sickly mate; but after an absence of twenty-four hours it returned, and apparently communicated the result of its successful exploration, for both then started along the same track and disappeared over the
Even in the highest class of the Mollusca, the Cephalopoda or cuttle- fishes, in which the sexes are separate, secondary sexual characters of the present kind do not, as far as I can discover, occur.
This is a surprising circumstance, as these animals possess highly-developed sense-organs and have considerable mental powers, as will be admitted by every one who has watched their artful endeavours to escape from an enemy.
(3.
See, for instance, the account which I have given in my 'Journal of Researches,' 1845, p.
7.
) Certain Cephalopoda, however, are characterised by one extraordinary sexual character, namely that the male element collects within one of the arms or tentacles, which is then cast off, and clinging by its sucking-discs to the female, lives for a time an
So completely does the cast-off arm resemble a separate animal, that it was described by Cuvier as a parasitic worm under the name of Hectocotyle.
But this marvellous structure may be classed as a primary rather than as a secondary sexual character.
Although with the Mollusca sexual selection does not seem to have come into play; yet many univalve and bivalve shells, such as volutes, cones, scallops, etc.
, are beautifully coloured and shaped.
The colours do not appear in most cases to be of any use as a protection; they are probably the direct result, as in the lowest classes, of the nature of the tissues; the patterns and the sculpture of the shell depending on its manner of growth.
The amount of light seems to be influential to a certain extent; for although, as repeatedly stated by Mr. Gwyn Jeffreys, the shells of some species living at a profound depth are brightly coloured, yet we generally see the lower surfaces, as well as the
(4.
I have given ('Geological Observations on Volcanic Islands,' 1844, p.
53) a curious instance of the influence of light on the colours of a frondescent incrustation, deposited by the surf on the coast-rocks of Ascension and formed by the solution of triturated sea-shells.
) In some cases, as with shells living amongst corals or brightly-tinted seaweeds, the bright colours may serve as a protection.
(5.
Dr. Morse has lately discussed this subject in his paper on the 'Adaptive Coloration of Mollusca,' 'Proc.
Boston Soc.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
xiv.
April 1871.
) But that many of the nudibranch Mollusca, or sea-slugs, are as beautifully coloured as any shells, may be seen in Messrs.
Alder and Hancock's magnificent work; and from information kindly given me by Mr. Hancock, it seems extremely doubtful whether these colours usually serve as a protection.
With some species this may be the case, as with one kind which lives on the green leaves of algae, and is itself bright-green.
But many brightly-coloured, white, or otherwise conspicuous species, do not seek concealment; whilst again some equally conspicuous species, as well as other dull-coloured kinds live under stones and in dark recesses.
So that with these nudibranch molluscs, colour apparently does not stand in any close relation to the nature of the places which they inhabit.
These naked sea-slugs are hermaphrodites, yet they pair together, as do land-snails, many of which have extremely pretty shells.
It is conceivable that two hermaphrodites, attracted by each other's greater beauty, might unite and leave offspring which would inherit their parents' greater beauty.
But with such lowly-organised creatures this is extremely improbable.
Nor is it at all obvious how the offspring from the more beautiful pairs of hermaphrodites would have any advantage over the offspring of the less beautiful, so as to increase in number, unless indeed vigour and beauty generally coincided.
We have not here the case of a number of males becoming mature before the females, with the more beautiful males selected by the more vigorous females.
If, indeed, brilliant colours were beneficial to a hermaphrodite animal in relation to its general habits of life, the more brightly-tinted individuals would succeed best and would increase in number; but this would be a case of natural and not of sexual
SUB-KINGDOM OF THE VERMES: CLASS, ANNELIDA (OR SEA-WORMS).
In this class, although the sexes, when separate, sometimes differ from each other in characters of such importance that they have been placed under distinct genera or even families, yet the differences do not seem of the kind which can be safely
These animals are often beautifully coloured, but as the sexes do not differ in this respect, we are but little concerned with them.
Even the Nemertians, though so lowly organised, "vie in beauty and variety of colouring with any other group in the invertebrate series"; yet Dr. McIntosh (6.
See his beautiful monograph on 'British Annelids,' part i.
1873, p.
3.
) cannot discover that these colours are of any service.
The sedentary annelids become duller-coloured, according to M. Quatrefages (7.
See M. Perrier: 'L'Origine de l'Homme d'aprs Darwin,' 'Revue Scientifique', Feb.
1873, p.
866.
), after the period of reproduction; and this I presume may be attributed to their less vigorous condition at that time.
All these worm- like animals apparently stand too low in the scale for the individuals of either sex to exert any choice in selecting a partner, or for the individuals of the same sex to struggle together in rivalry.
SUB-KINGDOM OF THE ARTHROPODA: CLASS, CRUSTACEA.
In this great class we first meet with undoubted secondary sexual characters, often developed in a remarkable manner.
Unfortunately the habits of crustaceans are very imperfectly known, and we cannot explain the uses of many structures peculiar to one sex.
With the lower parasitic species the males are of small size, and they alone are furnished with perfect swimming-legs, antennae and sense-organs; the females being destitute of these organs, with their bodies often consisting of a mere distorted mass.
But these extraordinary differences between the two sexes are no doubt related to their widely different habits of life, and consequently do not concern us.
In various crustaceans, belonging to distinct families, the anterior antennae are furnished with peculiar thread-like bodies, which are believed to act as smelling-organs, and these are much more numerous in the males than in the females.
As the males, without any unusual development of their olfactory organs, would almost certainly be able sooner or later to find the females, the increased number of the smelling-threads has probably been acquired through sexual selection, by the better
Fritz Mller has described a remarkable dimorphic species of Tanais, in which the male is represented by two distinct forms, which never graduate into each other.
In the one form the male is furnished with more numerous smelling-threads, and in the other form with more powerful and more elongated chelae or pincers, which serve to hold the female.
Fritz Mller suggests that these differences between the two male forms of the same species may have originated in certain individuals having varied in the number of the smelling-threads, whilst other individuals varied in the shape and size of their
(8.
'Facts and Arguments for Darwin,' English translat.
, 1869, p.
20.
See the previous discussion on the olfactory threads.
Sars has described a somewhat analogous case (as quoted in 'Nature,' 1870, p.
455) in a Norwegian crustacean, the Pontoporeia affinis.
) [Fig.
4.
Labidocera Darwinii (from Lubbock).
Labelled are: a.
Part of right anterior antenna of male, forming a prehensile organ.
b.
Posterior pair of thoracic legs of male.
c.
Ditto of female.
] In some of the lower crustaceans, the right anterior antenna of the male differs greatly in structure from the left, the latter resembling in its simple tapering joints the antennae of the female.
In the male the modified antenna is either swollen in the middle or angularly bent, or converted (Fig.
4) into an elegant, and sometimes wonderfully complex, prehensile organ.
(9.
See Sir J. Lubbock in 'Annals and Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
xi.
1853, pl.
i.
and x.
; and vol.
xii.
(1853), pl.
vii.
See also Lubbock in 'Transactions, Entomological Society,' vol.
iv.
new series, 1856-1858, p.
8.
With respect to the zigzagged antennae mentioned below, see Fritz Mller, 'Facts and Arguments for Darwin,' 1869, p.
40, foot- note.
) It serves, as I hear from Sir J. Lubbock, to hold the female, and for this same purpose one of the two posterior legs (b) on the same side of the body is converted into a forceps.
In another family the inferior or posterior antennae are "curiously zigzagged" in the males alone.
[Fig.
5.
Anterior part of body of Callianassa (from Milne-Edwards), showing the unequal and differently-constructed right and left-hand chelae of the male.
N.B.--The artist by mistake has reversed the drawing, and made the left-hand chela the largest.
Fig.
6.
Second leg of male Orchestia Tucuratinga (from Fritz Mller).
Fig.
7.
Ditto of female.
] In the higher crustaceans the anterior legs are developed into chelae or pincers; and these are generally larger in the male than in the female,--so much so that the market value of the male edible crab (Cancer pagurus), according to Mr. C. Spence Bate,
In many species the chelae are of unequal size on the opposite side of the body, the right-hand one being, as I am informed by Mr. Bate, generally, though not invariably, the largest.
This inequality is also often much greater in the male than in the female.
The two chelae of the male often differ in structure (Figs.
5, 6, and 7), the smaller one resembling that of the female.
What advantage is gained by their inequality in size on the opposite sides of the body, and by the inequality being much greater in the male than in the female; and why, when they are of equal size, both are often much larger in the male than in the
As I hear from Mr. Bate, the chelae are sometimes of such length and size that they cannot possibly be used for carrying food to the mouth.
In the males of certain fresh-water prawns (Palaemon) the right leg is actually longer than the whole body.
(10.
See a paper by Mr. C. Spence Bate, with figures, in 'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1868, p.
363; and on the nomenclature of the genus, ibid.
p.
585.
I am greatly indebted to Mr. Spence Bate for nearly all the above statements with respect to the chelae of the higher crustaceans.
) The great size of the one leg with its chelae may aid the male in fighting with his rivals; but this will not account for their inequality in the female on the opposite sides of the body.
In Gelasimus, according to a statement quoted by Milne Edwards (11.
'Hist.
Nat.
des Crust.
' tom.
ii.
1837, p.
50.
), the male and the female live in the same burrow, and this shews that they pair; the male closes the mouth of the burrow with one of its chelae, which is enormously developed; so that here it indirectly serves as a means of defence.
Their main use, however, is probably to seize and to secure the female, and this in some instances, as with Gammarus, is known to be the case.
The male of the hermit or soldier crab (Pagurus) for weeks together, carries about the shell inhabited by the female.
(12.
Mr. C. Spence Bate, 'British Association, Fourth Report on the Fauna of S. Devon.
') The sexes, however, of the common shore-crab (Carcinus maenas), as Mr. Bate informs me, unite directly after the female has moulted her hard shell, when she is so soft that she would be injured if seized by the strong pincers of the male; but as she is
[Fig.
8.
Orchestia Darwinii (from Fritz Mller), showing the differently- constructed chelae of the two male forms.
] Fritz Mller states that certain species of Melita are distinguished from all other amphipods by the females having "the coxal lamellae of the penultimate pair of feet produced into hook-like processes, of which the males lay hold with the hands of the
The development of these hook-like processes has probably followed from those females which were the most securely held during the act of reproduction, having left the largest number of offspring.
Another Brazilian amphipod (see Orchestia darwinii, Fig.
8) presents a case of dimorphism, like that of Tanais; for there are two male forms, which differ in the structure of their chelae.
(13.
Fritz Mller, 'Facts and Arguments for Darwin,' 1869, pp.
25-28.
) As either chela would certainly suffice to hold the female,--for both are now used for this purpose,--the two male forms probably originated by some having varied in one manner and some in another; both forms having derived certain special, but nearly
It is not known that male crustaceans fight together for the possession of the females, but it is probably the case; for with most animals when the male is larger than the female, he seems to owe his greater size to his ancestors having fought with other
In most of the orders, especially in the highest or the Brachyura, the male is larger than the female; the parasitic genera, however, in which the sexes follow different habits of life, and most of the Entomostraca must be excepted.
The chelae of many crustaceans are weapons well adapted for fighting.
Thus when a Devil-crab (Portunus puber) was seen by a son of Mr. Bate fighting with a Carcinus maenas, the latter was soon thrown on its back, and had every limb torn from its body.
When several males of a Brazilian Gelasimus, a species furnished with immense pincers, were placed together in a glass vessel by Fritz Mller, they mutilated and killed one another.
Mr. Bate put a large male Carcinus maenas into a pan of water, inhabited by a female which was paired with a smaller male; but the latter was soon dispossessed.
Mr. Bate adds, "if they fought, the victory was a bloodless one, for I saw no wounds".
This same naturalist separated a male sand-skipper (so common on our sea-shores), Gammarus marinus, from its female, both of whom were imprisoned in the same vessel with many individuals of the same species.
The female, when thus divorced, soon joined the others.
After a time the male was put again into the same vessel; and he then, after swimming about for a time, dashed into the crowd, and without any fighting at once took away his wife.
This fact shews that in the Amphipoda, an order low in the scale, the males and females recognise each other, and are mutually attached.
The mental powers of the Crustacea are probably higher than at first sight appears probable.
Any one who tries to catch one of the shore-crabs, so common on tropical coasts, will perceive how wary and alert they are.
There is a large crab (Birgus latro), found on coral islands, which makes a thick bed of the picked fibres of the cocoa-nut, at the bottom of a deep burrow.
It feeds on the fallen fruit of this tree by tearing off the husk, fibre by fibre; and it always begins at that end where the three eye-like depressions are situated.
It then breaks through one of these eyes by hammering with its heavy front pincers, and turning round, extracts the albuminous core with its narrow posterior pincers.
But these actions are probably instinctive, so that they would be performed as well by a young animal as by an old one.
The following case, however, can hardly be so considered: a trustworthy naturalist, Mr. Gardner (14.
'Travels in the Interior of Brazil,' 1846, p.
111.
I have given, in my 'Journal of Researches,' p.
463, an account of the habits of the Birgus.
), whilst watching a shore-crab (Gelasimus) making its burrow, threw some shells towards the hole.
One rolled in, and three other shells remained within a few inches of the mouth.
In about five minutes the crab brought out the shell which had fallen in, and carried it away to a distance of a foot; it then saw the three other shells lying near, and evidently thinking that they might likewise roll in, carried them to the spot where it
It would, I think, be difficult to distinguish this act from one performed by man by the aid of reason.
Mr. Bate does not know of any well-marked case of difference of colour in the two sexes of our British crustaceans, in which respect the sexes of the higher animals so often differ.
In some cases, however, the males and females differ slightly in tint, but Mr. Bate thinks not more than may be accounted for by their different habits of life, such as by the male wandering more about, and being thus more exposed to the light.
Dr. Power tried to distinguish by colour the sexes of the several species which inhabit the Mauritius, but failed, except with one species of Squilla, probably S. stylifera, the male of which is described as being "of a beautiful bluish-green," with some
(15.
Mr. Ch.
Fraser, in 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1869, p.
3.
I am indebted to Mr. Bate for Dr. Power's statement.
) In this case, we may suspect the agency of sexual selection.
From M. Bert's observations on Daphnia, when placed in a vessel illuminated by a prism, we have reason to believe that even the lowest crustaceans can distinguish colours.
With Saphirina (an oceanic genus of Entomostraca), the males are furnished with minute shields or cell-like bodies, which exhibit beautiful changing colours; these are absent in the females, and in both sexes of one species.
(16.
Claus, 'Die freilebenden Copepoden,' 1863, s.
35.
) It would, however, be extremely rash to conclude that these curious organs serve to attract the females.
I am informed by Fritz Mller, that in the female of a Brazilian species of Gelasimus, the whole body is of a nearly uniform greyish-brown.
In the male the posterior part of the cephalo- thorax is pure white, with the anterior part of a rich green, shading into dark brown; and it is remarkable that these colours are liable to change in the course of a few minutes--the white becoming dirty grey
It deserves especial notice that the males do not acquire their bright colours until they become mature.
They appear to be much more numerous than the females; they differ also in the larger size of their chelae.
In some species of the genus, probably in all, the sexes pair and inhabit the same burrow.
They are also, as we have seen, highly intelligent animals.
From these various considerations it seems probable that the male in this species has become gaily ornamented in order to attract or excite the female.
It has just been stated that the male Gelasimus does not acquire his conspicuous colours until mature and nearly ready to breed.
This seems a general rule in the whole class in respect to the many remarkable structural differences between the sexes.
We shall hereafter find the same law prevailing throughout the great sub-kingdom of the Vertebrata; and in all cases it is eminently distinctive of characters which have been acquired through sexual selection.
Fritz Mller (17.
'Facts and Arguments,' etc.
, p.
79.
) gives some striking instances of this law; thus the male sand-hopper (Orchestia) does not, until nearly full grown, acquire his large claspers, which are very differently constructed from those of the female; whilst young, his claspers resemble those of
CLASS, ARACHNIDA (SPIDERS).
The sexes do not generally differ much in colour, but the males are often darker than the females, as may be seen in Mr. Blackwall's magnificent work.
(18.
'A History of the Spiders of Great Britain,' 1861-64.
For the following facts, see pp.
77, 88, 102.
) In some species, however, the difference is conspicuous: thus the female of Sparassus smaragdulus is dullish green, whilst the adult male has the abdomen of a fine yellow, with three longitudinal stripes of rich red.
In certain species of Thomisus the sexes closely resemble each other, in others they differ much; and analogous cases occur in many other genera.
It is often difficult to say which of the two sexes departs most from the ordinary coloration of the genus to which the species belong; but Mr. Blackwall thinks that, as a general rule, it is the male; and Canestrini (19.
This author has recently published a valuable essay on the 'Caratteri sessuali secondarii degli Arachnidi,' in the 'Atti della Soc.
Veneto-Trentina di Sc.
Nat.
Padova,' vol.
i.
Fasc.
3, 1873.
) remarks that in certain genera the males can be specifically distinguished with ease, but the females with great difficulty.
I am informed by Mr. Blackwall that the sexes whilst young usually resemble each other; and both often undergo great changes in colour during their successive moults, before arriving at maturity.
In other cases the male alone appears to change colour.
Thus the male of the above bright-coloured Sparassus at first resembles the female, and acquires his peculiar tints only when nearly adult.
Spiders are possessed of acute senses, and exhibit much intelligence; as is well known, the females often shew the strongest affection for their eggs, which they carry about enveloped in a silken web.
The males search eagerly for the females, and have been seen by Canestrini and others to fight for possession of them.
This same author says that the union of the two sexes has been observed in about twenty species; and he asserts positively that the female rejects some of the males who court her, threatens them with open mandibles, and at last after long hesitation
From these several considerations, we may admit with some confidence that the well-marked differences in colour between the sexes of certain species are the results of sexual selection; though we have not here the best kind of evidence,-- the display by
From the extreme variability of colour in the male of some species, for instance of Theridion lineatum, it would appear that these sexual characters of the males have not as yet become well fixed.
Canestrini draws the same conclusion from the fact that the males of certain species present two forms, differing from each other in the size and length of their jaws; and this reminds us of the above cases of dimorphic crustaceans.
The male is generally much smaller than the female, sometimes to an extraordinary degree (20.
Aug.
Vinson ('Araneides des Iles de la Reunion,' pl.
vi.
figs.
1 and 2) gives a good instance of the small size of the male, in Epeira nigra.
In this species, as I may add, the male is testaceous and the female black with legs banded with red.
Other even more striking cases of inequality in size between the sexes have been recorded ('Quarterly Journal of Science,' July 1868, p.
429); but I have not seen the original accounts.
), and he is forced to be extremely cautious in making his advances, as the female often carries her coyness to a dangerous pitch.
De Geer saw a male that "in the midst of his preparatory caresses was seized by the object of his attentions, enveloped by her in a web and then devoured, a sight which, as he adds, filled him with horror and indignation".
(21.
Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction to Entomology,' vol.
i.
1818, p.
280.
) The Rev.
O.P. Cambridge (22.
'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1871, p.
621.
) accounts in the following manner for the extreme smallness of the male in the genus Nephila.
"M.
Vinson gives a graphic account of the agile way in which the diminutive male escapes from the ferocity of the female, by gliding about and playing hide and seek over her body and along her gigantic limbs: in such a pursuit it is evident that the chances of
e.
, so small as to be a sort of parasite upon the female, and either beneath her notice, or too agile and too small for her to catch without great difficulty".
Westring has made the interesting discovery that the males of several species of Theridion (23.
Theridion (Asagena, Sund.
) serratipes, 4- punctatum et guttatum; see Westring, in Kroyer, 'Naturhist.
Tidskrift,' vol.
iv.
1842-1843, p.
349; and vol.
ii.
1846-1849, p.
342.
See, also, for other species, 'Araneae Suecicae,' p.
184.
) have the power of making a stridulating sound, whilst the females are mute.
The apparatus consists of a serrated ridge at the base of the abdomen, against which the hard hinder part of the thorax is rubbed; and of this structure not a trace can be detected in the females.
It deserves notice that several writers, including the well-known arachnologist Walckenaer, have declared that spiders are attracted by music.
(24.
Dr. H.H. van Zouteveen, in his Dutch translation of this work (vol.
i.
p.
444), has collected several cases.
) From the analogy of the Orthoptera and Homoptera, to be described in the next chapter, we may feel almost sure that the stridulation serves, as Westring also believes, to call or to excite the female; and this is the first case known to me in the
(25.
Hilgendorf, however, has lately called attention to an analogous structure in some of the higher crustaceans, which seems adapted to produce sound; see 'Zoological Record,' 1869, p.
603.
) CLASS, MYRIAPODA.
In neither of the two orders in this class, the millipedes and centipedes, can I find any well-marked instances of such sexual differences as more particularly concern us.
In Glomeris limbata, however, and perhaps in some few other species, the males differ slightly in colour from the females; but this Glomeris is a highly variable species.
In the males of the Diplopoda, the legs belonging either to one of the anterior or of the posterior segments of the body are modified into prehensile hooks which serve to secure the female.
In some species of Iulus the tarsi of the male are furnished with membranous suckers for the same purpose.
As we shall see when we treat of Insects, it is a much more unusual circumstance, that it is the female in Lithobius, which is furnished with prehensile appendages at the extremity of her body for holding the male.
(26.
Walckenaer et P. Gervais, 'Hist.
Nat.
des Insectes: Apteres,' tom.
iv.
1847, pp.
17, 19, 68.
) CHAPTER X. SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS OF INSECTS.
Diversified structures possessed by the males for seizing the females-- Differences between the sexes, of which the meaning is not understood-- Difference in size between the sexes--Thysanura--Diptera--Hemiptera-- Homoptera, musical powers possessed by the
In the immense class of insects the sexes sometimes differ in their locomotive-organs, and often in their sense-organs, as in the pectinated and beautifully plumose antennae of the males of many species.
In Chloeon, one of the Ephemerae, the male has great pillared eyes, of which the female is entirely destitute.
(1.
Sir J. Lubbock, 'Transact.
Linnean Soc.
' vol.
xxv, 1866, p.
484.
With respect to the Mutillidae see Westwood, 'Modern Class.
of Insects,' vol.
ii.
p.
213.
) The ocelli are absent in the females of certain insects, as in the Mutillidae; and here the females are likewise wingless.
But we are chiefly concerned with structures by which one male is enabled to conquer another, either in battle or courtship, through his strength, pugnacity, ornaments, or music.
The innumerable contrivances, therefore, by which the male is able to seize the female, may be briefly passed over.
Besides the complex structures at the apex of the abdomen, which ought perhaps to be ranked as primary organs (2.
These organs in the male often differ in closely-allied species, and afford excellent specific characters.
But their importance, from a functional point of view, as Mr. R. MacLachlan has remarked to me, has probably been overrated.
It has been suggested, that slight differences in these organs would suffice to prevent the intercrossing of well-marked varieties or incipient species, and would thus aid in their development.
That this can hardly be the case, we may infer from the many recorded cases (see, for instance, Bronn, 'Geschichte der Natur,' B. ii.
1843, s.
164; and Westwood, 'Transact.
Ent.
Soc.
' vol.
iii.
1842, p.
195) of distinct species having been observed in union.
Mr. MacLachlan informs me (vide 'Stett.
Ent.
Zeitung,' 1867, s.
155) that when several species of Phryganidae, which present strongly-pronounced differences of this kind, were confined together by Dr. Aug.
Meyer, THEY COUPLED, and one pair produced fertile ova.
), "it is astonishing," as Mr. B.D. Walsh (3.
'The Practical Entomologist,' Philadelphia, vol.
ii.
May 1867, p.
88.
) has remarked, "how many different organs are worked in by nature for the seemingly insignificant object of enabling the male to grasp the female firmly".
The mandibles or jaws are sometimes used for this purpose; thus the male Corydalis cornutus (a neuropterous insect in some degree allied to the Dragon flies, etc.
) has immense curved jaws, many times longer than those of the female; and they are smooth instead of being toothed, so that he is thus enabled to seize her without injury.
(4.
Mr. Walsh, ibid.
p.
107.
) One of the stag-beetles of North America (Lucanus elaphus) uses his jaws, which are much larger than those of the female, for the same purpose, but probably likewise for fighting.
In one of the sand- wasps (Ammophila) the jaws in the two sexes are closely alike, but are used for widely different purposes: the males, as Professor Westwood observes, "are exceedingly ardent, seizing their partners round the neck with their
'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
ii.
1840, pp.
205, 206.
Mr. Walsh, who called my attention to the double use of the jaws, says that he has repeatedly observed this fact.
); whilst the females use these organs for burrowing in sand-banks and making their nests.
[Fig.
9.
Crabro cribrarius.
Upper figure, male; lower figure, female.
] The tarsi of the front-legs are dilated in many male beetles, or are furnished with broad cushions of hairs; and in many genera of water-beetles they are armed with a round flat sucker, so that the male may adhere to the slippery body of the female.
It is a much more unusual circumstance that the females of some water-beetles (Dytiscus) have their elytra deeply grooved, and in Acilius sulcatus thickly set with hairs, as an aid to the male.
The females of some other water-beetles (Hydroporus) have their elytra punctured for the same purpose.
(6.
We have here a curious and inexplicable case of dimorphism, for some of the females of four European species of Dytiscus, and of certain species of Hydroporus, have their elytra smooth; and no intermediate gradations between the sulcated or punctured, and
See Dr. H. Schaum, as quoted in the 'Zoologist,' vols.
v.
-vi.
1847-48, p.
1896.
Also Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction to Entomology,' vol.
iii.
1826, p.
305.
) In the male of Crabro cribrarius (Fig.
9), it is the tibia which is dilated into a broad horny plate, with minute membraneous dots, giving to it a singular appearance like that of a riddle.
(7.
Westwood, 'Modern Class.
' vol.
ii.
p.
193.
The following statement about Penthe, and others in inverted commas, are taken from Mr. Walsh, 'Practical Entomologist,' Philadelphia, vol.
iii.
p.
88.
) In the male of Penthe (a genus of beetles) a few of the middle joints of the antennae are dilated and furnished on the inferior surface with cushions of hair, exactly like those on the tarsi of the Carabidae, "and obviously for the same end".
In male dragon-flies, "the appendages at the tip of the tail are modified in an almost infinite variety of curious patterns to enable them to embrace the neck of the female".
Lastly, in the males of many insects, the legs are furnished with peculiar spines, knobs or spurs; or the whole leg is bowed or thickened, but this is by no means invariably a sexual character; or one pair, or all three pairs are elongated, sometimes to an
(8.
Kirby and Spence, 'Introduct.
' etc.
, vol.
iii.
pp.
332-336.
) [Fig.
10.
Taphroderes distortus (much enlarged).
Upper figure, male; lower figure, female.
] The sexes of many species in all the orders present differences, of which the meaning is not understood.
One curious case is that of a beetle (Fig.
10), the male of which has left mandible much enlarged; so that the mouth is greatly distorted.
In another Carabidous beetle, Eurygnathus (9.
'Insecta Maderensia,' 1854, page 20.
), we have the case, unique as far as known to Mr. Wollaston, of the head of the female being much broader and larger, though in a variable degree, than that of the male.
Any number of such cases could be given.
They abound in the Lepidoptera: one of the most extraordinary is that certain male butterflies have their fore-legs more or less atrophied, with the tibiae and tarsi reduced to mere rudimentary knobs.
The wings, also, in the two sexes often differ in neuration (10.
E. Doubleday, 'Annals and Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
i.
1848, p.
379.
I may add that the wings in certain Hymenoptera (see Shuckard, 'Fossorial Hymenoptera,' 1837, pp.
39-43) differ in neuration according to sex.
), and sometimes considerably in outline, as in the Aricoris epitus, which was shewn to me in the British Museum by Mr. A. Butler.
The males of certain South American butterflies have tufts of hair on the margins of the wings, and horny excrescences on the discs of the posterior pair.
(11.
H.W. Bates, in 'Journal of Proc.
Linn.
Soc.
' vol.
vi.
1862, p.
74.
Mr. Wonfor's observations are quoted in 'Popular Science Review,' 1868, p.
343.
) In several British butterflies, as shewn by Mr. Wonfor, the males alone are in parts clothed with peculiar scales.
The use of the bright light of the female glow-worm has been subject to much discussion.
The male is feebly luminous, as are the larvae and even the eggs.
It has been supposed by some authors that the light serves to frighten away enemies, and by others to guide the male to the female.
At last, Mr. Belt (12.
'The Naturalist in Nicaragua,' 1874, pp.
316-320.
On the phosphorescence of the eggs, see 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' Nov.
1871, p.
372.
) appears to have solved the difficulty: he finds that all the Lampyridae which he has tried are highly distasteful to insectivorous mammals and birds.
Hence it is in accordance with Mr. Bates' view, hereafter to be explained, that many insects mimic the Lampyridae closely, in order to be mistaken for them, and thus to escape destruction.
He further believes that the luminous species profit by being at once recognised as unpalatable.
It is probable that the same explanation may be extended to the Elaters, both sexes of which are highly luminous.
It is not known why the wings of the female glow-worm have not been developed; but in her present state she closely resembles a larva, and as larvae are so largely preyed on by many animals, we can understand why she has been rendered so much more luminous
DIFFERENCE IN SIZE BETWEEN THE SEXES.
With insects of all kinds the males are commonly smaller than the females; and this difference can often be detected even in the larval state.
So considerable is the difference between the male and female cocoons of the silk-moth (Bombyx mori), that in France they are separated by a particular mode of weighing.
(13.
Robinet, 'Vers a Soie,' 1848, p.
207.
) In the lower classes of the animal kingdom, the greater size of the females seems generally to depend on their developing an enormous number of ova; and this may to a certain extent hold good with insects.
But Dr. Wallace has suggested a much more probable explanation.
He finds, after carefully attending to the development of the caterpillars of Bombyx cynthia and yamamai, and especially to that of some dwarfed caterpillars reared from a second brood on unnatural food, "that in proportion as the individual moth is finer,
(14.
'Transact.
Ent.
Soc.
' 3rd series, vol.
v.
p.
486.
) Now as most insects are short-lived, and as they are exposed to many dangers, it would manifestly be advantageous to the female to be impregnated as soon as possible.
This end would be gained by the males being first matured in large numbers ready for the advent of the females; and this again would naturally follow, as Mr. A.R. Wallace has remarked (15.
'Journal of Proc.
Ent.
Soc.
' Feb.
4, 1867, p.
lxxi.
), through natural selection; for the smaller males would be first matured, and thus would procreate a large number of offspring which would inherit the reduced size of their male parents, whilst the larger males from being matured later would leave fewer
There are, however, exceptions to the rule of male insects being smaller than the females: and some of these exceptions are intelligible.
Size and strength would be an advantage to the males, which fight for the possession of the females; and in these cases, as with the stag-beetle (Lucanus), the males are larger than the females.
There are, however, other beetles which are not known to fight together, of which the males exceed the females in size; and the meaning of this fact is not known; but in some of these cases, as with the huge Dynastes and Megasoma, we can at least see that
So again, male dragon-flies (Libellulidae) are sometimes sensibly larger, and never smaller, than the females (16.
For this and other statements on the size of the sexes, see Kirby and Spence, ibid.
vol.
iii.
p.
300; on the duration of life in insects, see p.
344.
); and as Mr. MacLachlan believes, they do not generally pair with the females until a week or fortnight has elapsed, and until they have assumed their proper masculine colours.
But the most curious case, shewing on what complex and easily-overlooked relations, so trifling a character as difference in size between the sexes may depend, is that of the aculeate Hymenoptera; for Mr. F. Smith informs me that throughout nearly the
The explanation of this anomaly is that a marriage flight is absolutely necessary with these species, and the male requires great strength and size in order to carry the female through the air.
Increased size has here been acquired in opposition to the usual relation between size and the period of development, for the males, though larger, emerge before the smaller females.
We will now review the several Orders, selecting such facts as more particularly concern us.
The Lepidoptera (Butterflies and Moths) will be retained for a separate chapter.
ORDER, THYSANURA.
The members of this lowly organised order are wingless, dull-coloured, minute insects, with ugly, almost misshapen heads and bodies.
Their sexes do not differ, but they are interesting as shewing us that the males pay sedulous court to the females even low down in the animal scale.
Sir J. Lubbock (17.
'Transact.
Linnean Soc.
' vol.
xxvi.
1868, p.
296.
) says: "it is very amusing to see these little creatures (Smynthurus luteus) coquetting together.
The male, which is much smaller than the female, runs round her, and they butt one another, standing face to face and moving backward and forward like two playful lambs.
Then the female pretends to run away and the male runs after her with a queer appearance of anger, gets in front and stands facing her again; then she turns coyly round, but he, quicker and more active, scuttles round too, and seems to whip her with his
ORDER, DIPTERA (FLIES).
The sexes differ little in colour.
The greatest difference, known to Mr. F. Walker, is in the genus Bibio, in which the males are blackish or quite black, and the females obscure brownish-orange.
The genus Elaphomyia, discovered by Mr. Wallace (18.
'The Malay Archipelago,' vol.
ii.
1869, p.
313.
) in New Guinea, is highly remarkable, as the males are furnished with horns, of which the females are quite destitute.
The horns spring from beneath the eyes, and curiously resemble those of a stag, being either branched or palmated.
In one of the species, they equal the whole body in length.
They might be thought to be adapted for fighting, but as in one species they are of a beautiful pink colour, edged with black, with a pale central stripe, and as these insects have altogether a very elegant appearance, it is perhaps more probable that they
That the males of some Diptera fight together is certain; Prof.
Westwood (19.
'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
ii.
1840, p.
526.
) has several times seen this with the Tipulae.
The males of other Diptera apparently try to win the females by their music: H. Mller (20.
'Anwendung,' etc.
, 'Verh.
d.
n.
V. Jahrg.
' xxix.
p.
80.
Mayer, in 'American Naturalist,' 1874, p.
236.
) watched for some time two males of an Eristalis courting a female; they hovered above her, and flew from side to side, making a high humming noise at the same time.
Gnats and mosquitoes (Culicidae) also seem to attract each other by humming; and Prof.
Mayer has recently ascertained that the hairs on the antennae of the male vibrate in unison with the notes of a tuning-fork, within the range of the sounds emitted by the female.
The longer hairs vibrate sympathetically with the graver notes, and the shorter hairs with the higher ones.
Landois also asserts that he has repeatedly drawn down a whole swarm of gnats by uttering a particular note.
It may be added that the mental faculties of the Diptera are probably higher than in most other insects, in accordance with their highly- developed nervous system.
(21.
See Mr. B.T. Lowne's interesting work, 'On the Anatomy of the Blow-fly, Musca vomitoria,' 1870, p.
14.
He remarks (p.
33) that, "the captured flies utter a peculiar plaintive note, and that this sound causes other flies to disappear".
) ORDER, HEMIPTERA (FIELD-BUGS).
Mr. J.W. Douglas, who has particularly attended to the British species, has kindly given me an account of their sexual differences.
The males of some species are furnished with wings, whilst the females are wingless; the sexes differ in the form of their bodies, elytra, antennae and tarsi; but as the signification of these differences are unknown, they may be here passed over.
The females are generally larger and more robust than the males.
With British, and, as far as Mr. Douglas knows, with exotic species, the sexes do not commonly differ much in colour; but in about six British species the male is considerably darker than the female, and in about four other species the female is darker
Both sexes of some species are beautifully coloured; and as these insects emit an extremely nauseous odour, their conspicuous colours may serve as a signal that they are unpalatable to insectivorous animals.
In some few cases their colours appear to be directly protective: thus Prof.
Hoffmann informs me that he could hardly distinguish a small pink and green species from the buds on the trunks of lime-trees, which this insect frequents.
Some species of Reduvidae make a stridulating noise; and, in the case of Pirates stridulus, this is said (22.
Westwood, 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
ii.
p.
473.
) to be effected by the movement of the neck within the pro-thoracic cavity.
According to Westring, Reduvius personatus also stridulates.
But I have no reason to suppose that this is a sexual character, excepting that with non-social insects there seems to be no use for sound-producing organs, unless it be as a sexual call.
ORDER: HOMOPTERA.
Every one who has wandered in a tropical forest must have been astonished at the din made by the male Cicadae.
The females are mute; as the Grecian poet Xenarchus says, "Happy the Cicadas live, since they all have voiceless wives".
The noise thus made could be plainly heard on board the "Beagle," when anchored at a quarter of a mile from the shore of Brazil; and Captain Hancock says it can be heard at the distance of a mile.
The Greeks formerly kept, and the Chinese now keep these insects in cages for the sake of their song, so that it must be pleasing to the ears of some men.
(23.
These particulars are taken from Westwood's 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
ii.
1840, p.
422.
See, also, on the Fulgoridae, Kirby and Spence, 'Introduct.
' vol.
ii.
p.
401.
) The Cicadidae usually sing during the day, whilst the Fulgoridae appear to be night-songsters.
The sound, according to Landois (24.
'Zeitschrift fr wissenschaft.
Zoolog.
' B. xvii.
1867, ss.
152-158.
), is produced by the vibration of the lips of the spiracles, which are set into motion by a current of air emitted from the tracheae; but this view has lately been disputed.
Dr. Powell appears to have proved (25.
'Transactions of the New Zealand Institute,' vol.
v.
1873, p.
286.
) that it is produced by the vibration of a membrane, set into action by a special muscle.
In the living insect, whilst stridulating, this membrane can be seen to vibrate; and in the dead insect the proper sound is heard, if the muscle, when a little dried and hardened, is pulled with the point of a pin.
In the female the whole complex musical apparatus is present, but is much less developed than in the male, and is never used for producing sound.
With respect to the object of the music, Dr. Hartman, in speaking of the Cicada septemdecim of the United States, says (26.
I am indebted to Mr. Walsh for having sent me this extract from 'A Journal of the Doings of Cicada septemdecim,' by Dr. Hartman.
), "the drums are now (June 6th and 7th, 1851) heard in all directions.
This I believe to be the marital summons from the males.
Standing in thick chestnut sprouts about as high as my head, where hundreds were around me, I observed the females coming around the drumming males".
He adds, "this season (Aug.
1868) a dwarf pear-tree in my garden produced about fifty larvae of Cic.
pruinosa; and I several times noticed the females to alight near a male while he was uttering his clanging notes".
Fritz Mller writes to me from S. Brazil that he has often listened to a musical contest between two or three males of a species with a particularly loud voice, seated at a considerable distance from each other: as soon as one had finished his song,
As there is so much rivalry between the males, it is probable that the females not only find them by their sounds, but that, like female birds, they are excited or allured by the male with the most attractive voice.
I have not heard of any well-marked cases of ornamental differences between the sexes of the Homoptera.
Mr. Douglas informs me that there are three British species, in which the male is black or marked with black bands, whilst the females are pale-coloured or obscure.
ORDER, ORTHOPTERA (CRICKETS AND GRASSHOPPERS).
The males in the three saltatorial families in this Order are remarkable for their musical powers, namely the Achetidae or crickets, the Locustidae for which there is no equivalent English name, and the Acridiidae or grasshoppers.
The stridulation produced by some of the Locustidae is so loud that it can be heard during the night at the distance of a mile (27.
L. Guilding, 'Transactions of the Linnean Society,' vol.
xv.
p.
154.
); and that made by certain species is not unmusical even to the human ear, so that the Indians on the Amazons keep them in wicker cages.
All observers agree that the sounds serve either to call or excite the mute females.
With respect to the migratory locusts of Russia, Korte has given (28.
I state this on the authority of Koppen, 'ber die Heuschrecken in Sdrussland,' 1866, p.
32, for I have in vain endeavoured to procure Korte's work.
) an interesting case of selection by the female of a male.
The males of this species (Pachytylus migratorius) whilst coupled with the female stridulate from anger or jealousy, if approached by other males.
The house-cricket when surprised at night uses its voice to warn its fellows.
(29.
Gilbert White, 'Natural History of Selborne,' vol.
ii.
1825, p.
262.
) In North America the Katy-did (Platyphyllum concavum, one of the Locustidae) is described (30.
Harris, 'Insects of New England,' 1842, p.
128.
) as mounting on the upper branches of a tree, and in the evening beginning "his noisy babble, while rival notes issue from the neighbouring trees, and the groves resound with the call of Katy-did-she- did the live-long night".
Mr. Bates, in speaking of the European field- cricket (one of the Achetidae), says "the male has been observed to place himself in the evening at the entrance of his burrow, and stridulate until a female approaches, when the louder notes are succeeded by a
(31.
'The Naturalist on the Amazons,' vol.
i.
1863, p.
252.
Mr. Bates gives a very interesting discussion on the gradations in the musical apparatus of the three families.
See also Westwood, 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
ii.
pp.
445 and 453.
) Dr. Scudder was able to excite one of these insects to answer him, by rubbing on a file with a quill.
(32.
'Proceedings of the Boston Society of Natural History,' vol.
xi.
April 1868.
) In both sexes a remarkable auditory apparatus has been discovered by Von Siebold, situated in the front legs.
(33.
'Nouveau Manuel d'Anat.
Comp.
' (French translat.
), tom.
1, 1850, p.
567.
) [Fig.
11.
Gryllus campestris (from Landois).
Right-hand figure, under side of part of a wing-nervure, much magnified, showing the teeth, st.
Left-hand figure, upper surface of wing-cover, with the projecting, smooth nervure, r, across which the teeth (st) are scraped.
Fig.
12.
Teeth of Nervure of Gryllus domesticus (from Landois).
] In the three Families the sounds are differently produced.
In the males of the Achetidae both wing-covers have the same apparatus; and this in the field-cricket (see Gryllus campestris, Fig.
11) consists, as described by Landois (34.
'Zeitschrift fr wissenschaft.
Zoolog.
' B. xvii.
1867, s.
117.
), of from 131 to 138 sharp, transverse ridges or teeth (st) on the under side of one of the nervures of the wing-cover.
This toothed nervure is rapidly scraped across a projecting, smooth, hard nervure (r) on the upper surface of the opposite wing.
First one wing is rubbed over the other, and then the movement is reversed.
Both wings are raised a little at the same time, so as to increase the resonance.
In some species the wing-covers of the males are furnished at the base with a talc-like plate.
(35.
Westwood, 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
i.
p.
440.
) I here give a drawing (Fig.
12) of the teeth on the under side of the nervure of another species of Gryllus, viz.
, G. domesticus.
With respect to the formation of these teeth, Dr. Gruber has shewn (36.
'Ueber der Tonapparat der Locustiden, ein Beitrag zum Darwinismus,' 'Zeitschrift fr wissenschaft.
Zoolog.
' B. xxii.
1872, p.
100.
) that they have been developed by the aid of selection, from the minute scales and hairs with which the wings and body are covered, and I came to the same conclusion with respect to those of the Coleoptera.
But Dr. Gruber further shews that their development is in part directly due to the stimulus from the friction of one wing over the other.
[Fig.
13.
Chlorocoelus Tanana (from Bates).
a,b.
Lobes of opposite wing-covers.
] In the Locustidae the opposite wing-covers differ from each other in structure (Fig.
13), and the action cannot, as in the last family, be reversed.
The left wing, which acts as the bow, lies over the right wing which serves as the fiddle.
One of the nervures (a) on the under surface of the former is finely serrated, and is scraped across the prominent nervures on the upper surface of the opposite or right wing.
In our British Phasgonura viridissima it appeared to me that the serrated nervure is rubbed against the rounded hind-corner of the opposite wing, the edge of which is thickened, coloured brown, and very sharp.
In the right wing, but not in the left, there is a little plate, as transparent as talc, surrounded by nervures, and called the speculum.
In Ephippiger vitium, a member of this same family, we have a curious subordinate modification; for the wing-covers are greatly reduced in size, but "the posterior part of the pro-thorax is elevated into a kind of dome over the wing-covers, and which has
(37.
Westwood 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
i.
p.
453.
) We thus see that the musical apparatus is more differentiated or specialised in the Locustidae (which include, I believe, the most powerful performers in the Order), than in the Achetidae, in which both wing-covers have the same structure and the same
(38.
Landois, 'Zeitschrift fr wissenschaft.
Zoolog.
' B. xvii.
1867, ss.
121, 122.
) Landois, however, detected in one of the Locustidae, namely in Decticus, a short and narrow row of small teeth, mere rudiments, on the inferior surface of the right wing-cover, which underlies the other and is never used as the bow.
I observed the same rudimentary structure on the under side of the right wing-cover in Phasgonura viridissima.
Hence we may infer with confidence that the Locustidae are descended from a form, in which, as in the existing Achetidae, both wing-covers had serrated nervures on the under surface, and could be indifferently used as the bow; but that in the Locustidae
Dr. Gruber takes the same view, and has shewn that rudimentary teeth are commonly found on the inferior surface of the right wing.
By what steps the more simple apparatus in the Achetidae originated, we do not know, but it is probable that the basal portions of the wing- covers originally overlapped each other as they do at present; and that the friction of the nervures produced a
(39.
Mr. Walsh also informs me that he has noticed that the female of the Platyphyllum concavum, "when captured makes a feeble grating noise by shuffling her wing-covers together".
) A grating sound thus occasionally and accidentally made by the males, if it served them ever so little as a love-call to the females, might readily have been intensified through sexual selection, by variations in the roughness of the nervures having been
[Fig.
14.
Hind-leg of Stenobothrus pratorum: r, the stridulating ridge; lower figure, the teeth forming the ridge, much magnified (from Landois).
Fig.
15.
Pneumora (from specimens in the British Museum).
Upper figure, male; lower figure, female.
] In the last and third family, namely the Acridiidae or grasshoppers, the stridulation is produced in a very different manner, and according to Dr. Scudder, is not so shrill as in the preceding Families.
The inner surface of the femur (Fig.
14, r) is furnished with a longitudinal row of minute, elegant, lancet-shaped, elastic teeth, from 85 to 93 in number (40.
Landois, ibid.
s.
113.
); and these are scraped across the sharp, projecting nervures on the wing-covers, which are thus made to vibrate and resound.
Harris (41.
'Insects of New England,' 1842, p.
133.
) says that when one of the males begins to play, he first "bends the shank of the hind-leg beneath the thigh, where it is lodged in a furrow designed to receive it, and then draws the leg briskly up and down.
He does not play both fiddles together, but alternately, first upon one and then on the other".
In many species, the base of the abdomen is hollowed out into a great cavity which is believed to act as a resounding board.
In Pneumora (Fig.
15), a S. African genus belonging to the same family, we meet with a new and remarkable modification; in the males a small notched ridge projects obliquely from each side of the abdomen, against which the hind femora are rubbed.
(42.
Westwood, 'Modern Classification,' vol i.
p.
462.
) As the male is furnished with wings (the female being wingless), it is remarkable that the thighs are not rubbed in the usual manner against the wing-covers; but this may perhaps be accounted for by the unusually small size of the hind-legs.
I have not been able to examine the inner surface of the thighs, which, judging from analogy, would be finely serrated.
The species of Pneumora have been more profoundly modified for the sake of stridulation than any other orthopterous insect; for in the male the whole body has been converted into a musical instrument, being distended with air, like a great pellucid
Mr. Trimen informs me that at the Cape of Good Hope these insects make a wonderful noise during the night.
In the three foregoing families, the females are almost always destitute of an efficient musical apparatus.
But there are a few exceptions to this rule, for Dr. Gruber has shewn that both sexes of Ephippiger vitium are thus provided; though the organs differ in the male and female to a certain extent.
Hence we cannot suppose that they have been transferred from the male to the female, as appears to have been the case with the secondary sexual characters of many other animals.
They must have been independently developed in the two sexes, which no doubt mutually call to each other during the season of love.
In most other Locustidae (but not according to Landois in Decticus) the females have rudiments of the stridulatory organs proper to the male; from whom it is probable that these have been transferred.
Landois also found such rudiments on the under surface of the wing-covers of the female Achetidae, and on the femora of the female Acridiidae.
In the Homoptera, also, the females have the proper musical apparatus in a functionless state; and we shall hereafter meet in other divisions of the animal kingdom with many instances of structures proper to the male being present in a rudimentary
Landois has observed another important fact, namely, that in the females of the Acridiidae, the stridulating teeth on the femora remain throughout life in the same condition in which they first appear during the larval state in both sexes.
In the males, on the other hand, they become further developed, and acquire their perfect structure at the last moult, when the insect is mature and ready to breed.
From the facts now given, we see that the means by which the males of the Orthoptera produce their sounds are extremely diversified, and are altogether different from those employed by the Homoptera.
(43.
Landois has recently found in certain Orthoptera rudimentary structures closely similar to the sound-producing organs in the Homoptera; and this is a surprising fact.
See 'Zeitschrift fr wissenschaft, Zoolog.
' B. xxii.
Heft 3, 1871, p.
348.
) But throughout the animal kingdom we often find the same object gained by the most diversified means; this seems due to the whole organisation having undergone multifarious changes in the course of ages, and as part after part varied different variations
The diversity of means for producing sound in the three families of the Orthoptera and in the Homoptera, impresses the mind with the high importance of these structures to the males, for the sake of calling or alluring the females.
We need feel no surprise at the amount of modification which the Orthoptera have undergone in this respect, as we now know, from Dr. Scudder's remarkable discovery (44.
'Transactions, Entomological Society,' 3rd series, vol.
ii.
('Journal of Proceedings,' p.
117).
), that there has been more than ample time.
This naturalist has lately found a fossil insect in the Devonian formation of New Brunswick, which is furnished with "the well-known tympanum or stridulating apparatus of the male Locustidae".
The insect, though in most respects related to the Neuroptera, appears, as is so often the case with very ancient forms, to connect the two related Orders of the Neuroptera and Orthoptera.
I have but little more to say on the Orthoptera.
Some of the species are very pugnacious: when two male field-crickets (Gryllus campestris) are confined together, they fight till one kills the other; and the species of Mantis are described as manoeuvring with their sword-like front-limbs, like hussars
The Chinese keep these insects in little bamboo cages, and match them like game-cocks.
(45.
Westwood, 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
i.
p.
427; for crickets, p.
445.
) With respect to colour, some exotic locusts are beautifully ornamented; the posterior wings being marked with red, blue, and black; but as throughout the Order the sexes rarely differ much in colour, it is not probable that they owe their bright tints to
Conspicuous colours may be of use to these insects, by giving notice that they are unpalatable.
Thus it has been observed (46.
Mr. Ch.
Horne, in 'Proceedings of the Entomological Society,' May 3, 1869, p.
xii.
) that a bright-coloured Indian locust was invariably rejected when offered to birds and lizards.
Some cases, however, are known of sexual differences in colour in this Order.
The male of an American cricket (47.
The Oecanthus nivalis, Harris, 'Insects of New England,' 1842, p.
124.
The two sexes of OE.
pellucidus of Europe differ, as I hear from Victor Carus, in nearly the same manner.
) is described as being as white as ivory, whilst the female varies from almost white to greenish-yellow or dusky.
Mr. Walsh informs me that the adult male of Spectrum femoratum (one of the Phasmidae) "is of a shining brownish-yellow colour; the adult female being of a dull, opaque, cinereous brown; the young of both sexes being green".
Lastly, I may mention that the male of one curious kind of cricket (48.
Platyblemnus: Westwood, 'Modern Classification,' vol.
i.
p.
447.
) is furnished with "a long membranous appendage, which falls over the face like a veil;" but what its use may be, is not known.
ORDER, NEUROPTERA.
Little need here be said, except as to colour.
In the Ephemeridae the sexes often differ slightly in their obscure tints (49.
B.D. Walsh, the 'Pseudo-neuroptera of Illinois,' in 'Proceedings of the Entomological Society of Philadelphia,' 1862, p.
361.
); but it is not probable that the males are thus rendered attractive to the females.
The Libellulidae, or dragon-flies, are ornamented with splendid green, blue, yellow, and vermilion metallic tints; and the sexes often differ.
Thus, as Prof.
Westwood remarks (50.
'Modern Classification,' vol.
ii.
p.
37.
), the males of some of the Agrionidae, "are of a rich blue with black wings, whilst the females are fine green with colourless wings".
But in Agrion Ramburii these colours are exactly reversed in the two sexes.
(51.
Walsh, ibid.
p.
381.
I am indebted to this naturalist for the following facts on Hetaerina, Anax, and Gomphus.
) In the extensive N. American genus of Hetaerina, the males alone have a beautiful carmine spot at the base of each wing.
In Anax junius the basal part of the abdomen in the male is a vivid ultramarine blue, and in the female grass-green.
In the allied genus Gomphus, on the other hand, and in some other genera, the sexes differ but little in colour.
In closely-allied forms throughout the animal kingdom, similar cases of the sexes differing greatly, or very little, or not at all, are of frequent occurrence.
Although there is so wide a difference in colour between the sexes of many Libellulidae, it is often difficult to say which is the more brilliant; and the ordinary coloration of the two sexes is reversed, as we have just seen, in one species of Agrion.
It is not probable that their colours in any case have been gained as a protection.
Mr. MacLachlan, who has closely attended to this family, writes to me that dragon-flies--the tyrants of the insect-world--are the least liable of any insect to be attacked by birds or other enemies, and he believes that their bright colours serve as a
Certain dragon-flies apparently are attracted by particular colours: Mr. Patterson observed (52.
'Transactions, Ent.
Soc.
' vol.
i.
1836, p.
lxxxi.
) that the Agrionidae, of which the males are blue, settled in numbers on the blue float of a fishing line; whilst two other species were attracted by shining white colours.
It is an interesting fact, first noticed by Schelver, that, in several genera belonging to two sub-families, the males on first emergence from the pupal state, are coloured exactly like the females; but that their bodies in a short time assume a
Mr. MacLachlan believes that in the male of Libellula depressa this change of colour does not occur until nearly a fortnight after the metamorphosis, when the sexes are ready to pair.
Certain species of Neurothemis present, according to Brauer (53.
See abstract in the 'Zoological Record' for 1867, p.
450.
), a curious case of dimorphism, some of the females having ordinary wings, whilst others have them "very richly netted, as in the males of the same species".
Brauer "explains the phenomenon on Darwinian principles by the supposition that the close netting of the veins is a secondary sexual character in the males, which has been abruptly transferred to some of the females, instead of, as generally occurs, to all
Mr. MacLachlan informs me of another instance of dimorphism in several species of Agrion, in which some individuals are of an orange colour, and these are invariably females.
This is probably a case of reversion; for in the true Libellulae, when the sexes differ in colour, the females are orange or yellow; so that supposing Agrion to be descended from some primordial form which resembled the typical Libellulae in its sexual
Although many dragon-flies are large, powerful, and fierce insects, the males have not been observed by Mr. MacLachlan to fight together, excepting, as he believes, in some of the smaller species of Agrion.
In another group in this Order, namely, the Termites or white ants, both sexes at the time of swarming may be seen running about, "the male after the female, sometimes two chasing one female, and contending with great eagerness who shall win the prize".
(54.
Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction to Entomology,' vol.
ii.
1818, p.
35.
) The Atropos pulsatorius is said to make a noise with its jaws, which is answered by other individuals.
(55.
Houzeau, 'Les Facults Mentales,' etc.
Tom.
i.
p.
104.
) ORDER, HYMENOPTERA.
That inimitable observer, M. Fabre (56.
See an interesting article, 'The Writings of Fabre,' in 'Nat.
Hist.
Review,' April 1862, p.
122.
), in describing the habits of Cerceris, a wasp-like insect, remarks that "fights frequently ensue between the males for the possession of some particular female, who sits an apparently unconcerned beholder of the struggle for supremacy, and when the
Westwood (57.
'Journal of Proceedings of Entomological Society,' Sept.
7, 1863, p.
169.
) says that the males of one of the saw-flies (Tenthredinae) "have been found fighting together, with their mandibles locked".
As M. Fabre speaks of the males of Cerceris striving to obtain a particular female, it may be well to bear in mind that insects belonging to this Order have the power of recognising each other after long intervals of time, and are deeply attached.
For instance, Pierre Huber, whose accuracy no one doubts, separated some ants, and when, after an interval of four months, they met others which had formerly belonged to the same community, they recognised and caressed one another with their antennae.
Had they been strangers they would have fought together.
Again, when two communities engage in a battle, the ants on the same side sometimes attack each other in the general confusion, but they soon perceive their mistake, and the one ant soothes the other.
(58.
P. Huber, 'Recherches sur les Moeurs des Fourmis,' 1810, pp.
150, 165.
) In this Order slight differences in colour, according to sex, are common, but conspicuous differences are rare except in the family of Bees; yet both sexes of certain groups are so brilliantly coloured--for instance in Chrysis, in which vermilion and
In the Ichneumonidae, according to Mr. Walsh (59.
'Proceedings of the Entomological Society of Philadelphia,' 1866, pp.
238, 239.
), the males are almost universally lighter-coloured than the females.
On the other hand, in the Tenthredinidae the males are generally darker than the females.
In the Siricidae the sexes frequently differ; thus the male of Sirex juvencus is banded with orange, whilst the female is dark purple; but it is difficult to say which sex is the more ornamented.
In Tremex columbae the female is much brighter coloured than the male.
I am informed by Mr. F. Smith, that the male ants of several species are black, the females being testaceous.
In the family of Bees, especially in the solitary species, as I hear from the same entomologist, the sexes often differ in colour.
The males are generally the brighter, and in Bombus as well as in Apathus, much more variable in colour than the females.
In Anthophora retusa the male is of a rich fulvous-brown, whilst the female is quite black: so are the females of several species of Xylocopa, the males being bright yellow.
On the other hand the females of some species, as of Andraena fulva, are much brighter coloured than the males.
Such differences in colour can hardly be accounted for by the males being defenceless and thus requiring protection, whilst the females are well defended by their stings.
H. Mller (60.
'Anwendung der Darwinschen Lehre auf Bienen,' Verh.
d.
n.
V. Jahrg.
xxix.
), who has particularly attended to the habits of bees, attributes these differences in colour in chief part to sexual selection.
That bees have a keen perception of colour is certain.
He says that the males search eagerly and fight for the possession of the females; and he accounts through such contests for the mandibles of the males being in certain species larger than those of the females.
In some cases the males are far more numerous than the females, either early in the season, or at all times and places, or locally; whereas the females in other cases are apparently in excess.
In some species the more beautiful males appear to have been selected by the females; and in others the more beautiful females by the males.
Consequently in certain genera (Mller, p.
42), the males of the several species differ much in appearance, whilst the females are almost indistinguishable; in other genera the reverse occurs.
H. Mller believes (p.
82) that the colours gained by one sex through sexual selection have often been transferred in a variable degree to the other sex, just as the pollen-collecting apparatus of the female has often been transferred to the male, to whom it is absolutely
(61.
M. Perrier in his article 'la Selection sexuelle d'aprs Darwin' ('Revue Scientifique,' Feb.
1873, p.
868), without apparently having reflected much on the subject, objects that as the males of social bees are known to be produced from unfertilised ova, they could not transmit new characters to their male offspring.
This is an extraordinary objection.
A female bee fertilised by a male, which presented some character facilitating the union of the sexes, or rendering him more attractive to the female, would lay eggs which would produce only females; but these young females would next year produce males;
To take a case with ordinary animals as nearly parallel as possible: if a female of any white quadruped or bird were crossed by a male of a black breed, and the male and female offspring were paired together, will it be pretended that the grandchildren
The acquirement of new characters by the sterile worker-bees is a much more difficult case, but I have endeavoured to shew in my 'Origin of Species,' how these sterile beings are subjected to the power of natural selection.
) Mutilla Europaea makes a stridulating noise; and according to Goureau (62.
Quoted by Westwood, 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
ii.
p.
214.
) both sexes have this power.
He attributes the sound to the friction of the third and preceding abdominal segments, and I find that these surfaces are marked with very fine concentric ridges; but so is the projecting thoracic collar into which the head articulates, and this collar,
It is rather surprising that both sexes should have the power of stridulating, as the male is winged and the female wingless.
It is notorious that Bees express certain emotions, as of anger, by the tone of their humming; and according to H. Mller (p.
80), the males of some species make a peculiar singing noise whilst pursuing the females.
ORDER, COLEOPTERA (BEETLES).
Many beetles are coloured so as to resemble the surfaces which they habitually frequent, and they thus escape detection by their enemies.
Other species, for instance diamond-beetles, are ornamented with splendid colours, which are often arranged in stripes, spots, crosses, and other elegant patterns.
Such colours can hardly serve directly as a protection, except in the case of certain flower-feeding species; but they may serve as a warning or means of recognition, on the same principle as the phosphorescence of the glow-worm.
As with beetles the colours of the two sexes are generally alike, we have no evidence that they have been gained through sexual selection; but this is at least possible, for they have been developed in one sex and then transferred to the other; and this
Blind beetles, which cannot of course behold each other's beauty, never, as I hear from Mr. Waterhouse, jun.
, exhibit bright colours, though they often have polished coats; but the explanation of their obscurity may be that they generally inhabit caves and other obscure stations.
Some Longicorns, especially certain Prionidae, offer an exception to the rule that the sexes of beetles do not differ in colour.
Most of these insects are large and splendidly coloured.
The males in the genus Pyrodes (63.
Pyrodes pulcherrimus, in which the sexes differ conspicuously, has been described by Mr. Bates in 'Transact.
Ent.
Soc.
' 1869, p.
50.
I will specify the few other cases in which I have heard of a difference in colour between the sexes of beetles.
Kirby and Spence ('Introduct.
to Entomology,' vol.
iii.
p.
301) mention a Cantharis, Meloe, Rhagium, and the Leptura testacea; the male of the latter being testaceous, with a black thorax, and the female of a dull red all over.
These two latter beetles belong to the family of Longicorns.
Messrs.
R. Trimen and Waterhouse, jun.
, inform me of two Lamellicorns, viz.
, a Peritrichia and Trichius, the male of the latter being more obscurely coloured than the female.
In Tillus elongatus the male is black, and the female always, as it is believed, of a dark blue colour, with a red thorax.
The male, also, of Orsodacna atra, as I hear from Mr. Walsh, is black, the female (the so- called O. ruficollis) having a rufous thorax.
), which I saw in Mr. Bates's collection, are generally redder but rather duller than the females, the latter being coloured of a more or less splendid golden-green.
On the other hand, in one species the male is golden-green, the female being richly tinted with red and purple.
In the genus Esmeralda the sexes differ so greatly in colour that they have been ranked as distinct species; in one species both are of a beautiful shining green, but the male has a red thorax.
On the whole, as far as I could judge, the females of those Prionidae, in which the sexes differ, are coloured more richly than the males, and this does not accord with the common rule in regard to colour, when acquired through sexual selection.
[Fig.
16.
Chalcosoma atlas.
Upper figure, male (reduced); lower figure, female (nat.
size).
Fig.
17.
Copris isidis.
Fig.
18.
Phanaeus faunus.
Fig.
19.
Dipelicus cantori.
Fig.
20.
Onthophagus rangifer, enlarged.
(In Figs.
17 to 20 the left-hand figures are males.
)] A most remarkable distinction between the sexes of many beetles is presented by the great horns which rise from the head, thorax, and clypeus of the males; and in some few cases from the under surface of the body.
These horns, in the great family of the Lamellicorns, resemble those of various quadrupeds, such as stags, rhinoceroses, etc.
, and are wonderful both from their size and diversified shapes.
Instead of describing them, I have given figures of the males and females of some of the more remarkable forms.
(Figs.
16 to 20.
) The females generally exhibit rudiments of the horns in the form of small knobs or ridges; but some are destitute of even the slightest rudiment.
On the other hand, the horns are nearly as well developed in the female as in the male Phanaeus lancifer; and only a little less well developed in the females of some other species of this genus and of Copris.
I am informed by Mr. Bates that the horns do not differ in any manner corresponding with the more important characteristic differences between the several subdivisions of the family: thus within the same section of the genus Onthophagus, there are species
In almost all cases, the horns are remarkable from their excessive variability; so that a graduated series can be formed, from the most highly developed males to others so degenerate that they can barely be distinguished from the females.
Mr. Walsh (64.
'Proceedings of the Entomological Society of Philadephia,' 1864, p.
228.
) found that in Phanaeus carnifex the horns were thrice as long in some males as in others.
Mr. Bates, after examining above a hundred males of Onthophagus rangifer (Fig.
20), thought that he had at last discovered a species in which the horns did not vary; but further research proved the contrary.
The extraordinary size of the horns, and their widely different structure in closely-allied forms, indicate that they have been formed for some purpose; but their excessive variability in the males of the same species leads to the inference that this
The horns do not shew marks of friction, as if used for any ordinary work.
Some authors suppose (65.
Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction to Entomology,' vol.
iii.
p.
300.
) that as the males wander about much more than the females, they require horns as a defence against their enemies; but as the horns are often blunt, they do not seem well adapted for defence.
The most obvious conjecture is that they are used by the males for fighting together; but the males have never been observed to fight; nor could Mr. Bates, after a careful examination of numerous species, find any sufficient evidence, in their mutilated or
If the males had been habitual fighters, the size of their bodies would probably have been increased through sexual selection, so as to have exceeded that of the females; but Mr. Bates, after comparing the two sexes in above a hundred species of the
In Lethrus, moreover, a beetle belonging to the same great division of the Lamellicorns, the males are known to fight, but are not provided with horns, though their mandibles are much larger than those of the female.
The conclusion that the horns have been acquired as ornaments is that which best agrees with the fact of their having been so immensely, yet not fixedly, developed,--as shewn by their extreme variability in the same species, and by their extreme diversity
This view will at first appear extremely improbable; but we shall hereafter find with many animals standing much higher in the scale, namely fishes, amphibians, reptiles and birds, that various kinds of crests, knobs, horns and combs have been developed
[Fig.
21.
Onitis furcifer, male viewed from beneath.
Fig.
22.
Onitis furcifer.
Left-hand figure, male, viewed laterally.
Right-hand figure, female.
a.
Rudiment of cephalic horn.
b.
Trace of thoracic horn or crest.
] The males of Onitis furcifer (Fig.
21), and of some other species of the genus, are furnished with singular projections on their anterior femora, and with a great fork or pair of horns on the lower surface of the thorax.
Judging from other insects, these may aid the male in clinging to the female.
Although the males have not even a trace of a horn on the upper surface of the body, yet the females plainly exhibit a rudiment of a single horn on the head (Fig.
22, a), and of a crest (b) on the thorax.
That the slight thoracic crest in the female is a rudiment of a projection proper to the male, though entirely absent in the male of this particular species, is clear: for the female of Bubas bison (a genus which comes next to Onitis) has a similar slight
So, again, there can hardly be a doubt that the little point (a) on the head of the female Onitis furcifer, as well as on the head of the females of two or three allied species, is a rudimentary representative of the cephalic horn, which is common to the
18).
The old belief that rudiments have been created to complete the scheme of nature is here so far from holding good, that we have a complete inversion of the ordinary state of things in the family.
We may reasonably suspect that the males originally bore horns and transferred them to the females in a rudimentary condition, as in so many other Lamellicorns.
Why the males subsequently lost their horns, we know not; but this may have been caused through the principle of compensation, owing to the development of the large horns and projections on the lower surface; and as these are confined to the males, the
[Fig.
23.
Bledius taurus, magnified.
Left-hand figure, male; right-hand figure, female.
] The cases hitherto given refer to the Lamellicorns, but the males of some few other beetles, belonging to two widely distinct groups, namely, the Curculionidae and Staphylinidae, are furnished with horns--in the former on the lower surface of the body
Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction to Entomology,' vol.
iii.
p.
329.
), in the latter on the upper surface of the head and thorax.
In the Staphylinidae, the horns of the males are extraordinarily variable in the same species, just as we have seen with the Lamellicorns.
In Siagonium we have a case of dimorphism, for the males can be divided into two sets, differing greatly in the size of their bodies and in the development of their horns, without intermediate gradations.
In a species of Bledius (Fig.
23), also belonging to the Staphylinidae, Professor Westwood states that, "male specimens can be found in the same locality in which the central horn of the thorax is very large, but the horns of the head quite rudimental; and others, in which the thoracic
(67.
'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
i.
p.
172: Siagonium, p.
172.
In the British Museum I noticed one male specimen of Siagonium in an intermediate condition, so that the dimorphism is not strict.
) Here we apparently have a case of compensation, which throws light on that just given, of the supposed loss of the upper horns by the males of Onitis.
LAW OF BATTLE.
Some male beetles, which seem ill-fitted for fighting, nevertheless engage in conflicts for the possession of the females.
Mr. Wallace (68.
'The Malay Archipelago,' vol.
ii.
1869, p.
276.
Riley, Sixth 'Report on Insects of Missouri,' 1874, p.
115.
) saw two males of Leptorhynchus angustatus, a linear beetle with a much elongated rostrum, "fighting for a female, who stood close by busy at her boring.
They pushed at each other with their rostra, and clawed and thumped, apparently in the greatest rage".
The smaller male, however, "soon ran away, acknowledging himself vanquished".
In some few cases male beetles are well adapted for fighting, by possessing great toothed mandibles, much larger than those of the females.
This is the case with the common stag-beetle (Lucanus cervus), the males of which emerge from the pupal state about a week before the other sex, so that several may often be seen pursuing the same female.
At this season they engage in fierce conflicts.
When Mr. A.H. Davis (69.
'Entomological Magazine,' vol.
i.
1833, p.
82.
See also on the conflicts of this species, Kirby and Spence, ibid.
vol.
iii.
p.
314; and Westwood, ibid.
vol.
i.
p.
187.
) enclosed two males with one female in a box, the larger male severely pinched the smaller one, until he resigned his pretensions.
A friend informs me that when a boy he often put the males together to see them fight, and he noticed that they were much bolder and fiercer than the females, as with the higher animals.
The males would seize hold of his finger, if held in front of them, but not so the females, although they have stronger jaws.
The males of many of the Lucanidae, as well as of the above-mentioned Leptorhynchus, are larger and more powerful insects than the females.
The two sexes of Lethrus cephalotes (one of the Lamellicorns) inhabit the same burrow; and the male has larger mandibles than the female.
If, during the breeding-season, a strange male attempts to enter the burrow, he is attacked; the female does not remain passive, but closes the mouth of the burrow, and encourages her mate by continually pushing him on from behind; and the battle lasts
(70.
Quoted from Fischer, in 'Dict.
Class.
d'Hist.
Nat.
' tom.
x.
p.
324.
) The two sexes of another Lamellicorn beetle, the Ateuchus cicatricosus, live in pairs, and seem much attached to each other; the male excites the females to roll the balls of dung in which the ova are deposited; and if she is removed, he becomes much
If the male is removed the female ceases all work, and as M. Brulerie believes, would remain on the same spot until she died.
(71.
'Ann.
Soc.
Entomolog.
France,' 1866, as quoted in 'Journal of Travel,' by A. Murray, 1868, p.
135.
) [Fig.
24.
Chiasognathus Grantii, reduced.
Upper figure, male; lower figure, female.
] The great mandibles of the male Lucanidae are extremely variable both in size and structure, and in this respect resemble the horns on the head and thorax of many male Lamellicorns and Staphylinidae.
A perfect series can be formed from the best-provided to the worst-provided or degenerate males.
Although the mandibles of the common stag-beetle, and probably of many other species, are used as efficient weapons for fighting, it is doubtful whether their great size can thus be accounted for.
We have seen that they are used by the Lucanus elaphus of N. America for seizing the female.
As they are so conspicuous and so elegantly branched, and as owing to their great length they are not well adapted for pinching, the suspicion has crossed my mind that they may in addition serve as an ornament, like the horns on the head and thorax of the
The male Chiasognathus grantii of S. Chile--a splendid beetle belonging to the same family--has enormously developed mandibles (Fig.
24); he is bold and pugnacious; when threatened he faces round, opens his great jaws, and at the same time stridulates loudly.
But the mandibles were not strong enough to pinch my finger so as to cause actual pain.
Sexual selection, which implies the possession of considerable perceptive powers and of strong passions, seems to have been more effective with the Lamellicorns than with any other family of beetles.
With some species the males are provided with weapons for fighting; some live in pairs and shew mutual affection; many have the power of stridulating when excited; many are furnished with the most extraordinary horns, apparently for the sake of ornament;
Lastly, several of the largest beetles in the world belong to this family, which was placed by Linnaeus and Fabricius as the head of the Order.
(72.
Westwood, 'Modern Classification,' vol.
i.
p.
184.
) STRIDULATING ORGANS.
Beetles belonging to many and widely distinct families possess these organs.
The sound thus produced can sometimes be heard at the distance of several feet or even yards (73.
Wollaston, 'On Certain Musical Curculionidae,' 'Annals and Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
vi.
1860, p.
14.
), but it is not comparable with that made by the Orthoptera.
The rasp generally consists of a narrow, slightly-raised surface, crossed by very fine, parallel ribs, sometimes so fine as to cause iridescent colours, and having a very elegant appearance under the microscope.
In some cases, as with Typhoeus, minute, bristly or scale-like prominences, with which the whole surrounding surface is covered in approximately parallel lines, could be traced passing into the ribs of the rasp.
The transition takes place by their becoming confluent and straight, and at the same time more prominent and smooth.
A hard ridge on an adjoining part of the body serves as the scraper for the rasp, but this scraper in some cases has been specially modified for the purpose.
It is rapidly moved across the rasp, or conversely the rasp across the scraper.
[Fig.
25.
Necrophorus (from Landois).
r.
The two rasps.
Left-hand figure, part of the rasp highly magnified.
] These organs are situated in widely different positions.
In the carrion- beetles (Necrophorus) two parallel rasps (r, Fig.
25) stand on the dorsal surface of the fifth abdominal segment, each rasp (74.
Landois, 'Zeitschrift fur wissenschaft Zoolog.
' B. xvii.
1867, s.
127.
) consisting of 126 to 140 fine ribs.
These ribs are scraped against the posterior margins of the elytra, a small portion of which projects beyond the general outline.
In many Crioceridae, and in Clythra 4-punctata (one of the Chrysomelidae), and in some Tenebrionidae, etc.
(75.
I am greatly indebted to Mr. G.R. Crotch for having sent me many prepared specimens of various beetles belonging to these three families and to others, as well as for valuable information.
He believes that the power of stridulation in the Clythra has not been previously observed.
I am also much indebted to Mr. E.W. Janson, for information and specimens.
I may add that my son, Mr. F. Darwin, finds that Dermestes murinus stridulates, but he searched in vain for the apparatus.
Scolytus has lately been described by Dr. Chapman as a stridulator, in the 'Entomologist's Monthly Magazine,' vol.
vi.
p.
130.
), the rasp is seated on the dorsal apex of the abdomen, on the pygidium or pro-pygidium, and is scraped in the same manner by the elytra.
In Heterocerus, which belongs to another family, the rasps are placed on the sides of the first abdominal segment, and are scraped by ridges on the femora.
(76.
Schiodte, translated, in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
xx.
1867, p.
37.
) In certain Curculionidae and Carabidae (77.
Westring has described (Kroyer, 'Naturhist.
Tidskrift,' B. ii.
1848- 49, p.
334) the stridulating organs in these two, as well as in other families.
In the Carabidae I have examined Elaphrus uliginosus and Blethisa multipunctata, sent to me by Mr. Crotch.
In Blethisa the transverse ridges on the furrowed border of the abdominal segment do not, as far as I could judge, come into play in scraping the rasps on the elytra.
), the parts are completely reversed in position, for the rasps are seated on the inferior surface of the elytra, near their apices, or along their outer margins, and the edges of the abdominal segments serve as the scrapers.
In Pelobius Hermanni (one of Dytiscidae or water-beetles) a strong ridge runs parallel and near to the sutural margin of the elytra, and is crossed by ribs, coarse in the middle part, but becoming gradually finer at both ends, especially at the upper end;
In a great number of long-horned beetles (Longicornia) the organs are situated quite otherwise, the rasp being on the meso-thorax, which is rubbed against the pro-thorax; Landois counted 238 very fine ribs on the rasp of Cerambyx heros.
[Fig.
26.
Hind-leg of Geotrupes stercorarius (from Landois).
r.
Rasp.
c.
Coxa.
f.
Femur.
t.
Tibia.
tr.
Tarsi.
] Many Lamellicorns have the power of stridulating, and the organs differ greatly in position.
Some species stridulate very loudly, so that when Mr. F. Smith caught a Trox sabulosus, a gamekeeper, who stood by, thought he had caught a mouse; but I failed to discover the proper organs in this beetle.
In Geotrupes and Typhoeus, a narrow ridge runs obliquely across (r, Fig.
26) the coxa of each hind-leg (having in G. stercorarius 84 ribs), which is scraped by a specially projecting part of one of the abdominal segments.
In the nearly allied Copris lunaris, an excessively narrow fine rasp runs along the sutural margin of the elytra, with another short rasp near the basal outer margin; but in some other Coprini the rasp is seated, according to Leconte (78.
I am indebted to Mr. Walsh, of Illinois, for having sent me extracts from Leconte's 'Introduction to Entomology,' pp.
101, 143.
), on the dorsal surface of the abdomen.
In Oryctes it is seated on the pro-pygidium; and, according to the same entomologist, in some other Dynastini, on the under surface of the elytra.
Lastly, Westring states that in Omaloplia brunnea the rasp is placed on the pro-sternum, and the scraper on the meta-sternum, the parts thus occupying the under surface of the body, instead of the upper surface as in the Longicorns.
We thus see that in the different coleopterous families the stridulating organs are wonderfully diversified in position, but not much in structure.
Within the same family some species are provided with these organs, and others are destitute of them.
This diversity is intelligible, if we suppose that originally various beetles made a shuffling or hissing noise by the rubbing together of any hard and rough parts of their bodies, which happened to be in contact; and that from the noise thus produced
Some beetles as they move, now produce, either intentionally or unintentionally, a shuffling noise, without possessing any proper organs for the purpose.
Mr. Wallace informs me that the Euchirus longimanus (a Lamellicorn, with the anterior legs wonderfully elongated in the male) "makes, whilst moving, a low hissing sound by the protrusion and contraction of the abdomen; and when seized it produces a grating
The hissing sound is clearly due to a narrow rasp running along the sutural margin of each elytron; and I could likewise make the grating sound by rubbing the shagreened surface of the femur against the granulated margin of the corresponding elytron; but I
After examining Cychrus, and reading what Westring has written about this beetle, it seems very doubtful whether it possesses any true rasp, though it has the power of emitting a sound.
From the analogy of the Orthoptera and Homoptera, I expected to find the stridulating organs in the Coleoptera differing according to sex; but Landois, who has carefully examined several species, observed no such difference; nor did Westring; nor did Mr.
Any difference in these organs, if slight, would, however, be difficult to detect, on account of their great variability.
Thus, in the first pair of specimens of Necrophorus humator and of Pelobius which I examined, the rasp was considerably larger in the male than in the female; but not so with succeeding specimens.
In Geotrupes stercorarius the rasp appeared to me thicker, opaquer, and more prominent in three males than in the same number of females; in order, therefore, to discover whether the sexes differed in their power of stridulating, my son, Mr. F. Darwin,
He then examined all these specimens, and found that the males were very nearly in the same proportion to the females in both the lots.
Mr. F. Smith has kept alive numerous specimens of Monoynchus pseudacori (Curculionidae), and is convinced that both sexes stridulate, and apparently in an equal degree.
Nevertheless, the power of stridulating is certainly a sexual character in some few Coleoptera.
Mr. Crotch discovered that the males alone of two species of Heliopathes (Tenebrionidae) possess stridulating organs.
I examined five males of H. gibbus, and in all these there was a well- developed rasp, partially divided into two, on the dorsal surface of the terminal abdominal segment; whilst in the same number of females there was not even a rudiment of the rasp, the
In H. cribratostriatus the male has a similar rasp, excepting that it is not partially divided into two portions, and the female is completely destitute of this organ; the male in addition has on the apical margins of the elytra, on each side of the
Again, in three species of the Lamellicorn genus Oryctes, we have a nearly parallel case.
In the females of O. gryphus and nasicornis the ribs on the rasp of the pro-pygidium are less continuous and less distinct than in the males; but the chief difference is that the whole upper surface of this segment, when held in the proper light, is seen
It should be noticed that in all Coleoptera the effective part of the rasp is destitute of hairs.
In O. senegalensis the difference between the sexes is more strongly marked, and this is best seen when the proper abdominal segment is cleaned and viewed as a transparent object.
In the female the whole surface is covered with little separate crests, bearing spines; whilst in the male these crests in proceeding towards the apex, become more and more confluent, regular, and naked; so that three-fourths of the segment is covered with
In the females, however, of all three species of Oryctes, a slight grating or stridulating sound is produced, when the abdomen of a softened specimen is pushed backwards and forwards.
In the case of the Heliopathes and Oryctes there can hardly be a doubt that the males stridulate in order to call or to excite the females; but with most beetles the stridulation apparently serves both sexes as a mutual call.
Beetles stridulate under various emotions, in the same manner as birds use their voices for many purposes besides singing to their mates.
The great Chiasognathus stridulates in anger or defiance; many species do the same from distress or fear, if held so that they cannot escape; by striking the hollow stems of trees in the Canary Islands, Messrs.
Wollaston and Crotch were able to discover the presence of beetles belonging to the genus Acalles by their stridulation.
Lastly, the male Ateuchus stridulates to encourage the female in her work, and from distress when she is removed.
(79.
M. P. de la Brulerie, as quoted in 'Journal of Travel,' A. Murray, vol.
i.
1868, p.
135.
) Some naturalists believe that beetles make this noise to frighten away their enemies; but I cannot think that a quadruped or bird, able to devour a large beetle, would be frightened by so slight a sound.
The belief that the stridulation serves as a sexual call is supported by the fact that death-ticks (Anobium tessellatum) are well known to answer each other's ticking, and, as I have myself observed, a tapping noise artificially made.
Mr. Doubleday also informs me that he has sometimes observed a female ticking (80.
According to Mr. Doubleday, "the noise is produced by the insect raising itself on its legs as high as it can, and then striking its thorax five or six times, in rapid succession, against the substance upon which it is sitting".
For references on this subject see Landois, 'Zeitschrift fr wissen.
Zoolog.
' B. xvii.
s.
131.
Olivier says (as quoted by Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction to Entomology,' vol.
ii.
p.
395) that the female of Pimelia striata produces a rather loud sound by striking her abdomen against any hard substance, "and that the male, obedient to this call, soon attends her, and they pair".
), and in an hour or two afterwards has found her united with a male, and on one occasion surrounded by several males.
Finally, it is probable that the two sexes of many kinds of beetles were at first enabled to find each other by the slight shuffling noise produced by the rubbing together of the adjoining hard parts of their bodies; and that as those males or females
CHAPTER XI.
INSECTS, continued.
ORDER LEPIDOPTERA.
(BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS.
) Courtship of butterflies--Battles--Ticking noise--Colours common to both sexes, or more brilliant in the males--Examples--Not due to the direct action of the conditions of life--Colours adapted for protection--Colours of moths--Display--Perceptive powers
In this great Order the most interesting points for us are the differences in colour between the sexes of the same species, and between the distinct species of the same genus.
Nearly the whole of the following chapter will be devoted to this subject; but I will first make a few remarks on one or two other points.
Several males may often be seen pursuing and crowding round the same female.
Their courtship appears to be a prolonged affair, for I have frequently watched one or more males pirouetting round a female until I was tired, without seeing the end of the courtship.
Mr. A.G. Butler also informs me that he has several times watched a male courting a female for a full quarter of an hour; but she pertinaciously refused him, and at last settled on the ground and closed her wings, so as to escape from his addresses.
Although butterflies are weak and fragile creatures, they are pugnacious, and an emperor butterfly (1.
Apatura Iris: 'The Entomologist's Weekly Intelligence,' 1859, p.
139.
For the Bornean Butterflies, see C. Collingwood, 'Rambles of a Naturalist,' 1868, p.
183.
) has been captured with the tips of its wings broken from a conflict with another male.
Mr. Collingwood, in speaking of the frequent battles between the butterflies of Borneo, says, "They whirl round each other with the greatest rapidity, and appear to be incited by the greatest ferocity".
The Ageronia feronia makes a noise like that produced by a toothed wheel passing under a spring catch, and which can be heard at the distance of several yards: I noticed this sound at Rio de Janeiro, only when two of these butterflies were chasing each
(2.
See my 'Journal of Researches,' 1845, p.
33.
Mr. Doubleday has detected ('Proc.
Ent.
Soc.
' March 3, 1845, p.
123) a peculiar membranous sac at the base of the front wings, which is probably connected with the production of the sound.
For the case of Thecophora, see 'Zoological Record,' 1869, p.
401.
For Mr. Buchanan White's observations, the Scottish Naturalist, July 1872, p.
214.
) Some moths also produce sounds; for instance, the males Theocophora fovea.
On two occasions Mr. F. Buchanan White (3.
'The Scottish Naturalist,' July 1872, p.
213.
) heard a sharp quick noise made by the male of Hylophila prasinana, and which he believes to be produced, as in Cicada, by an elastic membrane, furnished with a muscle.
He quotes, also, Guenee, that Setina produces a sound like the ticking of a watch, apparently by the aid of "two large tympaniform vesicles, situated in the pectoral region"; and these "are much more developed in the male than in the female".
Hence the sound-producing organs in the Lepidoptera appear to stand in some relation with the sexual functions.
I have not alluded to the well-known noise made by the Death's Head Sphinx, for it is generally heard soon after the moth has emerged from its cocoon.
Giard has always observed that the musky odour, which is emitted by two species of Sphinx moths, is peculiar to the males (4.
'Zoological Record,' 1869, p.
347.
); and in the higher classes we shall meet with many instances of the males alone being odoriferous.
Every one must have admired the extreme beauty of many butterflies and of some moths; and it may be asked, are their colours and diversified patterns the result of the direct action of the physical conditions to which these insects have been exposed,
Or have successive variations been accumulated and determined as a protection, or for some unknown purpose, or that one sex may be attractive to the other?
And, again, what is the meaning of the colours being widely different in the males and females of certain species, and alike in the two sexes of other species of the same genus?
Before attempting to answer these questions a body of facts must be given.
With our beautiful English butterflies, the admiral, peacock, and painted lady (Vanessae), as well as many others, the sexes are alike.
This is also the case with the magnificent Heliconidae, and most of the Danaidae in the tropics.
But in certain other tropical groups, and in some of our English butterflies, as the purple emperor, orange-tip, etc.
(Apatura Iris and Anthocharis cardamines), the sexes differ either greatly or slightly in colour.
No language suffices to describe the splendour of the males of some tropical species.
Even within the same genus we often find species presenting extraordinary differences between the sexes, whilst others have their sexes closely alike.
Thus in the South American genus Epicalia, Mr. Bates, to whom I am indebted for most of the following facts, and for looking over this whole discussion, informs me that he knows twelve species, the two sexes of which haunt the same stations (and this is
(5.
See also Mr. Bates's paper in 'Proc.
Ent.
Soc.
of Philadelphia,' 1865, p.
206.
Also Mr. Wallace on the same subject, in regard to Diadema, in 'Transactions, Entomological Society of London,' 1869, p.
278.
) In nine of these twelve species the males rank amongst the most brilliant of all butterflies, and differ so greatly from the comparatively plain females that they were formerly placed in distinct genera.
The females of these nine species resemble each other in their general type of coloration; and they likewise resemble both sexes of the species in several allied genera found in various parts of the world.
Hence we may infer that these nine species, and probably all the others of the genus, are descended from an ancestral form which was coloured in nearly the same manner.
In the tenth species the female still retains the same general colouring, but the male resembles her, so that he is coloured in a much less gaudy and contrasted manner than the males of the previous species.
In the eleventh and twelfth species, the females depart from the usual type, for they are gaily decorated almost like the males, but in a somewhat less degree.
Hence in these two latter species the bright colours of the males seem to have been transferred to the females; whilst in the tenth species the male has either retained or recovered the plain colours of the female, as well as of the parent-form of the
The sexes in these three cases have thus been rendered nearly alike, though in an opposite manner.
In the allied genus Eubagis, both sexes of some of the species are plain-coloured and nearly alike; whilst with the greater number the males are decorated with beautiful metallic tints in a diversified manner, and differ much from their females.
The females throughout the genus retain the same general style of colouring, so that they resemble one another much more closely than they resemble their own males.
In the genus Papilio, all the species of the Aeneas group are remarkable for their conspicuous and strongly contrasted colours, and they illustrate the frequent tendency to gradation in the amount of difference between the sexes.
In a few species, for instance in P. ascanius, the males and females are alike; in others the males are either a little brighter, or very much more superb than the females.
The genus Junonia, allied to our Vanessae, offers a nearly parallel case, for although the sexes of most of the species resemble each other, and are destitute of rich colours, yet in certain species, as in J. oenone, the male is rather more bright-coloured
Another striking case was pointed out to me in the British Museum by Mr. A. Butler, namely, one of the tropical American Theclae, in which both sexes are nearly alike and wonderfully splendid; in another species the male is coloured in a similarly gorgeous
Our common little English blue butterflies of the genus Lycaena, illustrate the various differences in colour between the sexes, almost as well, though not in so striking a manner, as the above exotic genera.
In Lycaena agestis both sexes have wings of a brown colour, bordered with small ocellated orange spots, and are thus alike.
In L. oegon the wings of the males are of a fine blue, bordered with black, whilst those of the female are brown, with a similar border, closely resembling the wings of L. agestis.
Lastly, in L. arion both sexes are of a blue colour and are very like, though in the female the edges of the wings are rather duskier, with the black spots plainer; and in a bright blue Indian species both sexes are still more alike.
I have given the foregoing details in order to shew, in the first place, that when the sexes of butterflies differ, the male as a general rule is the more beautiful, and departs more from the usual type of colouring of the group to which the species
Hence in most groups the females of the several species resemble each other much more closely than do the males.
In some cases, however, to which I shall hereafter allude, the females are coloured more splendidly than the males.
In the second place, these details have been given to bring clearly before the mind that within the same genus, the two sexes frequently present every gradation from no difference in colour, to so great a difference that it was long before the two were
In the third place, we have seen that when the sexes nearly resemble each other, this appears due either to the male having transferred his colours to the female, or to the male having retained, or perhaps recovered, the primordial colours of the group.
It also deserves notice that in those groups in which the sexes differ, the females usually somewhat resemble the males, so that when the males are beautiful to an extraordinary degree, the females almost invariably exhibit some degree of beauty.
From the many cases of gradation in the amount of difference between the sexes, and from the prevalence of the same general type of coloration throughout the whole of the same group, we may conclude that the causes have generally been the same which have
As so many gorgeous butterflies inhabit the tropics, it has often been supposed that they owe their colours to the great heat and moisture of these zones; but Mr. Bates (6.
'The Naturalist on the Amazons,' vol.
i.
1863, p.
19.
) has shown by the comparison of various closely-allied groups of insects from the temperate and tropical regions, that this view cannot be maintained; and the evidence becomes conclusive when brilliantly- coloured males and plain-coloured females of the
Even when the sexes resemble each other, we can hardly believe that their brilliant and beautifully-arranged colours are the purposeless result of the nature of the tissues and of the action of the surrounding conditions.
With animals of all kinds, whenever colour has been modified for some special purpose, this has been, as far as we can judge, either for direct or indirect protection, or as an attraction between the sexes.
With many species of butterflies the upper surfaces of the wings are obscure; and this in all probability leads to their escaping observation and danger.
But butterflies would be particularly liable to be attacked by their enemies when at rest; and most kinds whilst resting raise their wings vertically over their backs, so that the lower surface alone is exposed to view.
Hence it is this side which is often coloured so as to imitate the objects on which these insects commonly rest.
Dr. Rossler, I believe, first noticed the similarity of the closed wings of certain Vanessae and other butterflies to the bark of trees.
Many analogous and striking facts could be given.
The most interesting one is that recorded by Mr. Wallace (7.
See the interesting article in the 'Westminster Review,' July 1867, p.
10.
A woodcut of the Kallima is given by Mr. Wallace in 'Hardwicke's Science Gossip,' September 1867, p.
196.
) of a common Indian and Sumatran butterfly (Kallima) which disappears like magic when it settles on a bush; for it hides its head and antennae between its closed wings, which, in form, colour and veining, cannot be distinguished from a withered leaf with
In some other cases the lower surfaces of the wings are brilliantly coloured, and yet are protective; thus in Thecla rubi the wings when closed are of an emerald green, and resemble the young leaves of the bramble, on which in spring this butterfly may
It is also remarkable that in very many species in which the sexes differ greatly in colour on their upper surface, the lower surface is closely similar or identical in both sexes, and serves as a protection.
(8.
Mr. G. Fraser, in 'Nature,' April 1871, p.
489.
) Although the obscure tints both of the upper and under sides of many butterflies no doubt serve to conceal them, yet we cannot extend this view to the brilliant and conspicuous colours on the upper surface of such species as our admiral and peacock
In these species both sexes are alike; but in the common brimstone butterfly (Gonepteryx rhamni), the male is of an intense yellow, whilst the female is much paler; and in the orange-tip (Anthocharis cardamines) the males alone have their wings tipped with
Both the males and females in these cases are conspicuous, and it is not credible that their difference in colour should stand in any relation to ordinary protection.
Prof.
Weismann remarks (9.
'Einfluss der Isolirung auf die Artbildung,' 1872, p.
58.
), that the female of one of the Lycaenae expands her brown wings when she settles on the ground, and is then almost invisible; the male, on the other hand, as if aware of the danger incurred from the bright blue of the upper surface of his wings, rests
Nevertheless, it is probable that conspicuous colours are indirectly beneficial to many species, as a warning that they are unpalatable.
For in certain other cases, beauty has been gained through the imitation of other beautiful species, which inhabit the same district and enjoy an immunity from attack by being in some way offensive to their enemies; but then we have to account for the
As Mr. Walsh has remarked to me, the females of our orange-tip butterfly, above referred to, and of an American species (Anth.
genutia) probably shew us the primordial colours of the parent-species of the genus; for both sexes of four or five widely-distributed species are coloured in nearly the same manner.
As in several previous cases, we may here infer that it is the males of Anth.
cardamines and genutia which have departed from the usual type of the genus.
In the Anth.
sara from California, the orange- tips to the wings have been partially developed in the female; but they are paler than in the male, and slightly different in some other respects.
In an allied Indian form, the Iphias glaucippe, the orange-tips are fully developed in both sexes.
In this Iphias, as pointed out to me by Mr. A. Butler, the under surface of the wings marvellously resembles a pale- coloured leaf; and in our English orange-tip, the under surface resembles the flower-head of the wild parsley, on which the butterfly often
(10.
See the interesting observations by T.W. Wood, 'The Student,' Sept.
1868, p.
81.
) The same reason which compels us to believe that the lower surfaces have here been coloured for the sake of protection, leads us to deny that the wings have been tipped with bright orange for the same purpose, especially when this character is confined
Most Moths rest motionless during the whole or greater part of the day with their wings depressed; and the whole upper surface is often shaded and coloured in an admirable manner, as Mr. Wallace has remarked, for escaping detection.
The front-wings of the Bombycidae and Noctuidae (11.
Mr. Wallace in 'Hardwicke's Science Gossip,' September 1867, p.
193.
), when at rest, generally overlap and conceal the hind-wings; so that the latter might be brightly coloured without much risk; and they are in fact often thus coloured.
During flight, moths would often be able to escape from their enemies; nevertheless, as the hind-wings are then fully exposed to view, their bright colours must generally have been acquired at some little risk.
But the following fact shews how cautious we ought to be in drawing conclusions on this head.
The common Yellow Under-wings (Triphaena) often fly about during the day or early evening, and are then conspicuous from the colour of their hind-wings.
It would naturally be thought that this would be a source of danger; but Mr. J. Jenner Weir believes that it actually serves them as a means of escape, for birds strike at these brightly coloured and fragile surfaces, instead of at the body.
For instance, Mr. Weir turned into his aviary a vigorous specimen of Triphaena pronuba, which was instantly pursued by a robin; but the bird's attention being caught by the coloured wings, the moth was not captured until after about fifty attempts, and
He tried the same experiment, in the open air, with a swallow and T. fimbria; but the large size of this moth probably interfered with its capture.
(12.
See also, on this subject, Mr. Weir's paper in 'Transactions, Entomological Society,' 1869, p.
23.
) We are thus reminded of a statement made by Mr. Wallace (13.
'Westminster Review,' July 1867, p.
16.
), namely, that in the Brazilian forests and Malayan islands, many common and highly-decorated butterflies are weak flyers, though furnished with a broad expanse of wing; and they "are often captured with pierced and broken wings, as if they had been
DISPLAY.
The bright colours of many butterflies and of some moths are specially arranged for display, so that they may be readily seen.
During the night colours are not visible, and there can be no doubt that the nocturnal moths, taken as a body, are much less gaily decorated than butterflies, all of which are diurnal in their habits.
But the moths of certain families, such as the Zygaenidae, several Sphingidae, Uraniidae, some Arctiidae and Saturniidae, fly about during the day or early evening, and many of these are extremely beautiful, being far brighter coloured than the strictly
A few exceptional cases, however, of bright-coloured nocturnal species have been recorded.
(14.
For instance, Lithosia; but Prof.
Westwood ('Modern Class.
of Insects,' vol.
ii.
p.
390) seems surprised at this case.
On the relative colours of diurnal and nocturnal Lepidoptera, see ibid.
pp.
333 and 392; also Harris, 'Treatise on the Insects of New England,' 1842, p.
315.
) There is evidence of another kind in regard to display.
Butterflies, as before remarked, elevate their wings when at rest, but whilst basking in the sunshine often alternately raise and depress them, thus exposing both surfaces to full view; and although the lower surface is often coloured in an obscure manner
In some tropical species the lower surface is even more brilliantly coloured than the upper.
(15.
Such differences between the upper and lower surfaces of the wings of several species of Papilio may be seen in the beautiful plates to Mr. Wallace's 'Memoir on the Papilionidae of the Malayan Region,' in 'Transactions of the Linnean Society,' vol.
xxv.
part i.
1865.
) In the English fritillaries (Argynnis) the lower surface alone is ornamented with shining silver.
Nevertheless, as a general rule, the upper surface, which is probably more fully exposed, is coloured more brightly and diversely than the lower.
Hence the lower surface generally affords to entomologists the more useful character for detecting the affinities of the various species.
Fritz Mller informs me that three species of Castnia are found near his house in S. Brazil: of two of them the hind-wings are obscure, and are always covered by the front-wings when these butterflies are at rest; but the third species has black
Other such cases could be added.
If we now turn to the enormous group of moths, which, as I hear from Mr. Stainton, do not habitually expose the under surface of their wings to full view, we find this side very rarely coloured with a brightness greater than, or even equal to, that of the
Some exceptions to the rule, either real or apparent, must be noticed, as the case of Hypopyra.
(16.
See Mr. Wormald on this moth: 'Proceedings of the Entomological Society,' March 2, 1868.
) Mr. Trimen informs me that in Guenee's great work, three moths are figured, in which the under surface is much the more brilliant.
For instance, in the Australian Gastrophora the upper surface of the fore-wing is pale greyish-ochreous, while the lower surface is magnificently ornamented by an ocellus of cobalt-blue, placed in the midst of a black mark, surrounded by orange-yellow, and
But the habits of these three moths are unknown; so that no explanation can be given of their unusual style of colouring.
Mr. Trimen also informs me that the lower surface of the wings in certain other Geometrae (17.
See also an account of the S. American genus Erateina (one of the Geometrae) in 'Transactions, Ent.
Soc.
' new series, vol.
v.
pl.
xv.
and xvi.
) and quadrifid Noctuae are either more variegated or more brightly-coloured than the upper surface; but some of these species have the habit of "holding their wings quite erect over their backs, retaining them in this position for a considerable time,"
Other species, when settled on the ground or herbage, now and then suddenly and slightly lift up their wings.
Hence the lower surface of the wings being brighter than the upper surface in certain moths is not so anomalous as it at first appears.
The Saturniidae include some of the most beautiful of all moths, their wings being decorated, as in our British Emperor moth, with fine ocelli; and Mr. T.W. Wood (18.
'Proc Ent.
Soc.
of London,' July 6, 1868, p.
xxvii.
) observes that they resemble butterflies in some of their movements; "for instance, in the gentle waving up and down of the wings as if for display, which is more characteristic of diurnal than of nocturnal Lepidoptera".
It is a singular fact that no British moths which are brilliantly coloured, and, as far as I can discover, hardly any foreign species, differ much in colour according to sex; though this is the case with many brilliant butterflies.
The male, however, of one American moth, the Saturnia Io, is described as having its fore-wings deep yellow, curiously marked with purplish-red spots; whilst the wings of the female are purple-brown, marked with grey lines.
(19.
Harris, 'Treatise,' etc.
, edited by Flint, 1862, p.
395.
) The British moths which differ sexually in colour are all brown, or of various dull yellow tints, or nearly white.
In several species the males are much darker than the females (20.
For instance, I observe in my son's cabinet that the males are darker than the females in the Lasiocampa quercus, Odonestis potatoria, Hypogymna dispar, Dasychira pudibunda, and Cycnia mendica.
In this latter species the difference in colour between the two sexes is strongly marked; and Mr. Wallace informs me that we here have, as he believes, an instance of protective mimicry confined to one sex, as will hereafter be more fully explained.
The white female of the Cycnia resembles the very common Spilosoma menthrasti, both sexes of which are white; and Mr. Stainton observed that this latter moth was rejected with utter disgust by a whole brood of young turkeys, which were fond of eating other
), and these belong to groups which generally fly about during the afternoon.
On the other hand, in many genera, as Mr. Stainton informs me, the males have the hind-wings whiter than those of the female--of which fact Agrotis exclamationis offers a good instance.
In the Ghost Moth (Hepialus humuli) the difference is more strongly marked; the males being white, and the females yellow with darker markings.
(21.
It is remarkable, that in the Shetland Islands the male of this moth, instead of differing widely from the female, frequently resembles her closely in colour (see Mr. MacLachlan, 'Transactions, Entomological Society,' vol.
ii.
1866, p.
459).
Mr. G. Fraser suggests ('Nature,' April 1871, p.
489) that at the season of the year when the ghost-moth appears in these northern islands, the whiteness of the males would not be needed to render them visible to the females in the twilight night.
) It is probable that in these cases the males are thus rendered more conspicuous, and more easily seen by the females whilst flying about in the dusk.
From the several foregoing facts it is impossible to admit that the brilliant colours of butterflies, and of some few moths, have commonly been acquired for the sake of protection.
We have seen that their colours and elegant patterns are arranged and exhibited as if for display.
Hence I am led to believe that the females prefer or are most excited by the more brilliant males; for on any other supposition the males would, as far as we can see, be ornamented to no purpose.
We know that ants and certain Lamellicorn beetles are capable of feeling an attachment for each other, and that ants recognise their fellows after an interval of several months.
Hence there is no abstract improbability in the Lepidoptera, which probably stand nearly or quite as high in the scale as these insects, having sufficient mental capacity to admire bright colours.
They certainly discover flowers by colour.
The Humming-bird Sphinx may often be seen to swoop down from a distance on a bunch of flowers in the midst of green foliage; and I have been assured by two persons abroad, that these moths repeatedly visit flowers painted on the walls of a room, and vainly
Fritz Mller informs me that several kinds of butterflies in S. Brazil shew an unmistakable preference for certain colours over others: he observed that they very often visited the brilliant red flowers of five or six genera of plants, but never the white
As I hear from Mr. Doubleday, the common white butterfly often flies down to a bit of paper on the ground, no doubt mistaking it for one of its own species.
Mr. Collingwood (22.
'Rambles of a Naturalist in the Chinese Seas,' 1868, p.
182.
) in speaking of the difficulty in collecting certain butterflies in the Malay Archipelago, states that "a dead specimen pinned upon a conspicuous twig will often arrest an insect of the same species in its headlong flight, and bring it down within easy
The courtship of butterflies is, as before remarked, a prolonged affair.
The males sometimes fight together in rivalry; and many may be seen pursuing or crowding round the same female.
Unless, then, the females prefer one male to another, the pairing must be left to mere chance, and this does not appear probable.
If, on the other band, the females habitually, or even occasionally, prefer the more beautiful males, the colours of the latter will have been rendered brighter by degrees, and will have been transmitted to both sexes or to one sex, according to the law of
The process of sexual selection will have been much facilitated, if the conclusion can be trusted, arrived at from various kinds of evidence in the supplement to the ninth chapter; namely, that the males of many Lepidoptera, at least in the imago state,
Some facts, however, are opposed to the belief that female butterflies prefer the more beautiful males; thus, as I have been assured by several collectors, fresh females may frequently be seen paired with battered, faded, or dingy males; but this is a
With moths of the family of the Bombycidae, the sexes pair immediately after assuming the imago state; for they cannot feed, owing to the rudimentary condition of their mouths.
The females, as several entomologists have remarked to me, lie in an almost torpid state, and appear not to evince the least choice in regard to their partners.
This is the case with the common silk-moth (B.
mori), as I have been told by some continental and English breeders.
Dr. Wallace, who has had great experience in breeding Bombyx cynthia, is convinced that the females evince no choice or preference.
He has kept above 300 of these moths together, and has often found the most vigorous females mated with stunted males.
The reverse appears to occur seldom; for, as he believes, the more vigorous males pass over the weakly females, and are attracted by those endowed with most vitality.
Nevertheless, the Bombycidae, though obscurely-coloured, are often beautiful to our eyes from their elegant and mottled shades.
I have as yet only referred to the species in which the males are brighter coloured than the females, and I have attributed their beauty to the females for many generations having chosen and paired with the more attractive males.
But converse cases occur, though rarely, in which the females are more brilliant than the males; and here, as I believe, the males have selected the more beautiful females, and have thus slowly added to their beauty.
We do not know why in various classes of animals the males of some few species have selected the more beautiful females instead of having gladly accepted any female, as seems to be the general rule in the animal kingdom: but if, contrary to what generally
Mr. Butler shewed me several species of Callidryas in the British Museum, in some of which the females equalled, and in others greatly surpassed the males in beauty; for the females alone have the borders of their wings suffused with crimson and orange,
The plainer males of these species closely resemble each other, shewing that here the females have been modified; whereas in those cases, where the males are the more ornate, it is these which have been modified, the females remaining closely alike.
In England we have some analogous cases, though not so marked.
The females alone of two species of Thecla have a bright-purple or orange patch on their fore-wings.
In Hipparchia the sexes do not differ much; but it is the female of H. janira which has a conspicuous light-brown patch on her wings; and the females of some of the other species are brighter coloured than their males.
Again, the females of Colias edusa and hyale have "orange or yellow spots on the black marginal border, represented in the males only by thin streaks"; and in Pieris it is the females which "are ornamented with black spots on the fore-wings, and these are
Now the males of many butterflies are known to support the females during their marriage flight; but in the species just named it is the females which support the males; so that the part which the two sexes play is reversed, as is their relative beauty.
Throughout the animal kingdom the males commonly take the more active share in wooing, and their beauty seems to have been increased by the females having accepted the more attractive individuals; but with these butterflies, the females take the more
Mr. Meldola, from whom the foregoing statements have been taken, says in conclusion: "Though I am not convinced of the action of sexual selection in producing the colours of insects, it cannot be denied that these facts are strikingly corroborative of Mr.
(23.
'Nature,' April 27, 1871, p.
508.
Mr. Meldola quotes Donzel, in 'Soc.
Ent.
de France,' 1837, p.
77, on the flight of butterflies whilst pairing.
See also Mr. G. Fraser, in 'Nature,' April 20, 1871, p.
489, on the sexual differences of several British butterflies.
) As sexual selection primarily depends on variability, a few words must be added on this subject.
In respect to colour there is no difficulty, for any number of highly variable Lepidoptera could be named.
One good instance will suffice.
Mr. Bates shewed me a whole series of specimens of Papilio sesostris and P. childrenae; in the latter the males varied much in the extent of the beautifully enamelled green patch on the fore-wings, and in the size of the white mark, and of the splendid
The male of Papilio sesostris is much less beautiful than of P. childrenae; and it likewise varies a little in the size of the green patch on the fore-wings, and in the occasional appearance of the small crimson stripe on the hind-wings, borrowed, as it
Hence between the brightest specimens of P. sesostris and the dullest of P. childrenae, there was but a small interval; and it was evident that as far as mere variability is concerned, there would be no difficulty in permanently increasing the beauty of
The variability is here almost confined to the male sex; but Mr. Wallace and Mr. Bates have shewn (24.
Wallace on the Papilionidae of the Malayan Region, in 'Transact.
Linn.
Soc.
' vol.
xxv.
1865, pp.
8, 36.
A striking case of a rare variety, strictly intermediate between two other well-marked female varieties, is given by Mr. Wallace.
See also Mr. Bates, in 'Proc.
Entomolog.
Soc.
' Nov.
19, 1866, p.
xl.
) that the females of some species are extremely variable, the males being nearly constant.
In a future chapter I shall have occasion to shew that the beautiful eye-like spots, or ocelli, found on the wings of many Lepidoptera, are eminently variable.
I may here add that these ocelli offer a difficulty on the theory of sexual selection; for though appearing to us so ornamental, they are never present in one sex and absent in the other, nor do they ever differ much in the two sexes.
(25.
Mr. Bates was so kind as to lay this subject before the Entomological Society, and I have received answers to this effect from several entomologists.
) This fact is at present inexplicable; but if it should hereafter be found that the formation of an ocellus is due to some change in the tissues of the wings, for instance, occurring at a very early period of development, we might expect, from what we
On the whole, although many serious objections may be urged, it seems probable that most of the brilliantly-coloured species of Lepidoptera owe their colours to sexual selection, excepting in certain cases, presently to be mentioned, in which conspicuous
From the ardour of the male throughout the animal kingdom, he is generally willing to accept any female; and it is the female which usually exerts a choice.
Hence, if sexual selection has been efficient with the Lepidoptera, the male, when the sexes differ, ought to be the more brilliantly coloured, and this undoubtedly is the case.
When both sexes are brilliantly coloured and resemble each other, the characters acquired by the males appear to have been transmitted to both.
We are led to this conclusion by cases, even within the same genus, of gradation from an extraordinary amount of difference to identity in colour between the two sexes.
But it may be asked whether the difference in colour between the sexes may not be accounted for by other means besides sexual selection.
Thus the males and females of the same species of butterfly are in several cases known (26.
H.W. Bates, 'The Naturalist on the Amazons,' vol.
ii.
1863, p.
228.
A.R. Wallace, in 'Transactions, Linnean Society,' vol.
xxv.
1865, p.
10.
) to inhabit different stations, the former commonly basking in the sunshine, the latter haunting gloomy forests.
It is therefore possible that different conditions of life may have acted directly on the two sexes; but this is not probable (27.
On this whole subject see 'The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' 1868, vol.
ii.
chap.
xxiii.
) as in the adult state they are exposed to different conditions during a very short period; and the larvae of both are exposed to the same conditions.
Mr. Wallace believes that the difference between the sexes is due not so much to the males having been modified, as to the females having in all or almost all cases acquired dull colours for the sake of protection.
It seems to me, on the contrary, far more probable that it is the males which have been chiefly modified through sexual selection, the females having been comparatively little changed.
We can thus understand how it is that the females of allied species generally resemble one another so much more closely than do the males.
They thus shew us approximately the primordial colouring of the parent-species of the group to which they belong.
They have, however, almost always been somewhat modified by the transfer to them of some of the successive variations, through the accumulation of which the males were rendered beautiful.
But I do not wish to deny that the females alone of some species may have been specially modified for protection.
In most cases the males and females of distinct species will have been exposed during their prolonged larval state to different conditions, and may have been thus affected; though with the males any slight change of colour thus caused will generally have
When we treat of Birds, I shall have to discuss the whole question, as to how far the differences in colour between the sexes are due to the males having been modified through sexual selection for ornamental purposes, or to the females having been modified
In all the cases in which the more common form of equal inheritance by both sexes has prevailed, the selection of bright-coloured males would tend to make the females bright-coloured; and the selection of dull-coloured females would tend to make the males
If both processes were carried on simultaneously, they would tend to counteract each other; and the final result would depend on whether a greater number of females from being well protected by obscure colours, or a greater number of males by being
In order to account for the frequent transmission of characters to one sex alone, Mr. Wallace expresses his belief that the more common form of equal inheritance by both sexes can be changed through natural selection into inheritance by one sex alone, but
We know from what occurs under domestication that new characters often appear, which from the first are transmitted to one sex alone; and by the selection of such variations there would not be the slightest difficulty in giving bright colours to the males
In this manner the females of some butterflies and moths have, it is probable, been rendered inconspicuous for the sake of protection, and widely different from their males.
I am, however, unwilling without distinct evidence to admit that two complex processes of selection, each requiring the transference of new characters to one sex alone, have been carried on with a multitude of species,--that the males have been rendered
The male, for instance, of the common brimstone butterfly (Gonepteryx), is of a far more intense yellow than the female, though she is equally conspicuous; and it does not seem probable that she specially acquired her pale tints as a protection, though it
The female of Anthocharis cardamines does not possess the beautiful orange wing-tips of the male; consequently she closely resembles the white butterflies (Pieris) so common in our gardens; but we have no evidence that this resemblance is beneficial to
As, on the other hand, she resembles both sexes of several other species of the genus inhabiting various quarters of the world, it is probable that she has simply retained to a large extent her primordial colours.
Finally, as we have seen, various considerations lead to the conclusion that with the greater number of brilliantly-coloured Lepidoptera it is the male which has been chiefly modified through sexual selection; the amount of difference between the sexes
Inheritance is governed by so many unknown laws or conditions, that it seems to us to act in a capricious manner (28.
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
chap.
xii.
p.
17.
); and we can thus, to a certain extent, understand how it is that with closely allied species the sexes either differ to an astonishing degree, or are identical in colour.
As all the successive steps in the process of variation are necessarily transmitted through the female, a greater or less number of such steps might readily become developed in her; and thus we can understand the frequent gradations from an extreme
These cases of gradation, it may be added, are much too common to favour the supposition that we here see females actually undergoing the process of transition and losing their brightness for the sake of protection; for we have every reason to conclude
MIMICRY.
This principle was first made clear in an admirable paper by Mr. Bates (29.
'Transact.
Linn.
Soc.
' vol.
xxiii.
1862, p.
495.
), who thus threw a flood of light on many obscure problems.
It had previously been observed that certain butterflies in S. America belonging to quite distinct families, resembled the Heliconidae so closely in every stripe and shade of colour, that they could not be distinguished save by an experienced entomologist.
As the Heliconidae are coloured in their usual manner, whilst the others depart from the usual colouring of the groups to which they belong, it is clear that the latter are the imitators, and the Heliconidae the imitated.
Mr. Bates further observed that the imitating species are comparatively rare, whilst the imitated abound, and that the two sets live mingled together.
From the fact of the Heliconidae being conspicuous and beautiful insects, yet so numerous in individuals and species, he concluded that they must be protected from the attacks of enemies by some secretion or odour; and this conclusion has now been amply
'Proc.
Entomological Soc.
' Dec.
3, 1866, p.
xlv.
), especially by Mr. Belt.
Hence Mr. Bates inferred that the butterflies which imitate the protected species have acquired their present marvellously deceptive appearance through variation and natural selection, in order to be mistaken for the protected kinds, and thus to escape
No explanation is here attempted of the brilliant colours of the imitated, but only of the imitating butterflies.
We must account for the colours of the former in the same general manner, as in the cases previously discussed in this chapter.
Since the publication of Mr. Bates' paper, similar and equally striking facts have been observed by Mr. Wallace in the Malayan region, by Mr. Trimen in South Africa, and by Mr. Riley in the United States.
(31.
Wallace, 'Transact.
Linn.
Soc.
' vol.
xxv.
1865 p.
i.
; also, 'Transact.
Ent.
Soc.
' vol.
iv.
(3rd series), 1867, p.
301.
Trimen, 'Linn.
Transact.
' vol.
xxvi.
1869, p.
497.
Riley, 'Third Annual Report on the Noxious Insects of Missouri,' 1871, pp.
163-168.
This latter essay is valuable, as Mr. Riley here discusses all the objections which have been raised against Mr. Bates's theory.
) As some writers have felt much difficulty in understanding how the first steps in the process of mimicry could have been effected through natural selection, it may be well to remark that the process probably commenced long ago between forms not widely
In this case even a slight variation would be beneficial, if it rendered the one species more like the other; and afterwards the imitated species might be modified to an extreme degree through sexual selection or other means, and if the changes were
It should also be remembered that many species of Lepidoptera are liable to considerable and abrupt variations in colour.
A few instances have been given in this chapter; and many more may be found in the papers of Mr. Bates and Mr. Wallace.
With several species the sexes are alike, and imitate the two sexes of another species.
But Mr. Trimen gives, in the paper already referred to, three cases in which the sexes of the imitated form differ from each other in colour, and the sexes of the imitating form differ in a like manner.
Several cases have also been recorded where the females alone imitate brilliantly-coloured and protected species, the males retaining "the normal aspect of their immediate congeners".
It is here obvious that the successive variations by which the female has been modified have been transmitted to her alone.
It is, however, probable that some of the many successive variations would have been transmitted to, and developed in, the males had not such males been eliminated by being thus rendered less attractive to the females; so that only those variations were
We have a partial illustration of these remarks in a statement by Mr. Belt (32.
'The Naturalist in Nicaragua,' 1874, p.
385.
); that the males of some of the Leptalides, which imitate protected species, still retain in a concealed manner some of their original characters.
Thus in the males "the upper half of the lower wing is of a pure white, whilst all the rest of the wings is barred and spotted with black, red and yellow, like the species they mimic.
The females have not this white patch, and the males usually conceal it by covering it with the upper wing, so that I cannot imagine its being of any other use to them than as an attraction in courtship, when they exhibit it to the females, and thus
BRIGHT COLOURS OF CATERPILLARS.
Whilst reflecting on the beauty of many butterflies, it occurred to me that some caterpillars were splendidly coloured; and as sexual selection could not possibly have here acted, it appeared rash to attribute the beauty of the mature insect to this
In the first place, it may be observed that the colours of caterpillars do not stand in any close correlation with those of the mature insect.
Secondly, their bright colours do not serve in any ordinary manner as a protection.
Mr. Bates informs me, as an instance of this, that the most conspicuous caterpillar which he ever beheld (that of a Sphinx) lived on the large green leaves of a tree on the open llanos of South America; it was about four inches in length, transversely
Hence it caught the eye of any one who passed by, even at the distance of many yards, and no doubt that of every passing bird.
I then applied to Mr. Wallace, who has an innate genius for solving difficulties.
After some consideration he replied: "Most caterpillars require protection, as may be inferred from some kinds being furnished with spines or irritating hairs, and from many being coloured green like the leaves on which they feed, or being curiously like
Another instance of protection, furnished me by Mr. J. Mansel Weale, may be added, namely, that there is a caterpillar of a moth which lives on the mimosas in South Africa, and fabricates for itself a case quite indistinguishable from the surrounding
From such considerations Mr. Wallace thought it probable that conspicuously coloured caterpillars were protected by having a nauseous taste; but as their skin is extremely tender, and as their intestines readily protrude from a wound, a slight peck from
Hence, as Mr. Wallace remarks, "distastefulness alone would be insufficient to protect a caterpillar unless some outward sign indicated to its would-be destroyer that its prey was a disgusting morsel".
Under these circumstances it would be highly advantageous to a caterpillar to be instantaneously and certainly recognised as unpalatable by all birds and other animals.
Thus the most gaudy colours would be serviceable, and might have been gained by variation and the survival of the most easily- recognised individuals.
This hypothesis appears at first sight very bold, but when it was brought before the Entomological Society (33.
'Proceedings, Entomological Society,' Dec.
3, 1866, p.
xlv.
and March 4, 1867, p.
lxxx.
) it was supported by various statements; and Mr. J. Jenner Weir, who keeps a large number of birds in an aviary, informs me that he has made many trials, and finds no exception to the rule, that all caterpillars of nocturnal and retiring habits with
The hairy and spinose kinds are invariably rejected, as were four conspicuously-coloured species.
When the birds rejected a caterpillar, they plainly shewed, by shaking their heads, and cleansing their beaks, that they were disgusted by the taste.
(34.
See Mr. J. Jenner Weir's paper on Insects and Insectivorous Birds, in 'Transact.
Ent.
Soc.
' 1869, p.
21; also Mr. Butler's paper, ibid.
p.
27.
Mr. Riley has given analogous facts in the 'Third Annual Report on the Noxious Insects of Missouri,' 1871, p.
148.
Some opposed cases are, however, given by Dr. Wallace and M. H. d'Orville; see 'Zoological Record,' 1869, p.
349.
) Three conspicuous kinds of caterpillars and moths were also given to some lizards and frogs, by Mr. A. Butler, and were rejected, though other kinds were eagerly eaten.
Thus the probability of Mr. Wallace's view is confirmed, namely, that certain caterpillars have been made conspicuous for their own good, so as to be easily recognised by their enemies, on nearly the same principle that poisons are sold in coloured bottles
We cannot, however, at present thus explain the elegant diversity in the colours of many caterpillars; but any species which had at some former period acquired a dull, mottled, or striped appearance, either in imitation of surrounding objects, or from the
, almost certainly would not become uniform in colour, when its tints were rendered intense and bright; for in order to make a caterpillar merely conspicuous, there would be no selection in any definite direction.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS ON INSECTS.
Looking back to the several Orders, we see that the sexes often differ in various characters, the meaning of which is not in the least understood.
The sexes, also, often differ in their organs of sense and means of locomotion, so that the males may quickly discover and reach the females.
They differ still oftener in the males possessing diversified contrivances for retaining the females when found.
We are, however, here concerned only in a secondary degree with sexual differences of these kinds.
In almost all the Orders, the males of some species, even of weak and delicate kinds, are known to be highly pugnacious; and some few are furnished with special weapons for fighting with their rivals.
But the law of battle does not prevail nearly so widely with insects as with the higher animals.
Hence it probably arises, that it is in only a few cases that the males have been rendered larger and stronger than the females.
On the contrary, they are usually smaller, so that they may be developed within a shorter time, to be ready in large numbers for the emergence of the females.
In two families of the Homoptera and in three of the Orthoptera, the males alone possess sound-producing organs in an efficient state.
These are used incessantly during the breeding-season, not only for calling the females, but apparently for charming or exciting them in rivalry with other males.
No one who admits the agency of selection of any kind, will, after reading the above discussion, dispute that these musical instruments have been acquired through sexual selection.
In four other Orders the members of one sex, or more commonly of both sexes, are provided with organs for producing various sounds, which apparently serve merely as call-notes.
When both sexes are thus provided, the individuals which were able to make the loudest or most continuous noise would gain partners before those which were less noisy, so that their organs have probably been gained through sexual selection.
It is instructive to reflect on the wonderful diversity of the means for producing sound, possessed by the males alone, or by both sexes, in no less than six Orders.
We thus learn how effectual sexual selection has been in leading to modifications which sometimes, as with the Homoptera, relate to important parts of the organisation.
From the reasons assigned in the last chapter, it is probable that the great horns possessed by the males of many Lamellicorn, and some other beetles, have been acquired as ornaments.
From the small size of insects, we are apt to undervalue their appearance.
If we could imagine a male Chalcosoma (Fig.
16), with its polished bronzed coat of mail, and its vast complex horns, magnified to the size of a horse, or even of a dog, it would be one of the most imposing animals in the world.
The colouring of insects is a complex and obscure subject.
When the male differs slightly from the female, and neither are brilliantly-coloured, it is probable that the sexes have varied in a slightly different manner, and that the variations have been transmitted by each sex to the same without any benefit or
When the male is brilliantly-coloured and differs conspicuously from the female, as with some dragon-flies and many butterflies, it is probable that he owes his colours to sexual selection; whilst the female has retained a primordial or very ancient type
But in some cases the female has apparently been made obscure by variations transmitted to her alone, as a means of direct protection; and it is almost certain that she has sometimes been made brilliant, so as to imitate other protected species inhabiting
When the sexes resemble each other and both are obscurely coloured, there is no doubt that they have been in a multitude of cases so coloured for the sake of protection.
So it is in some instances when both are brightly-coloured, for they thus imitate protected species, or resemble surrounding objects such as flowers; or they give notice to their enemies that they are unpalatable.
In other cases in which the sexes resemble each other and are both brilliant, especially when the colours are arranged for display, we may conclude that they have been gained by the male sex as an attraction, and have been transferred to the female.
We are more especially led to this conclusion whenever the same type of coloration prevails throughout a whole group, and we find that the males of some species differ widely in colour from the females, whilst others differ slightly or not at all with
In the same manner as bright colours have often been partially transferred from the males to the females, so it has been with the extraordinary horns of many Lamellicorn and some other beetles.
So again, the sound-producing organs proper to the males of the Homoptera and Orthoptera have generally been transferred in a rudimentary, or even in a nearly perfect condition, to the females; yet not sufficiently perfect to be of any use.
It is also an interesting fact, as bearing on sexual selection, that the stridulating organs of certain male Orthoptera are not fully developed until the last moult; and that the colours of certain male dragon-flies are not fully developed until some
Sexual selection implies that the more attractive individuals are preferred by the opposite sex; and as with insects, when the sexes differ, it is the male which, with some rare exceptions, is the more ornamented, and departs more from the type to which
That the females in most or all the Orders would have the power of rejecting any particular male, is probable from the many singular contrivances possessed by the males, such as great jaws, adhesive cushions, spines, elongated legs, etc.
, for seizing the female; for these contrivances show that there is some difficulty in the act, so that her concurrence would seem necessary.
Judging from what we know of the perceptive powers and affections of various insects, there is no antecedent improbability in sexual selection having come largely into play; but we have as yet no direct evidence on this head, and some facts are opposed to
Nevertheless, when we see many males pursuing the same female, we can hardly believe that the pairing is left to blind chance--that the female exerts no choice, and is not influenced by the gorgeous colours or other ornaments with which the male is
If we admit that the females of the Homoptera and Orthoptera appreciate the musical tones of their male partners, and that the various instruments have been perfected through sexual selection, there is little improbability in the females of other insects
But from the circumstance of colour being so variable, and from its having been so often modified for the sake of protection, it is difficult to decide in how large a proportion of cases sexual selection has played a part.
This is more especially difficult in those Orders, such as Orthoptera, Hymenoptera, and Coleoptera, in which the two sexes rarely differ much in colour; for we are then left to mere analogy.
With the Coleoptera, however, as before remarked, it is in the great Lamellicorn group, placed by some authors at the head of the Order, and in which we sometimes see a mutual attachment between the sexes, that we find the males of some species possessing
Hence it seems probable that all these characters have been gained through the same means, namely sexual selection.
With butterflies we have the best evidence, as the males sometimes take pains to display their beautiful colours; and we cannot believe that they would act thus, unless the display was of use to them in their courtship.
When we treat of Birds, we shall see that they present in their secondary sexual characters the closest analogy with insects.
Thus, many male birds are highly pugnacious, and some are furnished with special weapons for fighting with their rivals.
They possess organs which are used during the breeding-season for producing vocal and instrumental music.
They are frequently ornamented with combs, horns, wattles and plumes of the most diversified kinds, and are decorated with beautiful colours, all evidently for the sake of display.
We shall find that, as with insects, both sexes in certain groups are equally beautiful, and are equally provided with ornaments which are usually confined to the male sex.
In other groups both sexes are equally plain-coloured and unornamented.
Lastly, in some few anomalous cases, the females are more beautiful than the males.
We shall often find, in the same group of birds, every gradation from no difference between the sexes, to an extreme difference.
We shall see that female birds, like female insects, often possess more or less plain traces or rudiments of characters which properly belong to the males and are of use only to them.
The analogy, indeed, in all these respects between birds and insects is curiously close.
Whatever explanation applies to the one class probably applies to the other; and this explanation, as we shall hereafter attempt to shew in further detail, is sexual selection.
CHAPTER XII.
SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS OF FISHES, AMPHIBIANS, AND REPTILES.
FISHES: Courtship and battles of the males--Larger size of the females-- Males, bright colours and ornamental appendages; other strange characters-- Colours and appendages acquired by the males during the breeding-season alone--Fishes with both sexes
AMPHIBIANS: Differences in structure and colour between the sexes--Vocal organs.
REPTILES: Chelonians--Crocodiles--Snakes, colours in some cases protective--Lizards, battles of--Ornamental appendages--Strange differences in structure between the sexes--Colours--Sexual differences almost as great as with birds.
We have now arrived at the great sub-kingdom of the Vertebrata, and will commence with the lowest class, that of fishes.
The males of Plagiostomous fishes (sharks, rays) and of Chimaeroid fishes are provided with claspers which serve to retain the female, like the various structures possessed by many of the lower animals.
Besides the claspers, the males of many rays have clusters of strong sharp spines on their heads, and several rows along "the upper outer surface of their pectoral fins".
These are present in the males of some species, which have other parts of their bodies smooth.
They are only temporarily developed during the breeding-season; and Dr. Gunther suspects that they are brought into action as prehensile organs by the doubling inwards and downwards of the two sides of the body.
It is a remarkable fact that the females and not the males of some species, as of Raia clavata, have their backs studded with large hook-formed spines.
(1.
Yarrell's 'Hist.
of British Fishes,' vol.
ii.
1836, pp 417, 425, 436.
Dr. Gunther informs me that the spines in R. clavata are peculiar to the female.
) The males alone of the capelin (Mallotus villosus, one of Salmonidae), are provided with a ridge of closely-set, brush-like scales, by the aid of which two males, one on each side, hold the female, whilst she runs with great swiftness on the sandy beach,
(2.
The 'American Naturalist,' April 1871, p.
119.
) The widely distinct Monacanthus scopas presents a somewhat analogous structure.
The male, as Dr. Gunther informs me, has a cluster of stiff, straight spines, like those of a comb, on the sides of the tail; and these in a specimen six inches long were nearly one and a half inches in length; the female has in the same place a cluster of
In another species, M. peronii, the male has a brush like that possessed by the female of the last species, whilst the sides of the tail in the female are smooth.
In some other species of the same genus the tail can be perceived to be a little roughened in the male and perfectly smooth in the female; and lastly in others, both sexes have smooth sides.
The males of many fish fight for the possession of the females.
Thus the male stickleback (Gasterosteus leiurus) has been described as "mad with delight," when the female comes out of her hiding-place and surveys the nest which he has made for her.
"He darts round her in every direction, then to his accumulated materials for the nest, then back again in an instant; and as she does not advance he endeavours to push her with his snout, and then tries to pull her by the tail and side-spine to the nest".
(3.
See Mr. R. Warington's interesting articles in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' October 1852, and November 1855.
) The males are said to be polygamists (4.
Noel Humphreys, 'River Gardens,' 1857.
); they are extraordinarily bold and pugnacious, whilst "the females are quite pacific".
Their battles are at times desperate; "for these puny combatants fasten tight on each other for several seconds, tumbling over and over again until their strength appears completely exhausted".
With the rough- tailed stickleback (G.
trachurus) the males whilst fighting swim round and round each other, biting and endeavouring to pierce each other with their raised lateral spines.
The same writer adds (5.
Loudon's 'Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
iii.
1830, p.
331.
), "the bite of these little furies is very severe.
They also use their lateral spines with such fatal effect, that I have seen one during a battle absolutely rip his opponent quite open, so that he sank to the bottom and died".
When a fish is conquered, "his gallant bearing forsakes him; his gay colours fade away; and he hides his disgrace among his peaceable companions, but is for some time the constant object of his conqueror's persecution".
The male salmon is as pugnacious as the little stickleback; and so is the male trout, as I hear from Dr. Gunther.
Mr. Shaw saw a violent contest between two male salmon which lasted the whole day; and Mr. R. Buist, Superintendent of Fisheries, informs me that he has often watched from the bridge at Perth the males driving away their rivals, whilst the females were
The males "are constantly fighting and tearing each other on the spawning-beds, and many so injure each other as to cause the death of numbers, many being seen swimming near the banks of the river in a state of exhaustion, and apparently in a dying state".
(6.
The 'Field,' June 29, 1867.
For Mr. Shaw's Statement, see 'Edinburgh Review,' 1843.
Another experienced observer (Scrope's 'Days of Salmon Fishing,' p.
60) remarks that like the stag, the male would, if he could, keep all other males away.
) Mr. Buist informs me, that in June 1868, the keeper of the Stormontfield breeding-ponds visited the northern Tyne and found about 300 dead salmon, all of which with one exception were males; and he was convinced that they had lost their lives by
[Fig.
27.
Head of male common salmon (Salmo salar) during the breeding- season.
[This drawing, as well as all the others in the present chapter, have been executed by the well-known artist, Mr. G. Ford, from specimens in the British Museum, under the kind superintendence of Dr. Gunther.
] Fig.
28.
Head of female salmon.
] The most curious point about the male salmon is that during the breeding- season, besides a slight change in colour, "the lower jaw elongates, and a cartilaginous projection turns upwards from the point, which, when the jaws are closed, occupies a deep
(7.
Yarrell, 'History of British Fishes,' vol.
ii.
1836, p.
10.
) (Figs.
27 and 28.
) In our salmon this change of structure lasts only during the breeding-season; but in the Salmo lycaodon of N.W. America the change, as Mr. J.K. Lord (8.
'The Naturalist in Vancouver's Island,' vol.
i.
1866, p.
54.
) believes, is permanent, and best marked in the older males which have previously ascended the rivers.
In these old males the jaw becomes developed into an immense hook-like projection, and the teeth grow into regular fangs, often more than half an inch in length.
With the European salmon, according to Mr. Lloyd (9.
'Scandinavian Adventures,' vol.
i.
1854, pp.
100, 104.
), the temporary hook-like structure serves to strengthen and protect the jaws, when one male charges another with wonderful violence; but the greatly developed teeth of the male American salmon may be compared with the tusks of many male mammals, and they
The salmon is not the only fish in which the teeth differ in the two sexes; as this is the case with many rays.
In the thornback (Raia clavata) the adult male has sharp, pointed teeth, directed backwards, whilst those of the female are broad and flat, and form a pavement; so that these teeth differ in the two sexes of the same species more than is usual in distinct
The teeth of the male become sharp only when he is adult: whilst young they are broad and flat like those of the female.
As so frequently occurs with secondary sexual characters, both sexes of some species of rays (for instance R. batis), when adult, possess sharp pointed teeth; and here a character, proper to and primarily gained by the male, appears to have been
The teeth are likewise pointed in both sexes of R. maculata, but only when quite adult; the males acquiring them at an earlier age than the females.
We shall hereafter meet with analogous cases in certain birds, in which the male acquires the plumage common to both sexes when adult, at a somewhat earlier age than does the female.
With other species of rays the males even when old never possess sharp teeth, and consequently the adults of both sexes are provided with broad, flat teeth like those of the young, and like those of the mature females of the above-mentioned species.
(10.
See Yarrell's account of the rays in his 'History of British Fishes,' vol.
ii.
1836, p.
416, with an excellent figure, and pp.
422, 432.
) As the rays are bold, strong and voracious fish, we may suspect that the males require their sharp teeth for fighting with their rivals; but as they possess many parts modified and adapted for the prehension of the female, it is possible that their teeth
In regard to size, M. Carbonnier (11.
As quoted in 'The Farmer,' 1868, p.
369.
) maintains that the female of almost all fishes is larger than the male; and Dr. Gunther does not know of a single instance in which the male is actually larger than the female.
With some Cyprinodonts the male is not even half as large.
As in many kinds of fishes the males habitually fight together, it is surprising that they have not generally become larger and stronger than the females through the effects of sexual selection.
The males suffer from their small size, for according to M. Carbonnier, they are liable to be devoured by the females of their own species when carnivorous, and no doubt by other species.
Increased size must be in some manner of more importance to the females, than strength and size are to the males for fighting with other males; and this perhaps is to allow of the production of a vast number of ova.
[Fig.
29.
Callionymus lyra.
Upper figure, male; lower figure, female.
N.B. The lower figure is more reduced than the upper.
] In many species the male alone is ornamented with bright colours; or these are much brighter in the male than the female.
The male, also, is sometimes provided with appendages which appear to be of no more use to him for the ordinary purposes of life, than are the tail feathers to the peacock.
I am indebted for most of the following facts to the kindness of Dr. Gunther.
There is reason to suspect that many tropical fishes differ sexually in colour and structure; and there are some striking cases with our British fishes.
The male Callionymus lyra has been called the gemmeous dragonet "from its brilliant gem-like colours".
When fresh caught from the sea the body is yellow of various shades, striped and spotted with vivid blue on the head; the dorsal fins are pale brown with dark longitudinal bands; the ventral, caudal, and anal fins being bluish-black.
The female, or sordid dragonet, was considered by Linnaeus, and by many subsequent naturalists, as a distinct species; it is of a dingy reddish-brown, with the dorsal fin brown and the other fins white.
The sexes differ also in the proportional size of the head and mouth, and in the position of the eyes (12.
I have drawn up this description from Yarrell's 'British Fishes,' vol.
i.
1836, pp.
261 and 266.
); but the most striking difference is the extraordinary elongation in the male (Fig.
29) of the dorsal fin.
Mr. W. Saville Kent remarks that this "singular appendage appears from my observations of the species in confinement, to be subservient to the same end as the wattles, crests, and other abnormal adjuncts of the male in gallinaceous birds, for the purpose
(13.
'Nature,' July 1873, p.
264.
) The young males resemble the adult females in structure and colour.
Throughout the genus Callionymus (14.
'Catalogue of Acanth.
Fishes in the British Museum,' by Dr. Gunther, 1861, pp.
138- 151.
), the male is generally much more brightly spotted than the female, and in several species, not only the dorsal, but the anal fin is much elongated in the males.
The male of the Cottus scorpius, or sea-scorpion, is slenderer and smaller than the female.
There is also a great difference in colour between them.
It is difficult, as Mr. Lloyd (15.
'Game Birds of Sweden,' etc.
, 1867, p.
466.
) remarks, "for any one, who has not seen this fish during the spawning-season, when its hues are brightest, to conceive the admixture of brilliant colours with which it, in other respects so ill-favoured, is at that time adorned".
Both sexes of the Labrus mixtus, although very different in colour, are beautiful; the male being orange with bright blue stripes, and the female bright red with some black spots on the back.
[Fig.
30.
Xiphophorus Hellerii.
Upper figure, male; lower figure, female.
] In the very distinct family of the Cyprinodontidae--inhabitants of the fresh waters of foreign lands--the sexes sometimes differ much in various characters.
In the male of the Mollienesia petenensis (16.
With respect to this and the following species I am indebted to Dr. Gunther for information: see also his paper on the 'Fishes of Central America,' in 'Transact.
Zoological Soc.
' vol.
vi.
1868, p.
485.
), the dorsal fin is greatly developed and is marked with a row of large, round, ocellated, bright-coloured spots; whilst the same fin in the female is smaller, of a different shape, and marked only with irregularly curved brown spots.
In the male the basal margin of the anal fin is also a little produced and dark coloured.
In the male of an allied form, the Xiphophorus Hellerii (Fig.
30), the inferior margin of the caudal fin is developed into a long filament, which, as I hear from Dr. Gunther, is striped with bright colours.
This filament does not contain any muscles, and apparently cannot be of any direct use to the fish.
As in the case of the Callionymus, the males whilst young resemble the adult females in colour and structure.
Sexual differences such as these may be strictly compared with those which are so frequent with gallinaceous birds.
(17.
Dr. Gunther makes this remark; 'Catalogue of Fishes in the British Museum,' vol.
iii.
1861, p.
141.
) [Fig.
31.
Plecostomus barbatus.
Upper figure, head of male; lower figure, female.
] In a siluroid fish, inhabiting the fresh waters of South America, the Plecostomus barbatus (18.
See Dr. Gunther on this genus, in 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' 1868, p.
232.
) (Fig.
31), the male has its mouth and inter-operculum fringed with a beard of stiff hairs, of which the female shows hardly a trace.
These hairs are of the nature of scales.
In another species of the same genus, soft flexible tentacles project from the front part of the head of the male, which are absent in the female.
These tentacles are prolongations of the true skin, and therefore are not homologous with the stiff hairs of the former species; but it can hardly be doubted that both serve the same purpose.
What this purpose may be, it is difficult to conjecture; ornament does not here seem probable, but we can hardly suppose that stiff hairs and flexible filaments can be useful in any ordinary way to the males alone.
In that strange monster, the Chimaera monstrosa, the male has a hook-shaped bone on the top of the head, directed forwards, with its end rounded and covered with sharp spines; in the female "this crown is altogether absent," but what its use may be to the
(19.
F. Buckland, in 'Land and Water,' July 1868, p.
377, with a figure.
Many other cases could be added of structures peculiar to the male, of which the uses are not known.
) The structures as yet referred to are permanent in the male after he has arrived at maturity; but with some Blennies, and in another allied genus (20.
Dr. Gunther, 'Catalogue of Fishes,' vol.
iii.
pp.
221 and 240.
), a crest is developed on the head of the male only during the breeding-season, and the body at the same time becomes more brightly-coloured.
There can be little doubt that this crest serves as a temporary sexual ornament, for the female does not exhibit a trace of it.
In other species of the same genus both sexes possess a crest, and in at least one species neither sex is thus provided.
In many of the Chromidae, for instance in Geophagus and especially in Cichla, the males, as I hear from Professor Agassiz (21.
See also 'A Journey in Brazil,' by Prof.
and Mrs. Agassiz, 1868, p.
220.
), have a conspicuous protuberance on the forehead, which is wholly wanting in the females and in the young males.
Professor Agassiz adds, "I have often observed these fishes at the time of spawning when the protuberance is largest, and at other seasons when it is totally wanting, and the two sexes shew no difference whatever in the outline of the profile of the head.
I never could ascertain that it subserves any special function, and the Indians on the Amazon know nothing about its use".
These protuberances resemble, in their periodical appearance, the fleshy carbuncles on the heads of certain birds; but whether they serve as ornaments must remain at present doubtful.
I hear from Professor Agassiz and Dr. Gunther, that the males of those fishes, which differ permanently in colour from the females, often become more brilliant during the breeding-season.
This is likewise the case with a multitude of fishes, the sexes of which are identical in colour at all other seasons of the year.
The tench, roach, and perch may be given as instances.
The male salmon at this season is "marked on the cheeks with orange-coloured stripes, which give it the appearance of a Labrus, and the body partakes of a golden orange tinge.
The females are dark in colour, and are commonly called black-fish".
(22.
Yarrell, 'History of British Fishes,' vol.
ii.
1836, pp.
10, 12, 35.
) An analogous and even greater change takes place with the Salmo eriox or bull trout; the males of the char (S.
umbla) are likewise at this season rather brighter in colour than the females.
(23.
W. Thompson, in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
vi.
1841, p.
440.
) The colours of the pike (Esox reticulatus) of the United States, especially of the male, become, during the breeding-season, exceedingly intense, brilliant, and iridescent.
(24.
'The American Agriculturalist,' 1868, p.
100.
) Another striking instance out of many is afforded by the male stickleback (Gasterosteus leiurus), which is described by Mr. Warington (25.
'Annals and Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' Oct.
1852.
), as being then "beautiful beyond description".
The back and eyes of the female are simply brown, and the belly white.
The eyes of the male, on the other hand, are "of the most splendid green, having a metallic lustre like the green feathers of some humming-birds.
The throat and belly are of a bright crimson, the back of an ashy-green, and the whole fish appears as though it were somewhat translucent and glowed with an internal incandescence".
After the breeding season these colours all change, the throat and belly become of a paler red, the back more green, and the glowing tints subside.
With respect to the courtship of fishes, other cases have been observed since the first edition of this book appeared, besides that already given of the stickleback.
Mr. W.S. Kent says that the male of the Labrus mixtus, which, as we have seen, differs in colour from the female, makes "a deep hollow in the sand of the tank, and then endeavours in the most persuasive manner to induce a female of the same species to
The males of Cantharus lineatus become, during the breeding-season, of deep leaden- black; they then retire from the shoal, and excavate a hollow as a nest.
"Each male now mounts vigilant guard over his respective hollow, and vigorously attacks and drives away any other fish of the same sex.
Towards his companions of the opposite sex his conduct is far different; many of the latter are now distended with spawn, and these he endeavours by all the means in his power to lure singly to his prepared hollow, and there to deposit the myriad ova with
(26.
'Nature,' May 1873, p.
25.
) A more striking case of courtship, as well as of display, by the males of a Chinese Macropus has been given by M. Carbonnier, who carefully observed these fishes under confinement.
(27.
'Bulletin de la Societ d'Acclimat.
' Paris, July 1869, and Jan.
1870.
) The males are most beautifully coloured, more so than the females.
During the breeding-season they contend for the possession of the females; and, in the act of courtship, expand their fins, which are spotted and ornamented with brightly coloured rays, in the same manner, according to M. Carbonnier, as the peacock.
They then also bound about the females with much vivacity, and appear by "l'talage de leurs vives couleurs chercher a attirer l'attention des femelles, lesquelles ne paraissaient indiffrentes a ce mange, elles nageaient avec une molle lenteur vers
After the male has won his bride, he makes a little disc of froth by blowing air and mucus out of his mouth.
He then collects the fertilised ova, dropped by the female, in his mouth; and this caused M. Carbonnier much alarm, as he thought that they were going to be devoured.
But the male soon deposits them in the disc of froth, afterwards guarding them, repairing the froth, and taking care of the young when hatched.
I mention these particulars because, as we shall presently see, there are fishes, the males of which hatch their eggs in their mouths; and those who do not believe in the principle of gradual evolution might ask how could such a habit have originated; but
To return to our more immediate subject.
The case stands thus: female fishes, as far as I can learn, never willingly spawn except in the presence of the males; and the males never fertilise the ova except in the presence of the females.
The males fight for the possession of the females.
In many species, the males whilst young resemble the females in colour; but when adult become much more brilliant, and retain their colours throughout life.
In other species the males become brighter than the females and otherwise more highly ornamented, only during the season of love.
The males sedulously court the females, and in one case, as we have seen, take pains in displaying their beauty before them.
Can it be believed that they would thus act to no purpose during their courtship?
And this would be the case, unless the females exert some choice and select those males which please or excite them most.
If the female exerts such choice, all the above facts on the ornamentation of the males become at once intelligible by the aid of sexual selection.
We have next to inquire whether this view of the bright colours of certain male fishes having been acquired through sexual selection can, through the law of the equal transmission of characters to both sexes, be extended to those groups in which the males
In such a genus as Labrus, which includes some of the most splendid fishes in the world--for instance, the Peacock Labrus (L.
pavo), described (28.
Bory Saint Vincent, in 'Dict.
Class.
d'Hist.
Nat.
' tom.
ix.
1826, p.
151.
), with pardonable exaggeration, as formed of polished scales of gold, encrusting lapis-lazuli, rubies, sapphires, emeralds, and amethysts--we may, with much probability, accept this belief; for we have seen that the sexes in at least one species of the
With some fishes, as with many of the lowest animals, splendid colours may be the direct result of the nature of their tissues and of the surrounding conditions, without the aid of selection of any kind.
The gold-fish (Cyprinus auratus), judging from the analogy of the golden variety of the common carp, is perhaps a case in point, as it may owe its splendid colours to a single abrupt variation, due to the conditions to which this fish has been subjected
It is, however, more probable that these colours have been intensified through artificial selection, as this species has been carefully bred in China from a remote period.
(29.
Owing to some remarks on this subject, made in my work 'On the Variation of Animals under Domestication,' Mr. W.F. Mayers ('Chinese Notes and Queries,' Aug.
1868, p.
123) has searched the ancient Chinese encyclopedias.
He finds that gold-fish were first reared in confinement during the Sung Dynasty, which commenced A.D. 960.
In the year 1129 these fishes abounded.
In another place it is said that since the year 1548 there has been "produced at Hangchow a variety called the fire-fish, from its intensely red colour.
It is universally admired, and there is not a household where it is not cultivated, IN RIVALRY AS TO ITS COLOUR, and as a source of profit".
) Under natural conditions it does not seem probable that beings so highly organised as fishes, and which live under such complex relations, should become brilliantly coloured without suffering some evil or receiving some benefit from so great a change,
What, then, are we to conclude in regard to the many fishes, both sexes of which are splendidly coloured?
Mr. Wallace (30.
'Westminster Review,' July 1867, p.
7.
) believes that the species which frequent reefs, where corals and other brightly-coloured organisms abound, are brightly coloured in order to escape detection by their enemies; but according to my recollection they were thus rendered highly conspicuous.
In the fresh- waters of the tropics there are no brilliantly-coloured corals or other organisms for the fishes to resemble; yet many species in the Amazons are beautifully coloured, and many of the carnivorous Cyprinidae in India are ornamented with
(31.
'Indian Cyprinidae,' by Mr. M'Clelland, 'Asiatic Researches,' vol.
xix.
part ii.
1839, p.
230.
) Mr. M'Clelland, in describing these fishes, goes so far as to suppose that "the peculiar brilliancy of their colours" serves as "a better mark for king-fishers, terns, and other birds which are destined to keep the number of these fishes in check"; but
It is possible that certain fishes may have been rendered conspicuous in order to warn birds and beasts of prey that they were unpalatable, as explained when treating of caterpillars; but it is not, I believe, known that any fish, at least any fresh-water
On the whole, the most probable view in regard to the fishes, of which both sexes are brilliantly coloured, is that their colours were acquired by the males as a sexual ornament, and were transferred equally, or nearly so, to the other sex.
We have now to consider whether, when the male differs in a marked manner from the female in colour or in other ornaments, he alone has been modified, the variations being inherited by his male offspring alone; or whether the female has been specially
It is impossible to doubt that colour has been gained by many fishes as a protection: no one can examine the speckled upper surface of a flounder, and overlook its resemblance to the sandy bed of the sea on which it lives.
Certain fishes, moreover, can through the action of the nervous system change their colours in adaptation to surrounding objects, and that within a short time.
(32.
G. Pouchet, 'L'Institut.
' Nov.
1, 1871, p.
134.
) One of the most striking instances ever recorded of an animal being protected by its colour (as far as it can be judged of in preserved specimens), as well as by its form, is that given by Dr. Gunther (33.
'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1865, p.
327, pl.
xiv.
and xv.
) of a pipe-fish, which, with its reddish streaming filaments, is hardly distinguishable from the sea-weed to which it clings with its prehensile tail.
But the question now under consideration is whether the females alone have been modified for this object.
We can see that one sex will not be modified through natural selection for the sake of protection more than the other, supposing both to vary, unless one sex is exposed for a longer period to danger, or has less power of escaping from such danger than the
As far as there is any difference, the males, from being generally smaller and from wandering more about, are exposed to greater danger than the females; and yet, when the sexes differ, the males are almost always the more conspicuously coloured.
The ova are fertilised immediately after being deposited; and when this process lasts for several days, as in the case of the salmon (34.
Yarrell, 'British Fishes,' vol.
ii.
p.
11.
), the female, during the whole time, is attended by the male.
After the ova are fertilised they are, in most cases, left unprotected by both parents, so that the males and females, as far as oviposition is concerned, are equally exposed to danger, and both are equally important for the production of fertile ova;
Certain fishes, belonging to several families, make nests, and some of them take care of their young when hatched.
Both sexes of the bright coloured Crenilabrus massa and melops work together in building their nests with sea-weed, shells, etc.
(35.
According to the observations of M. Gerbe; see Gunther's 'Record of Zoolog.
Literature,' 1865, p.
194.
) But the males of certain fishes do all the work, and afterwards take exclusive charge of the young.
This is the case with the dull-coloured gobies (36.
Cuvier, 'Regne Animal,' vol.
ii.
1829, p.
242.
), in which the sexes are not known to differ in colour, and likewise with the sticklebacks (Gasterosteus), in which the males become brilliantly coloured during the spawning season.
The male of the smooth-tailed stickleback (G.
leiurus) performs the duties of a nurse with exemplary care and vigilance during a long time, and is continually employed in gently leading back the young to the nest, when they stray too far.
He courageously drives away all enemies including the females of his own species.
It would indeed be no small relief to the male, if the female, after depositing her eggs, were immediately devoured by some enemy, for he is forced incessantly to drive her from the nest.
(37.
See Mr. Warington's most interesting description of the habits of the Gasterosteus leiurus in 'Annals and Magazine of Nat.
History,' November 1855.
) The males of certain other fishes inhabiting South America and Ceylon, belonging to two distinct Orders, have the extraordinary habit of hatching within their mouths, or branchial cavities, the eggs laid by the females.
(38.
Prof.
Wyman, in 'Proc.
Boston Soc.
of Nat.
Hist.
' Sept.
15, 1857.
Also Prof.
Turner, in 'Journal of Anatomy and Physiology,' Nov.
1, 1866, p.
78.
Dr. Gunther has likewise described other cases.
) I am informed by Professor Agassiz that the males of the Amazonian species which follow this habit, "not only are generally brighter than the females, but the difference is greater at the spawning-season than at any other time".
The species of Geophagus act in the same manner; and in this genus, a conspicuous protuberance becomes developed on the forehead of the males during the breeding-season.
With the various species of Chromids, as Professor Agassiz likewise informs me, sexual differences in colour may be observed, "whether they lay their eggs in the water among aquatic plants, or deposit them in holes, leaving them to come out without further
It ought also to be observed that these sitters are among the brightest species in their respective families; for instance, Hygrogonus is bright green, with large black ocelli, encircled with the most brilliant red".
Whether with all the species of Chromids it is the male alone which sits on the eggs is not known.
It is, however, manifest that the fact of the eggs being protected or unprotected by the parents, has had little or no influence on the differences in colour between the sexes.
It is further manifest, in all the cases in which the males take exclusive charge of the nests and young, that the destruction of the brighter-coloured males would be far more influential on the character of the race, than the destruction of the
In most of the Lophobranchii (Pipe-fish, Hippocampi, etc.
) the males have either marsupial sacks or hemispherical depressions on the abdomen, in which the ova laid by the female are hatched.
The males also shew great attachment to their young.
(39.
Yarrell, 'History of British Fishes,' vol.
ii.
1836, pp.
329, 338.
) The sexes do not commonly differ much in colour; but Dr. Gunther believes that the male Hippocampi are rather brighter than the females.
The genus Solenostoma, however, offers a curious exceptional case (40.
Dr. Gunther, since publishing an account of this species in 'The Fishes of Zanzibar,' by Col.
Playfair, 1866, p.
137, has re-examined the specimens, and has given me the above information.
), for the female is much more vividly-coloured and spotted than the male, and she alone has a marsupial sack and hatches the eggs; so that the female of Solenostoma differs from all the other Lophobranchii in this latter respect, and from almost all other
It is improbable that this remarkable double inversion of character in the female should be an accidental coincidence.
As the males of several fishes, which take exclusive charge of the eggs and young, are more brightly coloured than the females, and as here the female Solenostoma takes the same charge and is brighter than the male, it might be argued that the conspicuous
But from the large number of fishes, of which the males are either permanently or periodically brighter than the females, but whose life is not at all more important for the welfare of the species than that of the female, this view can hardly be
When we treat of birds we shall meet with analogous cases, where there has been a complete inversion of the usual attributes of the two sexes, and we shall then give what appears to be the probable explanation, namely, that the males have selected the more
On the whole we may conclude, that with most fishes, in which the sexes differ in colour or in other ornamental characters, the males originally varied, with their variations transmitted to the same sex, and accumulated through sexual selection by
In many cases, however, such characters have been transferred, either partially or completely, to the females.
In other cases, again, both sexes have been coloured alike for the sake of protection; but in no instance does it appear that the female alone has had her colours or other characters specially modified for this latter purpose.
The last point which need be noticed is that fishes are known to make various noises, some of which are described as being musical.
Dr. Dufosse, who has especially attended to this subject, says that the sounds are voluntarily produced in several ways by different fishes: by the friction of the pharyngeal bones--by the vibration of certain muscles attached to the swim bladder, which
By this latter means the Trigla produces pure and long-drawn sounds which range over nearly an octave.
But the most interesting case for us is that of two species of Ophidium, in which the males alone are provided with a sound-producing apparatus, consisting of small movable bones, with proper muscles, in connection with the swim bladder.
(41.
'Comptes-Rendus,' tom.
xlvi.
1858, p.
353; tom.
xlvii.
1858, p.
916; tom.
liv.
1862, p.
393.
The noise made by the Umbrinas (Sciaena aquila), is said by some authors to be more like that of a flute or organ, than drumming: Dr. Zouteveen, in the Dutch translation of this work (vol.
ii.
p.
36), gives some further particulars on the sounds made by fishes.
) The drumming of the Umbrinas in the European seas is said to be audible from a depth of twenty fathoms; and the fishermen of Rochelle assert "that the males alone make the noise during the spawning-time; and that it is possible by imitating it, to take
(42.
The Rev.
C. Kingsley, in 'Nature,' May 1870, p.
40.
) From this statement, and more especially from the case of Ophidium, it is almost certain that in this, the lowest class of the Vertebrata, as with so many insects and spiders, sound-producing instruments have, at least in some cases, been developed
AMPHIBIANS.
URODELA.
[Fig.
32.
Triton cristatus (half natural size, from Bell's 'British Reptiles').
Upper figure, male during the breeding season; lower figure, female.
] I will begin with the tailed amphibians.
The sexes of salamanders or newts often differ much both in colour and structure.
In some species prehensile claws are developed on the fore-legs of the males during the breeding- season: and at this season in the male Triton palmipes the hind-feet are provided with a swimming-web, which is almost completely absorbed during the winter;
(43.
Bell, 'History of British Reptiles,' 2nd ed.
, 1849, pp.
156-159.
) This structure no doubt aids the male in his eager search and pursuit of the female.
Whilst courting her he rapidly vibrates the end of his tail.
With our common newts (Triton punctatus and cristatus) a deep, much indented crest is developed along the back and tail of the male during the breeding- season, which disappears during the winter.
Mr. St. George Mivart informs me that it is not furnished with muscles, and therefore cannot be used for locomotion.
As during the season of courtship it becomes edged with bright colours, there can hardly be a doubt that it is a masculine ornament.
In many species the body presents strongly contrasted, though lurid tints, and these become more vivid during the breeding-season.
The male, for instance, of our common little newt (Triton punctatus) is "brownish-grey above, passing into yellow beneath, which in the spring becomes a rich bright orange, marked everywhere with round dark spots".
The edge of the crest also is then tipped with bright red or violet.
The female is usually of a yellowish-brown colour with scattered brown dots, and the lower surface is often quite plain.
(44.
Bell, 'History of British Reptiles,' 2nd ed.
, 1849, pp.
146, 151.
) The young are obscurely tinted.
The ova are fertilised during the act of deposition, and are not subsequently tended by either parent.
We may therefore conclude that the males have acquired their strongly-marked colours and ornamental appendages through sexual selection; these being transmitted either to the male offspring alone, or to both sexes.
ANURA OR BATRACHIA.
With many frogs and toads the colours evidently serve as a protection, such as the bright green tints of tree frogs and the obscure mottled shades of many terrestrial species.
The most conspicuously-coloured toad which I ever saw, the Phryniscus nigricans (45.
'Zoology of the Voyage of the "Beagle,"' 1843.
Bell, ibid.
p.
49.
), had the whole upper surface of the body as black as ink, with the soles of the feet and parts of the abdomen spotted with the brightest vermilion.
It crawled about the bare sandy or open grassy plains of La Plata under a scorching sun, and could not fail to catch the eye of every passing creature.
These colours are probably beneficial by making this animal known to all birds of prey as a nauseous mouthful.
In Nicaragua there is a little frog "dressed in a bright livery of red and blue" which does not conceal itself like most other species, but hops about during the daytime, and Mr. Belt says (46.
'The Naturalist in Nicaragua,' 1874, p.
321.
) that as soon as he saw its happy sense of security, he felt sure that it was uneatable.
After several trials he succeeded in tempting a young duck to snatch up a young one, but it was instantly rejected; and the duck "went about jerking its head, as if trying to throw off some unpleasant taste".
With respect to sexual differences of colour, Dr. Gunther does not know of any striking instance either with frogs or toads; yet he can often distinguish the male from the female by the tints of the former being a little more intense.
Nor does he know of any striking difference in external structure between the sexes, excepting the prominences which become developed during the breeding-season on the front legs of the male, by which he is enabled to hold the female.
(47.
The male alone of the Bufo sikimmensis (Dr. Anderson, 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1871, p.
204) has two plate-like callosities on the thorax and certain rugosities on the fingers, which perhaps subserve the same end as the above-mentioned prominences.
) It is surprising that these animals have not acquired more strongly-marked sexual characters; for though cold-blooded their passions are strong.
Dr. Gunther informs me that he has several times found an unfortunate female toad dead and smothered from having been so closely embraced by three or four males.
Frogs have been observed by Professor Hoffman in Giessen fighting all day long during the breeding-season, and with so much violence that one had its body ripped open.
Frogs and toads offer one interesting sexual difference, namely, in the musical powers possessed by the males; but to speak of music, when applied to the discordant and overwhelming sounds emitted by male bull-frogs and some other species, seems, according
Nevertheless, certain frogs sing in a decidedly pleasing manner.
Near Rio Janeiro I used often to sit in the evening to listen to a number of little Hylae, perched on blades of grass close to the water, which sent forth sweet chirping notes in harmony.
The various sounds are emitted chiefly by the males during the breeding-season, as in the case of the croaking of our common frog.
(48.
Bell, 'History British Reptiles,' 1849, p.
93.
) In accordance with this fact the vocal organs of the males are more highly-developed than those of the females.
In some genera the males alone are provided with sacs which open into the larynx.
(49.
J. Bishop, in 'Todd's Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology,' vol.
iv.
p.
1503.
) For instance, in the edible frog (Rana esculenta) "the sacs are peculiar to the males, and become, when filled with air in the act of croaking, large globular bladders, standing out one on each side of the head, near the corners of the mouth".
The croak of the male is thus rendered exceedingly powerful; whilst that of the female is only a slight groaning noise.
(50.
Bell, ibid.
pp.
112-114.
) In the several genera of the family the vocal organs differ considerably in structure, and their development in all cases may be attributed to sexual selection.
REPTILES.
CHELONIA.
Tortoises and turtles do not offer well-marked sexual differences.
In some species, the tail of the male is longer than that of the female.
In some, the plastron or lower surface of the shell of the male is slightly concave in relation to the back of the female.
The male of the mud-turtle of the United States (Chrysemys picta) has claws on its front feet twice as long as those of the female; and these are used when the sexes unite.
(51.
Mr. C.J. Maynard, 'The American Naturalist,' Dec.
1869, p.
555.
) With the huge tortoise of the Galapagos Islands (Testudo nigra) the males are said to grow to a larger size than the females: during the pairing-season, and at no other time, the male utters a hoarse bellowing noise, which can be heard at the distance of
(52.
See my 'Journal of Researches during the Voyage of the "Beagle,"' 1845, p.
384.
) With the Testudo elegans of India, it is said "that the combats of the males may be heard at some distance, from the noise they produce in butting against each other".
(53.
Dr. Gunther, 'Reptiles of British India,' 1864, p.
7.
) CROCODILIA.
The sexes apparently do not differ in colour; nor do I know that the males fight together, though this is probable, for some kinds make a prodigious display before the females.
Bartram (54.
'Travels through Carolina,' etc.
, 1791, p.
128.
) describes the male alligator as striving to win the female by splashing and roaring in the midst of a lagoon, "swollen to an extent ready to burst, with its head and tail lifted up, he springs or twirls round on the surface of the water, like an Indian
During the season of love, a musky odour is emitted by the submaxillary glands of the crocodile, and pervades their haunts.
(55.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
i.
1866, p.
615.
) OPHIDIA.
Dr. Gunther informs me that the males are always smaller than the females, and generally have longer and slenderer tails; but he knows of no other difference in external structure.
In regard to colour, be can almost always distinguish the male from the female, by his more strongly- pronounced tints; thus the black zigzag band on the back of the male English viper is more distinctly defined than in the female.
The difference is much plainer in the rattle-snakes of N. America, the male of which, as the keeper in the Zoological Gardens shewed me, can at once be distinguished from the female by having more lurid yellow about its whole body.
In S. Africa the Bucephalus capensis presents an analogous difference, for the female "is never so fully variegated with yellow on the sides as the male".
(56.
Sir Andrew Smith, 'Zoology of S. Africa: Reptilia,' 1849, pl.
x.
) The male of the Indian Dipsas cynodon, on the other hand, is blackish-brown, with the belly partly black, whilst the female is reddish or yellowish-olive, with the belly either uniform yellowish or marbled with black.
In the Tragops dispar of the same country the male is bright green, and the female bronze-coloured.
(57.
Dr. A. Gunther, 'Reptiles of British India,' Ray Soc.
, 1864, pp.
304, 308.
) No doubt the colours of some snakes are protective, as shewn by the green tints of tree-snakes, and the various mottled shades of the species which live in sandy places; but it is doubtful whether the colours of many kinds, for instance of the common
The colours of certain species are very different in the adult and young states.
(58.
Dr. Stoliczka, 'Journal of Asiatic Society of Bengal,' vol.
xxxix, 1870, pp.
205, 211.
) During the breeding-season the anal scent-glands of snakes are in active function (59.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
i.
1866, p.
615.
); and so it is with the same glands in lizards, and as we have seen with the submaxillary glands of crocodiles.
As the males of most animals search for the females, these odoriferous glands probably serve to excite or charm the female, rather than to guide her to the spot where the male may be found.
Male snakes, though appearing so sluggish, are amorous; for many have been observed crowding round the same female, and even round her dead body.
They are not known to fight together from rivalry.
Their intellectual powers are higher than might have been anticipated.
In the Zoological Gardens they soon learn not to strike at the iron bar with which their cages are cleaned; and Dr. Keen of Philadelphia informs me that some snakes which he kept learned after four or five times to avoid a noose, with which they were at
An excellent observer in Ceylon, Mr. E. Layard, saw (60.
'Rambles in Ceylon,' in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' 2nd series, vol.
ix.
1852, p.
333.
) a cobra thrust its head through a narrow hole and swallow a toad.
"With this encumbrance he could not withdraw himself; finding this, he reluctantly disgorged the precious morsel, which began to move off; this was too much for snake philosophy to bear, and the toad was again seized, and again was the snake, after violent
This time, however, a lesson had been learnt, and the toad was seized by one leg, withdrawn, and then swallowed in triumph".
The keeper in the Zoological Gardens is positive that certain snakes, for instance Crotalus and Python, distinguish him from all other persons.
Cobras kept together in the same cage apparently feel some attachment towards each other.
(61.
Dr. Gunther, 'Reptiles of British India,' 1864, p.
340.
) It does not, however, follow because snakes have some reasoning power, strong passions and mutual affection, that they should likewise be endowed with sufficient taste to admire brilliant colours in their partners, so as to lead to the adornment of the
Nevertheless, it is difficult to account in any other manner for the extreme beauty of certain species; for instance, of the coral-snakes of S. America, which are of a rich red with black and yellow transverse bands.
I well remember how much surprise I felt at the beauty of the first coral- snake which I saw gliding across a path in Brazil.
Snakes coloured in this peculiar manner, as Mr. Wallace states on the authority of Dr. Gunther (62.
'Westminster Review,' July 1st, 1867, p.
32.
), are found nowhere else in the world except in S. America, and here no less than four genera occur.
One of these, Elaps, is venomous; a second and widely-distinct genus is doubtfully venomous, and the two others are quite harmless.
The species belonging to these distinct genera inhabit the same districts, and are so like each other that no one "but a naturalist would distinguish the harmless from the poisonous kinds".
Hence, as Mr. Wallace believes, the innocuous kinds have probably acquired their colours as a protection, on the principle of imitation; for they would naturally be thought dangerous by their enemies.
The cause, however, of the bright colours of the venomous Elaps remains to be explained, and this may perhaps be sexual selection.
Snakes produce other sounds besides hissing.
The deadly Echis carinata has on its sides some oblique rows of scales of a peculiar structure with serrated edges; and when this snake is excited these scales are rubbed against each other, which produces "a curious prolonged, almost hissing sound".
(63.
Dr. Anderson, 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1871, p.
196.
) With respect to the rattling of the rattle-snake, we have at last some definite information: for Professor Aughey states (64.
The 'American Naturalist,' 1873, p.
85.
), that on two occasions, being himself unseen, he watched from a little distance a rattle-snake coiled up with head erect, which continued to rattle at short intervals for half an hour: and at last he saw another snake approach, and when they met they
Hence he is satisfied that one of the uses of the rattle is to bring the sexes together.
Unfortunately he did not ascertain whether it was the male or the female which remained stationary and called for the other.
But it by no means follows from the above fact that the rattle may not be of use to these snakes in other ways, as a warning to animals which would otherwise attack them.
Nor can I quite disbelieve the several accounts which have appeared of their thus paralysing their prey with fear.
Some other snakes also make a distinct noise by rapidly vibrating their tails against the surrounding stalks of plants; and I have myself heard this in the case of a Trigonocephalus in S. America.
LACERTILIA.
The males of some, probably of many kinds of lizards, fight together from rivalry.
Thus the arboreal Anolis cristatellus of S. America is extremely pugnacious: "During the spring and early part of the summer, two adult males rarely meet without a contest.
On first seeing one another, they nod their heads up and down three or four times, and at the same time expanding the frill or pouch beneath the throat; their eyes glisten with rage, and after waving their tails from side to side for a few seconds, as if
The conflict generally ends in one of the combatants losing his tail, which is often devoured by the victor".
The male of this species is considerably larger than the female (65.
Mr. N.L. Austen kept these animals alive for a considerable time; see 'Land and Water,' July 1867, p.
9.
); and this, as far as Dr. Gunther has been able to ascertain, is the general rule with lizards of all kinds.
The male alone of the Cyrtodactylus rubidus of the Andaman Islands possesses pre-anal pores; and these pores, judging from analogy, probably serve to emit an odour.
(66.
Stoliczka, 'Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,' vol.
xxxiv.
1870, p.
166.
) [Fig.
33.
Sitana minor.
Male with the gular pouch expanded (from Gunther's 'Reptiles of India')'] The sexes often differ greatly in various external characters.
The male of the above-mentioned Anolis is furnished with a crest which runs along the back and tail, and can be erected at pleasure; but of this crest the female does not exhibit a trace.
In the Indian Cophotis ceylanica, the female has a dorsal crest, though much less developed than in the male; and so it is, as Dr. Gunther informs me, with the females of many Iguanas, Chameleons, and other lizards.
In some species, however, the crest is equally developed in both sexes, as in the Iguana tuberculata.
In the genus Sitana, the males alone are furnished with a large throat pouch (Fig.
33), which can be folded up like a fan, and is coloured blue, black, and red; but these splendid colours are exhibited only during the pairing-season.
The female does not possess even a rudiment of this appendage.
In the Anolis cristatellus, according to Mr. Austen, the throat pouch, which is bright red marbled with yellow, is present in the female, though in a rudimental condition.
Again, in certain other lizards, both sexes are equally well provided with throat pouches.
Here we see with species belonging to the same group, as in so many previous cases, the same character either confined to the males, or more largely developed in them than in the females, or again equally developed in both sexes.
The little lizards of the genus Draco, which glide through the air on their rib- supported parachutes, and which in the beauty of their colours baffle description, are furnished with skinny appendages to the throat "like the wattles of gallinaceous birds".
These become erected when the animal is excited.
They occur in both sexes, but are best developed when the male arrives at maturity, at which age the middle appendage is sometimes twice as long as the head.
Most of the species likewise have a low crest running along the neck; and this is much more developed in the full-grown males than in the females or young males.
(67.
All the foregoing statements and quotations, in regard to Cophotis, Sitana and Draco, as well as the following facts in regard to Ceratophora and Chamaeleon, are from Dr. Gunther himself, or from his magnificent work on the 'Reptiles of British India,' Ray
, 1864, pp.
122, 130, 135.
) A Chinese species is said to live in pairs during the spring; "and if one is caught, the other falls from the tree to the ground, and allows itself to be captured with impunity"--I presume from despair.
(68.
Mr. Swinhoe, 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1870, p.
240.
) [Fig.
34.
Ceratophora Stoddartii.
Upper figure; lower figure, female.
] There are other and much more remarkable differences between the sexes of certain lizards.
The male of Ceratophora aspera bears on the extremity of his snout an appendage half as long as the head.
It is cylindrical, covered with scales, flexible, and apparently capable of erection: in the female it is quite rudimental.
In a second species of the same genus a terminal scale forms a minute horn on the summit of the flexible appendage; and in a third species (C.
Stoddartii, fig.
34) the whole appendage is converted into a horn, which is usually of a white colour, but assumes a purplish tint when the animal is excited.
In the adult male of this latter species the horn is half an inch in length, but it is of quite minute size in the female and in the young.
These appendages, as Dr. Gunther has remarked to me, may be compared with the combs of gallinaceous birds, and apparently serve as ornaments.
[Fig.
35.
Chamaeleo bifurcus.
Upper figure, male; lower figure, female.
Fig.
36.
Chamaeleo Owenii.
Upper figure, male; lower figure, female.
] In the genus Chamaeleon we come to the acme of difference between the sexes.
The upper part of the skull of the male C. bifurcus (Fig.
35), an inhabitant of Madagascar, is produced into two great, solid, bony projections, covered with scales like the rest of the head; and of this wonderful modification of structure the female exhibits only a rudiment.
Again, in Chamaeleo Owenii (Fig.
36), from the West Coast of Africa, the male bears on his snout and forehead three curious horns, of which the female has not a trace.
These horns consist of an excrescence of bone covered with a smooth sheath, forming part of the general integuments of the body, so that they are identical in structure with those of a bull, goat, or other sheath-horned ruminant.
Although the three horns differ so much in appearance from the two great prolongations of the skull in C. bifurcus, we can hardly doubt that they serve the same general purpose in the economy of these two animals.
The first conjecture, which will occur to every one, is that they are used by the males for fighting together; and as these animals are very quarrelsome (69.
Dr. Buchholz, 'Monatsbericht K. Preuss.
Akad.
' Jan.
1874, p.
78.
), this is probably a correct view.
Mr. T.W. Wood also informs me that he once watched two individuals of C. pumilus fighting violently on the branch of a tree; they flung their heads about and tried to bite each other; they then rested for a time and afterwards continued their battle.
With many lizards the sexes differ slightly in colour, the tints and stripes of the males being brighter and more distinctly defined than in the females.
This, for instance, is the case with the above Cophotis and with the Acanthodactylus capensis of S. Africa.
In a Cordylus of the latter country, the male is either much redder or greener than the female.
In the Indian Calotes nigrilabris there is a still greater difference; the lips also of the male are black, whilst those of the female are green.
In our common little viviparous lizard (Zootoca vivipara) "the under side of the body and base of the tail in the male are bright orange, spotted with black; in the female these parts are pale-greyish-green without spots".
(70.
Bell, 'History of British Reptiles,' 2nd ed.
, 1849, p.
40.
) We have seen that the males alone of Sitana possess a throat-pouch; and this is splendidly tinted with blue, black, and red.
In the Proctotretus tenuis of Chile the male alone is marked with spots of blue, green, and coppery-red.
(71.
For Proctotretus, see 'Zoology of the Voyage of the "Beagle"; Reptiles,' by Mr. Bell, p.
8.
For the Lizards of S. Africa, see 'Zoology of S. Africa: Reptiles,' by Sir Andrew Smith, pl.
25 and 39.
For the Indian Calotes, see 'Reptiles of British India,' by Dr. Gunther, p.
143.
) In many cases the males retain the same colours throughout the year, but in others they become much brighter during the breeding-season; I may give as an additional instance the Calotes maria, which at this season has a bright red head, the rest of the
(72.
Gunther in 'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1870, p.
778, with a coloured figure.
) Both sexes of many species are beautifully coloured exactly alike; and there is no reason to suppose that such colours are protective.
No doubt with the bright green kinds which live in the midst of vegetation, this colour serves to conceal them; and in N. Patagonia I saw a lizard (Proctotretus multimaculatus) which, when frightened, flattened its body, closed its eyes, and then from its
But the bright colours with which so many lizards are ornamented, as well as their various curious appendages, were probably acquired by the males as an attraction, and then transmitted either to their male offspring alone, or to both sexes.
Sexual selection, indeed, seems to have played almost as important a part with reptiles as with birds; and the less conspicuous colours of the females in comparison with the males cannot be accounted for, as Mr. Wallace believes to be the case with birds,
CHAPTER XIII.
SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS OF BIRDS.
Sexual differences--Law of battle--Special weapons--Vocal organs-- Instrumental music--Love-antics and dances--Decorations, permanent and seasonal--Double and single annual moults--Display of ornaments by the males.
Secondary sexual characters are more diversified and conspicuous in birds, though not perhaps entailing more important changes of structure, than in any other class of animals.
I shall, therefore, treat the subject at considerable length.
Male birds sometimes, though rarely, possess special weapons for fighting with each other.
They charm the female by vocal or instrumental music of the most varied kinds.
They are ornamented by all sorts of combs, wattles, protuberances, horns, air-distended sacks, top- knots, naked shafts, plumes and lengthened feathers gracefully springing from all parts of the body.
The beak and naked skin about the head, and the feathers, are often gorgeously coloured.
The males sometimes pay their court by dancing, or by fantastic antics performed either on the ground or in the air.
In one instance, at least, the male emits a musky odour, which we may suppose serves to charm or excite the female; for that excellent observer, Mr. Ramsay (1.
'Ibis,' vol.
iii.
(new series), 1867, p.
414.
), says of the Australian musk-duck (Biziura lobata) that "the smell which the male emits during the summer months is confined to that sex, and in some individuals is retained throughout the year; I have never, even in the breeding-season, shot a female
So powerful is this odour during the pairing-season, that it can be detected long before the bird can be seen.
(2.
Gould, 'Handbook of the Birds of Australia,' 1865, vol.
ii.
p.
383.
) On the whole, birds appear to be the most aesthetic of all animals, excepting of course man, and they have nearly the same taste for the beautiful as we have.
This is shewn by our enjoyment of the singing of birds, and by our women, both civilised and savage, decking their heads with borrowed plumes, and using gems which are hardly more brilliantly coloured than the naked skin and wattles of certain birds.
In man, however, when cultivated, the sense of beauty is manifestly a far more complex feeling, and is associated with various intellectual ideas.
Before treating of the sexual characters with which we are here more particularly concerned, I may just allude to certain differences between the sexes which apparently depend on differences in their habits of life; for such cases, though common in the
Two humming-birds belonging to the genus Eustephanus, which inhabit the island of Juan Fernandez, were long thought to be specifically distinct, but are now known, as Mr. Gould informs me, to be the male and female of the same species, and they differ
In another genus of humming-birds (Grypus), the beak of the male is serrated along the margin and hooked at the extremity, thus differing much from that of the female.
In the Neomorpha of New Zealand, there is, as we have seen, a still wider difference in the form of the beak in relation to the manner of feeding of the two sexes.
Something of the same kind has been observed with the goldfinch (Carduelis elegans), for I am assured by Mr. J. Jenner Weir that the bird-catchers can distinguish the males by their slightly longer beaks.
The flocks of males are often found feeding on the seeds of the teazle (Dipsacus), which they can reach with their elongated beaks, whilst the females more commonly feed on the seeds of the betony or Scrophularia.
With a slight difference of this kind as a foundation, we can see how the beaks of the two sexes might be made to differ greatly through natural selection.
In some of the above cases, however, it is possible that the beaks of the males may have been first modified in relation to their contests with other males; and that this afterwards led to slightly changed habits of life.
LAW OF BATTLE.
Almost all male birds are extremely pugnacious, using their beaks, wings, and legs for fighting together.
We see this every spring with our robins and sparrows.
The smallest of all birds, namely the humming-bird, is one of the most quarrelsome.
Mr. Gosse (3.
Quoted by Mr. Gould, 'Introduction to the Trochilidae,' 1861, page 29.
) describes a battle in which a pair seized hold of each other's beaks, and whirled round and round, till they almost fell to the ground; and M. Montes de Oca, in speaking or another genus of humming-bird, says that two males rarely meet without a fierce
(4.
Gould, ibid.
p.
52.
) With waders, the males of the common water-hen (Gallinula chloropus) "when pairing, fight violently for the females: they stand nearly upright in the water and strike with their feet".
Two were seen to be thus engaged for half an hour, until one got hold of the head of the other, which would have been killed had not the observer interfered; the female all the time looking on as a quiet spectator.
(5.
W. Thompson, 'Natural History of Ireland: Birds,' vol.
ii.
1850, p.
327.
) Mr. Blyth informs me that the males of an allied bird (Gallicrex cristatus) are a third larger than the females, and are so pugnacious during the breeding-season that they are kept by the natives of Eastern Bengal for the sake of fighting.
Various other birds are kept in India for the same purpose, for instance, the bulbuls (Pycnonotus hoemorrhous) which "fight with great spirit".
(6.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' 1863, vol.
ii.
p.
96.
) [Fig.
37.
The Ruff or Machetes pugnax (from Brehm's 'Thierleben').
] The polygamous ruff (Machetes pugnax, Fig.
37) is notorious for his extreme pugnacity; and in the spring, the males, which are considerably larger than the females, congregate day after day at a particular spot, where the females propose to lay their eggs.
The fowlers discover these spots by the turf being trampled somewhat bare.
Here they fight very much like game- cocks, seizing each other with their beaks and striking with their wings.
The great ruff of feathers round the neck is then erected, and according to Col.
Montagu "sweeps the ground as a shield to defend the more tender parts"; and this is the only instance known to me in the case of birds of any structure serving as a shield.
The ruff of feathers, however, from its varied and rich colours probably serves in chief part as an ornament.
Like most pugnacious birds, they seem always ready to fight, and when closely confined, often kill each other; but Montagu observed that their pugnacity becomes greater during the spring, when the long feathers on their necks are fully developed; and at
(7.
Macgillivray, 'History of British Birds,' vol.
iv.
1852, pp.
177-181.
) Of the pugnacity of web-footed birds, two instances will suffice: in Guiana "bloody fights occur during the breeding-season between the males of the wild musk-duck (Cairina moschata); and where these fights have occurred the river is covered for some
(8.
Sir R. Schomburgk, in 'Journal of Royal Geographic Society,' vol.
xiii.
1843, p.
31.
) Birds which seem ill-adapted for fighting engage in fierce conflicts; thus the stronger males of the pelican drive away the weaker ones, snapping with their huge beaks and giving heavy blows with their wings.
Male snipe fight together, "tugging and pushing each other with their bills in the most curious manner imaginable".
Some few birds are believed never to fight; this is the case, according to Audubon, with one of the woodpeckers of the United States (Picu sauratus), although "the hens are followed by even half a dozen of their gay suitors".
(9.
'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
i.
p.
191.
For pelicans and snipes, see vol.
iii.
pp.
138, 477.
) The males of many birds are larger than the females, and this no doubt is the result of the advantage gained by the larger and stronger males over their rivals during many generations.
The difference in size between the two sexes is carried to an extreme point in several Australian species; thus the male musk-duck (Biziura), and the male Cincloramphus cruralis (allied to our pipits) are by measurement actually twice as large as their
(10.
Gould, 'Handbook of Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
p.
395; vol.
ii.
p.
383.
) With many other birds the females are larger than the males; and, as formerly remarked, the explanation often given, namely, that the females have most of the work in feeding their young, will not suffice.
In some few cases, as we shall hereafter see, the females apparently have acquired their greater size and strength for the sake of conquering other females and obtaining possession of the males.
The males of many gallinaceous birds, especially of the polygamous kinds, are furnished with special weapons for fighting with their rivals, namely spurs, which can be used with fearful effect.
It has been recorded by a trustworthy writer (11.
Mr. Hewitt, in the 'Poultry Book' by Tegetmeier, 1866, p.
137.
) that in Derbyshire a kite struck at a game-hen accompanied by her chickens, when the cock rushed to the rescue, and drove his spur right through the eye and skull of the aggressor.
The spur was with difficulty drawn from the skull, and as the kite, though dead, retained his grasp, the two birds were firmly locked together; but the cock when disentangled was very little injured.
The invincible courage of the game- cock is notorious: a gentleman who long ago witnessed the brutal scene, told me that a bird had both its legs broken by some accident in the cockpit, and the owner laid a wager that if the legs could be spliced so that
This was effected on the spot, and the bird fought with undaunted courage until he received his death-stroke.
In Ceylon a closely allied, wild species, the Gallus Stanleyi, is known to fight desperately "in defence of his seraglio," so that one of the combatants is frequently found dead.
(12.
Layard, 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
xiv.
1854, p.
63.
) An Indian partridge (Ortygornis gularis), the male of which is furnished with strong and sharp spurs, is so quarrelsome "that the scars of former fights disfigure the breast of almost every bird you kill".
(13.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
574.
) The males of almost all gallinaceous birds, even those which are not furnished with spurs, engage during the breeding-season in fierce conflicts.
The Capercailzie and Black-cock (Tetrao urogallus and T. tetrix), which are both polygamists, have regular appointed places, where during many weeks they congregate in numbers to fight together and to display their charms before the females.
Dr. W. Kovalevsky informs me that in Russia he has seen the snow all bloody on the arenas where the capercailzie have fought; and the black-cocks "make the feathers fly in every direction," when several "engage in a battle royal".
The elder Brehm gives a curious account of the Balz, as the love-dances and love-songs of the Black-cock are called in Germany.
The bird utters almost continuously the strangest noises: "he holds his tail up and spreads it out like a fan, he lifts up his head and neck with all the feathers erect, and stretches his wings from the body.
Then he takes a few jumps in different directions, sometimes in a circle, and presses the under part of his beak so hard against the ground that the chin feathers are rubbed off.
During these movements he beats his wings and turns round and round.
The more ardent he grows the more lively he becomes, until at last the bird appears like a frantic creature".
At such times the black-cocks are so absorbed that they become almost blind and deaf, but less so than the capercailzie: hence bird after bird may be shot on the same spot, or even caught by the hand.
After performing these antics the males begin to fight: and the same black-cock, in order to prove his strength over several antagonists, will visit in the course of one morning several Balz-places, which remain the same during successive years.
(14.
Brehm, 'Thierleben,' 1867, B. iv.
s.
351.
Some of the foregoing statements are taken from L. Lloyd, 'The Game Birds of Sweden,' etc.
, 1867, p.
79.
) The peacock with his long train appears more like a dandy than a warrior, but he sometimes engages in fierce contests: the Rev.
W. Darwin Fox informs me that at some little distance from Chester two peacocks became so excited whilst fighting, that they flew over the whole city, still engaged, until they alighted on the top of St. John's tower.
The spur, in those gallinaceous birds which are thus provided, is generally single; but Polyplectron (Fig.
51) has two or more on each leg; and one of the Blood-pheasants (Ithaginis cruentus) has been seen with five spurs.
The spurs are generally confined to the male, being represented by mere knobs or rudiments in the female; but the females of the Java peacock (Pavo muticus) and, as I am informed by Mr. Blyth, of the small fire-backed pheasant (Euplocamus erythrophthalmus)
In Galloperdix it is usual for the males to have two spurs, and for the females to have only one on each leg.
(15.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India': on Ithaginis, vol.
iii.
p.
523; on Galloperdix, p.
541.
) Hence spurs may be considered as a masculine structure, which has been occasionally more or less transferred to the females.
Like most other secondary sexual characters, the spurs are highly variable, both in number and development, in the same species.
[Fig.
38.
Palamedea cornuta (from Brehm), shewing the double wing-spurs, and the filament on the head.
] Various birds have spurs on their wings.
But the Egyptian goose (Chenalopex aegyptiacus) has only "bare obtuse knobs," and these probably shew us the first steps by which true spurs have been developed in other species.
In the spur-winged goose, Plectropterus gambensis, the males have much larger spurs than the females; and they use them, as I am informed by Mr. Bartlett, in fighting together, so that, in this case, the wing-spurs serve as sexual weapons; but according to
The Palamedea (Fig.
38) is armed with a pair of spurs on each wing; and these are such formidable weapons that a single blow has been known to drive a dog howling away.
But it does not appear that the spurs in this case, or in that of some of the spur-winged rails, are larger in the male than in the female.
(16.
For the Egyptian goose, see Macgillivray, 'British Birds,' vol.
iv.
p.
639.
For Plectropterus, Livingstone's 'Travels,' p.
254.
For Palamedea, Brehm's 'Thierleben,' B. iv.
s.
740.
See also on this bird Azara, 'Voyages dans l'Amerique merid.
' tom.
iv.
1809, pp.
179, 253.
) In certain plovers, however, the wing-spurs must be considered as a sexual character.
Thus in the male of our common peewit (Vanellus cristatus) the tubercle on the shoulder of the wing becomes more prominent during the breeding-season, and the males fight together.
In some species of Lobivanellus a similar tubercle becomes developed during the breeding-season "into a short horny spur".
In the Australian L. lobatus both sexes have spurs, but these are much larger in the males than in the females.
In an allied bird, the Hoplopterus armatus, the spurs do not increase in size during the breeding- season; but these birds have been seen in Egypt to fight together, in the same manner as our peewits, by turning suddenly in the air and striking sideways at
Thus also they drive away other enemies.
(17.
See, on our peewit, Mr. R. Carr in 'Land and Water,' Aug.
8th, 1868, p.
46.
In regard to Lobivanellus, see Jerdon's 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
647, and Gould's 'Handbook of Birds of Australia,' vol.
ii.
p.
220.
For the Hoplopterus, see Mr. Allen in the 'Ibis,' vol.
v.
1863, p.
156.
) The season of love is that of battle; but the males of some birds, as of the game-fowl and ruff, and even the young males of the wild turkey and grouse (18.
Audubon, 'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
ii.
p.
492; vol.
i.
pp.
4-13.
), are ready to fight whenever they meet.
The presence of the female is the teterrima belli causa.
The Bengali baboos make the pretty little males of the amadavat (Estrelda amandava) fight together by placing three small cages in a row, with a female in the middle; after a little time the two males are turned loose, and immediately a desperate battle
(19.
Mr. Blyth, 'Land and Water,' 1867, p.
212.
) When many males congregate at the same appointed spot and fight together, as in the case of grouse and various other birds, they are generally attended by the females (20.
Richardson on Tetrao umbellus, 'Fauna Bor.
Amer.
: Birds,' 1831, p.
343.
L. Lloyd, 'Game Birds of Sweden,' 1867, pp.
22, 79, on the capercailzie and black-cock.
Brehm, however, asserts ('Thierleben,' B. iv.
s.
352) that in Germany the grey-hens do not generally attend the Balzen of the black-cocks, but this is an exception to the common rule; possibly the hens may lie hidden in the surrounding bushes, as is known to be the case with the gray-hens in Scandinavia,
), which afterwards pair with the victorious combatants.
But in some cases the pairing precedes instead of succeeding the combat: thus according to Audubon (21.
'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
ii.
p.
275.
), several males of the Virginian goat-sucker (Caprimulgus virgianus) "court, in a highly entertaining manner the female, and no sooner has she made her choice, than her approved gives chase to all intruders, and drives them beyond his dominions".
Generally the males try to drive away or kill their rivals before they pair.
It does not, however, appear that the females invariably prefer the victorious males.
I have indeed been assured by Dr. W. Kovalevsky that the female capercailzie sometimes steals away with a young male who has not dared to enter the arena with the older cocks, in the same manner as occasionally happens with the does of the red-deer in
When two males contend in presence of a single female, the victor, no doubt, commonly gains his desire; but some of these battles are caused by wandering males trying to distract the peace of an already mated pair.
(22.
Brehm, 'Thierleben,' etc.
, B. iv.
1867, p.
990.
Audubon, 'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
ii.
p.
492.
) Even with the most pugnacious species it is probable that the pairing does not depend exclusively on the mere strength and courage of the male; for such males are generally decorated with various ornaments, which often become more brilliant during the
The males also endeavour to charm or excite their mates by love-notes, songs, and antics; and the courtship is, in many instances, a prolonged affair.
Hence it is not probable that the females are indifferent to the charms of the opposite sex, or that they are invariably compelled to yield to the victorious males.
It is more probable that the females are excited, either before or after the conflict, by certain males, and thus unconsciously prefer them.
In the case of Tetrao umbellus, a good observer (23.
'Land and Water,' July 25, 1868, p.
14.
) goes so far as to believe that the battles of the male "are all a sham, performed to show themselves to the greatest advantage before the admiring females who assemble around; for I have never been able to find a maimed hero, and seldom more than a
I shall have to recur to this subject, but I may here add that with the Tetrao cupido of the United States, about a score of males assemble at a particular spot, and, strutting about, make the whole air resound with their extraordinary noises.
At the first answer from a female the males begin to fight furiously, and the weaker give way; but then, according to Audubon, both the victors and vanquished search for the female, so that the females must either then exert a choice, or the battle must be
So, again, with one of the field-starlings of the United States (Sturnella ludoviciana) the males engage in fierce conflicts, "but at the sight of a female they all fly after her as if mad".
(24.
Audubon's 'Ornithological Biography;' on Tetrao cupido, vol.
ii.
p.
492; on the Sturnus, vol.
ii.
p.
219.
) VOCAL AND INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC.
With birds the voice serves to express various emotions, such as distress, fear, anger, triumph, or mere happiness.
It is apparently sometimes used to excite terror, as in the case of the hissing noise made by some nestling-birds.
Audubon (25.
'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
v.
p.
601.
), relates that a night-heron (Ardea nycticorax, Linn.
), which he kept tame, used to hide itself when a cat approached, and then "suddenly start up uttering one of the most frightful cries, apparently enjoying the cat's alarm and flight".
The common domestic cock clucks to the hen, and the hen to her chickens, when a dainty morsel is found.
The hen, when she has laid an egg, "repeats the same note very often, and concludes with the sixth above, which she holds for a longer time" (26.
The Hon.
Daines Barrington, 'Philosophical Transactions,' 1773, p.
252.
); and thus she expresses her joy.
Some social birds apparently call to each other for aid; and as they flit from tree to tree, the flock is kept together by chirp answering chirp.
During the nocturnal migrations of geese and other water-fowl, sonorous clangs from the van may be heard in the darkness overhead, answered by clangs in the rear.
Certain cries serve as danger signals, which, as the sportsman knows to his cost, are understood by the same species and by others.
The domestic cock crows, and the humming-bird chirps, in triumph over a defeated rival.
The true song, however, of most birds and various strange cries are chiefly uttered during the breeding- season, and serve as a charm, or merely as a call-note, to the other sex.
Naturalists are much divided with respect to the object of the singing of birds.
Few more careful observers ever lived than Montagu, and he maintained that the "males of song-birds and of many others do not in general search for the female, but, on the contrary, their business in the spring is to perch on some conspicuous spot,
(27.
'Ornithological Dictionary,' 1833, p.
475.
) Mr. Jenner Weir informs me that this is certainly the case with the nightingale.
Bechstein, who kept birds during his whole life, asserts, "that the female canary always chooses the best singer, and that in a state of nature the female finch selects that male out of a hundred whose notes please her most.
(28.
'Naturgeschichte der Stubenvgel,' 1840, s.
4.
Mr. Harrison Weir likewise writes to me:--"I am informed that the best singing males generally get a mate first, when they are bred in the same room".
) There can be no doubt that birds closely attend to each other's song.
Mr. Weir has told me of the case of a bullfinch which had been taught to pipe a German waltz, and who was so good a performer that he cost ten guineas; when this bird was first introduced into a room where other birds were kept and he began to sing, all
Many naturalists believe that the singing of birds is almost exclusively "the effect of rivalry and emulation," and not for the sake of charming their mates.
This was the opinion of Daines Barrington and White of Selborne, who both especially attended to this subject.
(29.
'Philosophical Transactions,' 1773, p.
263.
White's 'Natural History of Selborne,' 1825, vol.
i.
p.
246.
) Barrington, however, admits that "superiority in song gives to birds an amazing ascendancy over others, as is well known to bird- catchers".
It is certain that there is an intense degree of rivalry between the males in their singing.
Bird-fanciers match their birds to see which will sing longest; and I was told by Mr. Yarrell that a first-rate bird will sometimes sing till he drops down almost dead, or according to Bechstein (30.
'Naturgesch.
der Stubenvgel,' 1840, s.
252.
), quite dead from rupturing a vessel in the lungs.
Whatever the cause may be, male birds, as I hear from Mr. Weir, often die suddenly during the season of song.
That the habit of singing is sometimes quite independent of love is clear, for a sterile, hybrid canary-bird has been described (31.
Mr. Bold, 'Zoologist,' 1843-44, p.
659.
) as singing whilst viewing itself in a mirror, and then dashing at its own image; it likewise attacked with fury a female canary, when put into the same cage.
The jealousy excited by the act of singing is constantly taken advantage of by bird-catchers; a male, in good song, is hidden and protected, whilst a stuffed bird, surrounded by limed twigs, is exposed to view.
In this manner, as Mr. Weir informs me, a man has in the course of a single day caught fifty, and in one instance, seventy, male chaffinches.
The power and inclination to sing differ so greatly with birds that although the price of an ordinary male chaffinch is only sixpence, Mr. Weir saw one bird for which the bird-catcher asked three pounds; the test of a really good singer being that it will
That male birds should sing from emulation as well as for charming the female, is not at all incompatible; and it might have been expected that these two habits would have concurred, like those of display and pugnacity.
Some authors, however, argue that the song of the male cannot serve to charm the female, because the females of some few species, such as of the canary, robin, lark, and bullfinch, especially when in a state of widowhood, as Bechstein remarks, pour forth
In some of these cases the habit of singing may be in part attributed to the females having been highly fed and confined (32.
D. Barrington, 'Philosophical Transactions,' 1773, p.
262.
Bechstein, 'Stubenvgel,' 1840, s.
4.
), for this disturbs all the functions connected with the reproduction of the species.
Many instances have already been given of the partial transference of secondary masculine characters to the female, so that it is not at all surprising that the females of some species should possess the power of song.
It has also been argued, that the song of the male cannot serve as a charm, because the males of certain species, for instance of the robin, sing during the autumn.
(33.
This is likewise the case with the water-ouzel; see Mr. Hepburn in the 'Zoologist,' 1845-46, p.
1068.
) But nothing is more common than for animals to take pleasure in practising whatever instinct they follow at other times for some real good.
How often do we see birds which fly easily, gliding and sailing through the air obviously for pleasure?
The cat plays with the captured mouse, and the cormorant with the captured fish.
The weaver-bird (Ploceus), when confined in a cage, amuses itself by neatly weaving blades of grass between the wires of its cage.
Birds which habitually fight during the breeding-season are generally ready to fight at all times; and the males of the capercailzie sometimes hold their Balzen or leks at the usual place of assemblage during the autumn.
(34.
L. Lloyd, 'Game Birds of Sweden,' 1867, p.
25.
) Hence it is not at all surprising that male birds should continue singing for their own amusement after the season for courtship is over.
As shewn in a previous chapter, singing is to a certain extent an art, and is much improved by practice.
Birds can be taught various tunes, and even the unmelodious sparrow has learnt to sing like a linnet.
They acquire the song of their foster parents (35.
Barrington, ibid.
p.
264, Bechstein, ibid.
s.
5.
), and sometimes that of their neighbours.
(36.
Dureau de la Malle gives a curious instance ('Annales des Sc.
Nat.
' 3rd series, Zoolog.
, tom.
x.
p.
118) of some wild blackbirds in his garden in Paris, which naturally learnt a republican air from a caged bird.
) All the common songsters belong to the Order of Insessores, and their vocal organs are much more complex than those of most other birds; yet it is a singular fact that some of the Insessores, such as ravens, crows, and magpies, possess the proper
Bishop, in 'Todd's Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology,' vol.
iv.
p.
1496.
), though they never sing, and do not naturally modulate their voices to any great extent.
Hunter asserts (38.
As stated by Barrington in 'Philosophical Transactions,' 1773, p.
262.
) that with the true songsters the muscles of the larynx are stronger in the males than in the females; but with this slight exception there is no difference in the vocal organs of the two sexes, although the males of most species sing so much better and
It is remarkable that only small birds properly sing.
The Australian genus Menura, however, must be excepted; for the Menura Alberti, which is about the size of a half-grown turkey, not only mocks other birds, but "its own whistle is exceedingly beautiful and varied".
The males congregate and form "corroborying places," where they sing, raising and spreading their tails like peacocks, and drooping their wings.
(39.
Gould, 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
1865, pp.
308-310.
See also Mr. T.W. Wood in the 'Student,' April 1870, p.
125.
) It is also remarkable that birds which sing well are rarely decorated with brilliant colours or other ornaments.
Of our British birds, excepting the bullfinch and goldfinch, the best songsters are plain-coloured.
The kingfisher, bee-eater, roller, hoopoe, woodpeckers, etc.
, utter harsh cries; and the brilliant birds of the tropics are hardly ever songsters.
(40.
See remarks to this effect in Gould's 'Introduction to the Trochilidae,' 1861, p.
22.
) Hence bright colours and the power of song seem to replace each other.
We can perceive that if the plumage did not vary in brightness, or if bright colours were dangerous to the species, other means would be employed to charm the females; and melody of voice offers one such means.
[Fig.
39.
Tetrao cupido: male.
(T.W. Wood.
)] In some birds the vocal organs differ greatly in the two sexes.
In the Tetrao cupido (Fig.
39) the male has two bare, orange-coloured sacks, one on each side of the neck; and these are largely inflated when the male, during the breeding-season, makes his curious hollow sound, audible at a great distance.
Audubon proved that the sound was intimately connected with this apparatus (which reminds us of the air-sacks on each side of the mouth of certain male frogs), for he found that the sound was much diminished when one of the sacks of a tame bird was
The female has "a somewhat similar, though smaller naked space of skin on the neck; but this is not capable of inflation".
(41.
'The Sportsman and Naturalist in Canada,' by Major W. Ross King, 1866, pp.
144-146.
Mr. T.W. Wood gives in the 'Student' (April 1870, p.
116) an excellent account of the attitude and habits of this bird during its courtship.
He states that the ear-tufts or neck-plumes are erected, so that they meet over the crown of the head.
See his drawing, Fig.
39.
) The male of another kind of grouse (Tetrao urophasianus), whilst courting the female, has his "bare yellow oesophagus inflated to a prodigious size, fully half as large as the body"; and he then utters various grating, deep, hollow tones.
With his neck-feathers erect, his wings lowered, and buzzing on the ground, and his long pointed tail spread out like a fan, he displays a variety of grotesque attitudes.
The oesophagus of the female is not in any way remarkable.
(42.
Richardson, 'Fauna Bor.
Americana: Birds,' 1831, p.
359.
Audubon, ibid.
vol.
iv.
p.
507.
) [Fig.
40.
The Umbrella-bird or Cephalopterus ornatus, male (from Brehm).
] It seems now well made out that the great throat pouch of the European male bustard (Otis tarda), and of at least four other species, does not, as was formerly supposed, serve to hold water, but is connected with the utterance during the breeding-season
(43.
The following papers have been lately written on this subject: Prof.
A. Newton, in the 'Ibis,' 1862, p.
107; Dr. Cullen, ibid.
1865, p.
145; Mr. Flower, in 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1865, p.
747; and Dr. Murie, in 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1868, p.
471.
In this latter paper an excellent figure is given of the male Australian Bustard in full display with the sack distended.
It is a singular fact that the sack is not developed in all the males of the same species.
) A crow-like bird inhabiting South America (see Cephalopterus ornatus, Fig.
40) is called the umbrella-bird, from its immense top knot, formed of bare white quills surmounted by dark-blue plumes, which it can elevate into a great dome no less than five inches in diameter, covering the whole head.
This bird has on its neck a long, thin, cylindrical fleshy appendage, which is thickly clothed with scale-like blue feathers.
It probably serves in part as an ornament, but likewise as a resounding apparatus; for Mr. Bates found that it is connected "with an unusual development of the trachea and vocal organs".
It is dilated when the bird utters its singularly deep, loud and long sustained fluty note.
The head- crest and neck-appendage are rudimentary in the female.
(44.
Bates, 'The Naturalist on the Amazons,' 1863, vol.
ii.
p.
284; Wallace, in 'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1850, p.
206.
A new species, with a still larger neck-appendage (C.
penduliger), has lately been discovered, see 'Ibis,' vol.
i.
p.
457.
) The vocal organs of various web-footed and wading birds are extraordinarily complex, and differ to a certain extent in the two sexes.
In some cases the trachea is convoluted, like a French horn, and is deeply embedded in the sternum.
In the wild swan (Cygnus ferus) it is more deeply embedded in the adult male than in the adult female or young male.
In the male Merganser the enlarged portion of the trachea is furnished with an additional pair of muscles.
(45.
Bishop, in Todd's 'Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology,' vol.
iv.
p.
1499.
) In one of the ducks, however, namely Anas punctata, the bony enlargement is only a little more developed in the male than in the female.
(46.
Prof.
Newton, 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1871, p.
651.
) But the meaning of these differences in the trachea of the two sexes of the Anatidae is not understood; for the male is not always the more vociferous; thus with the common duck, the male hisses, whilst the female utters a loud quack.
(47.
The spoonbill (Platalea) has its trachea convoluted into a figure of eight, and yet this bird (Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
763) is mute; but Mr. Blyth informs me that the convolutions are not constantly present, so that perhaps they are now tending towards abortion.
) In both sexes of one of the cranes (Grus virgo) the trachea penetrates the sternum, but presents "certain sexual modifications".
In the male of the black stork there is also a well-marked sexual difference in the length and curvature of the bronchi.
(48.
'Elements of Comparative Anatomy,' by R. Wagner, Eng.
translat.
1845, p.
111.
With respect to the swan, as given above, Yarrell's 'History of British Birds,' 2nd edition, 1845, vol.
iii.
p.
193.
) Highly important structures have, therefore, in these cases been modified according to sex.
It is often difficult to conjecture whether the many strange cries and notes uttered by male birds during the breeding-season serve as a charm or merely as a call to the female.
The soft cooing of the turtle-dove and of many pigeons, it may be presumed, pleases the female.
When the female of the wild turkey utters her call in the morning, the male answers by a note which differs from the gobbling noise made, when with erected feathers, rustling wings and distended wattles, he puffs and struts before her.
(49.
C.L. Bonaparte, quoted in the 'Naturalist Library: Birds,' vol.
xiv.
p.
126.
) The spel of the black-cock certainly serves as a call to the female, for it has been known to bring four or five females from a distance to a male under confinement; but as the black-cock continues his spel for hours during successive days, and in the
(50.
L. Lloyd, 'The Game Birds of Sweden,' etc.
, 1867, pp.
22, 81.
) The voice of the common rook is known to alter during the breeding-season, and is therefore in some way sexual.
(51.
Jenner, 'Philosophical Transactions,' 1824, p.
20.
) But what shall we say about the harsh screams of, for instance, some kinds of macaws; have these birds as bad taste for musical sounds as they apparently have for colour, judging by the inharmonious contrast of their bright yellow and blue plumage?
It is indeed possible that without any advantage being thus gained, the loud voices of many male birds may be the result of the inherited effects of the continued use of their vocal organs when excited by the strong passions of love, jealousy and rage; but
We have as yet spoken only of the voice, but the males of various birds practise, during their courtship, what may be called instrumental music.
Peacocks and Birds of Paradise rattle their quills together.
Turkey-cocks scrape their wings against the ground, and some kinds of grouse thus produce a buzzing sound.
Another North American grouse, the Tetrao umbellus, when with his tail erect, his ruffs displayed, "he shows off his finery to the females, who lie hid in the neighbourhood," drums by rapidly striking his wings together above his back, according to Mr. R.
The sound thus produced is compared by some to distant thunder, and by others to the quick roll of a drum.
The female never drums, "but flies directly to the place where the male is thus engaged".
The male of the Kalij-pheasant, in the Himalayas, often makes a singular drumming noise with his wings, not unlike the sound produced by shaking a stiff piece of cloth".
On the west coast of Africa the little black-weavers (Ploceus?
) congregate in a small party on the bushes round a small open space, and sing and glide through the air with quivering wings, "which make a rapid whirring sound like a child's rattle".
One bird after another thus performs for hours together, but only during the courting-season.
At this season, and at no other time, the males of certain night-jars (Caprimulgus) make a strange booming noise with their wings.
The various species of woodpeckers strike a sonorous branch with their beaks, with so rapid a vibratory movement that "the head appears to be in two places at once".
The sound thus produced is audible at a considerable distance but cannot be described; and I feel sure that its source would never be conjectured by any one hearing it for the first time.
As this jarring sound is made chiefly during the breeding-season, it has been considered as a love-song; but it is perhaps more strictly a love- call.
The female, when driven from her nest, has been observed thus to call her mate, who answered in the same manner and soon appeared.
Lastly, the male hoopoe (Upupa epops) combines vocal and instrumental music; for during the breeding-season this bird, as Mr. Swinhoe observed, first draws in air, and then taps the end of its beak perpendicularly down against a stone or the trunk of a
If the beak is not thus struck against some object, the sound is quite different.
Air is at the same time swallowed, and the oesophagus thus becomes much swollen; and this probably acts as a resonator, not only with the hoopoe, but with pigeons and other birds.
(52.
For the foregoing facts see, on Birds of Paradise, Brehm, 'Thierleben,' Band iii.
s.
325.
On Grouse, Richardson, 'Fauna Bor.
Americ.
: Birds,' pp.
343 and 359; Major W. Ross King, 'The Sportsman in Canada,' 1866, p.
156; Mr. Haymond, in Prof.
Cox's 'Geol.
Survey of Indiana,' p.
227; Audubon, 'American Ornitholog.
Biograph.
' vol.
i.
p.
216.
On the Kalij-pheasant, Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
533.
On the Weavers, Livingstone's 'Expedition to the Zambesi,' 1865, p.
425.
On Woodpeckers, Macgillivray, 'Hist.
of British Birds,' vol.
iii.
1840, pp.
84, 88, 89, and 95.
On the Hoopoe, Mr. Swinhoe, in 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' June 23, 1863 and 1871, p.
348.
On the Night-jar, Audubon, ibid.
vol.
ii.
p.
255, and 'American Naturalist,' 1873, p.
672.
The English Night-jar likewise makes in the spring a curious noise during its rapid flight.
) [Fig.
41.
Outer tail-feather of Scolopax gallinago (from 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1858).
Fig.
42.
Outer tail-feather of Scolopax frenata.
Fig.
43.
Outer tail-feather of Scolopax javensis.
] In the foregoing cases sounds are made by the aid of structures already present and otherwise necessary; but in the following cases certain feathers have been specially modified for the express purpose of producing sounds.
The drumming, bleating, neighing, or thundering noise (as expressed by different observers) made by the common snipe (Scolopax gallinago) must have surprised every one who has ever heard it.
This bird, during the pairing-season, flies to "perhaps a thousand feet in height," and after zig-zagging about for a time descends to the earth in a curved line, with outspread tail and quivering pinions, and surprising velocity.
The sound is emitted only during this rapid descent.
No one was able to explain the cause until M. Meves observed that on each side of the tail the outer feathers are peculiarly formed (Fig.
41), having a stiff sabre-shaped shaft with the oblique barbs of unusual length, the outer webs being strongly bound together.
He found that by blowing on these feathers, or by fastening them to a long thin stick and waving them rapidly through the air, he could reproduce the drumming noise made by the living bird.
Both sexes are furnished with these feathers, but they are generally larger in the male than in the female, and emit a deeper note.
In some species, as in S. frenata (Fig.
42), four feathers, and in S. javensis (Fig.
43), no less than eight on each side of the tail are greatly modified.
Different tones are emitted by the feathers of the different species when waved through the air; and the Scolopax Wilsonii of the United States makes a switching noise whilst descending rapidly to the earth.
(53.
See M. Meves' interesting paper in 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1858, p.
199.
For the habits of the snipe, Macgillivray, 'History of British Birds,' vol.
iv.
p.
371.
For the American snipe, Capt.
Blakiston, 'Ibis,' vol.
v.
1863, p.
131.
) [Fig.
44.
Primary wing-feather of a Humming-bird, the Selasphorus platycercus (from a sketch by Mr. Salvin).
Upper figure, that of male; lower figure, corresponding feather of female.
] In the male of the Chamaepetes unicolor (a large gallinaceous bird of America), the first primary wing-feather is arched towards the tip and is much more attenuated than in the female.
In an allied bird, the Penelope nigra, Mr. Salvin observed a male, which, whilst it flew downwards "with outstretched wings, gave forth a kind of crashing rushing noise," like the falling of a tree.
(54.
Mr. Salvin, in 'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1867, p.
160.
I am much indebted to this distinguished ornithologist for sketches of the feathers of the Chamaepetes, and for other information.
) The male alone of one of the Indian bustards (Sypheotides auritus) has its primary wing-feathers greatly acuminated; and the male of an allied species is known to make a humming noise whilst courting the female.
(55.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
pp.
618, 621.
) In a widely different group of birds, namely Humming-birds, the males alone of certain kinds have either the shafts of their primary wing-feathers broadly dilated, or the webs abruptly excised towards the extremity.
The male, for instance, of Selasphorus platycercus, when adult, has the first primary wing-feather (Fig.
44), thus excised.
Whilst flying from flower to flower he makes "a shrill, almost whistling noise" (56.
Gould, 'Introduction to the Trochilidae,' 1861, p.
49.
Salvin, 'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1867, p.
160.
); but it did not appear to Mr. Salvin that the noise was intentionally made.
[Fig.
45.
Secondary wing-feathers of Pipra deliciosa (from Mr. Sclater, in 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1860).
The three upper feathers, a, b, c, from the male; the three lower corresponding feathers, d, e, f, from the female.
a and d, fifth secondary wing-feather of male and female, upper surface.
b and e, sixth secondary, upper surface.
c and f, seventh secondary, lower surface.
] Lastly, in several species of a sub-genus of Pipra or Manakin, the males, as described by Mr. Sclater, have their SECONDARY wing-feathers modified in a still more remarkable manner.
In the brilliantly-coloured P. deliciosa the first three secondaries are thick-stemmed and curved towards the body; in the fourth and fifth (Fig.
45, a) the change is greater; and in the sixth and seventh (b, c) the shaft "is thickened to an extraordinary degree, forming a solid horny lump".
The barbs also are greatly changed in shape, in comparison with the corresponding feathers (d, e, f) in the female.
Even the bones of the wing, which support these singular feathers in the male, are said by Mr. Fraser to be much thickened.
These little birds make an extraordinary noise, the first "sharp note being not unlike the crack of a whip".
(57.
Sclater, in 'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1860, p.
90, and in 'Ibis,' vol.
iv.
1862, p.
175.
Also Salvin, in 'Ibis,' 1860, p.
37.
) The diversity of the sounds, both vocal and instrumental, made by the males of many birds during the breeding-season, and the diversity of the means for producing such sounds, are highly remarkable.
We thus gain a high idea of their importance for sexual purposes, and are reminded of the conclusion arrived at as to insects.
It is not difficult to imagine the steps by which the notes of a bird, primarily used as a mere call or for some other purpose, might have been improved into a melodious love song.
In the case of the modified feathers, by which the drumming, whistling, or roaring noises are produced, we know that some birds during their courtship flutter, shake, or rattle their unmodified feathers together; and if the females were led to select the
The females, of course, would not notice each slight successive alteration in shape, but only the sounds thus produced.
It is a curious fact that in the same class of animals, sounds so different as the drumming of the snipe's tail, the tapping of the woodpecker's beak, the harsh trumpet-like cry of certain water-fowl, the cooing of the turtle-dove, and the song of the
But we must not judge of the tastes of distinct species by a uniform standard; nor must we judge by the standard of man's taste.
Even with man, we should remember what discordant noises, the beating of tom-toms and the shrill notes of reeds, please the ears of savages.
Sir S. Baker remarks (58.
'The Nile Tributaries of Abyssinia,' 1867, p.
203.
), that "as the stomach of the Arab prefers the raw meat and reeking liver taken hot from the animal, so does his ear prefer his equally coarse and discordant music to all other".
LOVE ANTICS AND DANCES.
The curious love gestures of some birds have already been incidentally noticed; so that little need here be added.
In Northern America large numbers of a grouse, the Tetrao phasianellus, meet every morning during the breeding-season on a selected level spot, and here they run round and round in a circle of about fifteen or twenty feet in diameter, so that the ground is
In these Partridge-dances, as they are called by the hunters, the birds assume the strangest attitudes, and run round, some to the left and some to the right.
Audubon describes the males of a heron (Ardea herodias) as walking about on their long legs with great dignity before the females, bidding defiance to their rivals.
With one of the disgusting carrion-vultures (Cathartes jota) the same naturalist states that "the gesticulations and parade of the males at the beginning of the love-season are extremely ludicrous".
Certain birds perform their love-antics on the wing, as we have seen with the black African weaver, instead of on the ground.
During the spring our little white-throat (Sylvia cinerea) often rises a few feet or yards in the air above some bush, and "flutters with a fitful and fantastic motion, singing all the while, and then drops to its perch".
The great English bustard throws himself into indescribably odd attitudes whilst courting the female, as has been figured by Wolf.
An allied Indian bustard (Otis bengalensis) at such times "rises perpendicularly into the air with a hurried flapping of his wings, raising his crest and puffing out the feathers of his neck and breast, and then drops to the ground;" he repeats this
Such females as happen to be near "obey this saltatory summons," and when they approach he trails his wings and spreads his tail like a turkey-cock.
(59.
For Tetrao phasianellus, see Richardson, 'Fauna, Bor.
America,' p.
361, and for further particulars Capt.
Blakiston, 'Ibis,' 1863, p.
125.
For the Cathartes and Ardea, Audubon, 'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
ii.
p.
51, and vol.
iii.
p.
89.
On the White-throat, Macgillivray, 'History of British Birds,' vol.
ii.
p.
354.
On the Indian Bustard, Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
618.
) [Fig.
46.
Bower-bird, Chlamydera maculata, with bower (from Brehm).
] But the most curious case is afforded by three allied genera of Australian birds, the famous Bower-birds,--no doubt the co-descendants of some ancient species which first acquired the strange instinct of constructing bowers for performing their
The bowers (Fig.
46), which, as we shall hereafter see, are decorated with feathers, shells, bones, and leaves, are built on the ground for the sole purpose of courtship, for their nests are formed in trees.
Both sexes assist in the erection of the bowers, but the male is the principal workman.
So strong is this instinct that it is practised under confinement, and Mr. Strange has described (60.
Gould, 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
pp.
444, 449, 455.
The bower of the Satin Bower-bird may be seen in the Zoological Society's Gardens, Regent's Park.
) the habits of some Satin Bower-birds which he kept in an aviary in New South Wales.
"At times the male will chase the female all over the aviary, then go to the bower, pick up a gay feather or a large leaf, utter a curious kind of note, set all his feathers erect, run round the bower and become so excited that his eyes appear ready to
Captain Stokes has described the habits and "play-houses" of another species, the Great Bower-bird, which was seen "amusing itself by flying backwards and forwards, taking a shell alternately from each side, and carrying it through the archway in its
These curious structures, formed solely as halls of assemblage, where both sexes amuse themselves and pay their court, must cost the birds much labour.
The bower, for instance, of the Fawn-breasted species, is nearly four feet in length, eighteen inches in height, and is raised on a thick platform of sticks.
DECORATION.
I will first discuss the cases in which the males are ornamented either exclusively or in a much higher degree than the females, and in a succeeding chapter those in which both sexes are equally ornamented, and finally the rare cases in which the female is
As with the artificial ornaments used by savage and civilised men, so with the natural ornaments of birds, the head is the chief seat of decoration.
(61.
See remarks to this effect, on the 'Feeling of Beauty among Animals,' by Mr. J. Shaw, in the 'Athenaeum,' Nov.
24th, 1866, p.
681.
) The ornaments, as mentioned at the commencement of this chapter, are wonderfully diversified.
The plumes on the front or back of the head consist of variously-shaped feathers, sometimes capable of erection or expansion, by which their beautiful colours are fully displayed.
Elegant ear-tufts (Fig.
39) are occasionally present.
The head is sometimes covered with velvety down, as with the pheasant; or is naked and vividly coloured.
The throat, also, is sometimes ornamented with a beard, wattles, or caruncles.
Such appendages are generally brightly- coloured, and no doubt serve as ornaments, though not always ornamental in our eyes; for whilst the male is in the act of courting the female, they often swell and assume vivid tints, as in the male turkey.
At such times the fleshy appendages about the head of the male Tragopan pheasant (Ceriornis Temminckii) swell into a large lappet on the throat and into two horns, one on each side of the splendid top-knot; and these are then coloured of the most intense
(62.
See Dr. Murie's account with coloured figures in 'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1872, p.
730.
) The African hornbill (Bucorax abyssinicus) inflates the scarlet bladder-like wattle on its neck, and with its wings drooping and tail expanded "makes quite a grand appearance".
(63.
Mr. Monteiro, 'Ibis,' vol.
iv.
1862, p.
339.
) Even the iris of the eye is sometimes more brightly-coloured in the male than in the female; and this is frequently the case with the beak, for instance, in our common blackbird.
In Buceros corrugatus, the whole beak and immense casque are coloured more conspicuously in the male than in the female; and "the oblique grooves upon the sides of the lower mandible are peculiar to the male sex".
(64.
'Land and Water,' 1868, p.
217.
) The head, again, often supports fleshy appendages, filaments, and solid protuberances.
These, if not common to both sexes, are always confined to the males.
The solid protuberances have been described in detail by Dr. W. Marshall (65.
'Ueber die Schdelhcker,' etc.
, 'Niederland.
Archiv.
fur Zoologie,' B. I. Heft 2, 1872.
), who shews that they are formed either of cancellated bone coated with skin, or of dermal and other tissues.
With mammals true horns are always supported on the frontal bones, but with birds various bones have been modified for this purpose; and in species of the same group the protuberances may have cores of bone, or be quite destitute of them, with intermediate
Hence, as Dr. Marshall justly remarks, variations of the most different kinds have served for the development through sexual selection of these ornamental appendages.
Elongated feathers or plumes spring from almost every part of the body.
The feathers on the throat and breast are sometimes developed into beautiful ruffs and collars.
The tail-feathers are frequently increased in length; as we see in the tail-coverts of the peacock, and in the tail itself of the Argus pheasant.
With the peacock even the bones of the tail have been modified to support the heavy tail- coverts.
(66.
Dr. W. Marshall, 'ber den Vogelschwanz,' ibid.
B. I. Heft 2, 1872.
) The body of the Argus is not larger than that of a fowl; yet the length from the end of the beak to the extremity of the tail is no less than five feet three inches (67.
Jardine's 'Naturalist Library: Birds,' vol.
xiv.
p.
166.
), and that of the beautifully ocellated secondary wing- feathers nearly three feet.
In a small African night-jar (Cosmetornis vexillarius) one of the primary wing-feathers, during the breeding-season, attains a length of twenty-six inches, whilst the bird itself is only ten inches in length.
In another closely-allied genus of night-jars, the shafts of the elongated wing-feathers are naked, except at the extremity, where there is a disc.
(68.
Sclater, in the 'Ibis,' vol.
vi.
1864, p.
114; Livingstone, 'Expedition to the Zambesi,' 1865, p.
66.
) Again, in another genus of night-jars, the tail-feathers are even still more prodigiously developed.
In general the feathers of the tail are more often elongated than those of the wings, as any great elongation of the latter impedes flight.
We thus see that in closely-allied birds ornaments of the same kind have been gained by the males through the development of widely different feathers.
It is a curious fact that the feathers of species belonging to very distinct groups have been modified in almost exactly the same peculiar manner.
Thus the wing-feathers in one of the above-mentioned night-jars are bare along the shaft, and terminate in a disc; or are, as they are sometimes called, spoon or racket-shaped.
Feathers of this kind occur in the tail of a motmot (Eumomota superciliaris), of a king-fisher, finch, humming-bird, parrot, several Indian drongos (Dicrurus and Edolius, in one of which the disc stands vertically), and in the tail of certain birds of
In these latter birds, similar feathers, beautifully ocellated, ornament the head, as is likewise the case with some gallinaceous birds.
In an Indian bustard (Sypheotides auritus) the feathers forming the ear- tufts, which are about four inches in length, also terminate in discs.
(69.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
620.
) It is a most singular fact that the motmots, as Mr. Salvin has clearly shewn (70.
'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1873, p.
429.
), give to their tail feathers the racket-shape by biting off the barbs, and, further, that this continued mutilation has produced a certain amount of inherited effect.
[Fig.
47.
Paradisea Papuana (T.W. Wood).
] Again, the barbs of the feathers in various widely-distinct birds are filamentous or plumose, as with some herons, ibises, birds of paradise, and Gallinaceae.
In other cases the barbs disappear, leaving the shafts bare from end to end; and these in the tail of the Paradisea apoda attain a length of thirty-four inches (71.
Wallace, in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
xx.
1857, p.
416, and in his 'Malay Archipelago,' vol.
ii.
1869, p.
390.
): in P. Papuana (Fig.
47) they are much shorter and thin.
Smaller feathers when thus denuded appear like bristles, as on the breast of the turkey-cock.
As any fleeting fashion in dress comes to be admired by man, so with birds a change of almost any kind in the structure or colouring of the feathers in the male appears to have been admired by the female.
The fact of the feathers in widely distinct groups having been modified in an analogous manner no doubt depends primarily on all the feathers having nearly the same structure and manner of development, and consequently tending to vary in the same manner.
We often see a tendency to analogous variability in the plumage of our domestic breeds belonging to distinct species.
Thus top-knots have appeared in several species.
In an extinct variety of the turkey, the top-knot consisted of bare quills surmounted with plumes of down, so that they somewhat resembled the racket- shaped feathers above described.
In certain breeds of the pigeon and fowl the feathers are plumose, with some tendency in the shafts to be naked.
In the Sebastopol goose the scapular feathers are greatly elongated, curled, or even spirally twisted, with the margins plumose.
(72.
See my work on 'The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
pp.
289, 293.
) In regard to colour, hardly anything need here be said, for every one knows how splendid are the tints of many birds, and how harmoniously they are combined.
The colours are often metallic and iridescent.
Circular spots are sometimes surrounded by one or more differently shaded zones, and are thus converted into ocelli.
Nor need much be said on the wonderful difference between the sexes of many birds.
The common peacock offers a striking instance.
Female birds of paradise are obscurely coloured and destitute of all ornaments, whilst the males are probably the most highly decorated of all birds, and in so many different ways that they must be seen to be appreciated.
The elongated and golden-orange plumes which spring from beneath the wings of the Paradisea apoda, when vertically erected and made to vibrate, are described as forming a sort of halo, in the centre of which the head "looks like a little emerald sun with
(73.
Quoted from M. de Lafresnaye in 'Annals and Mag.
of Natural History,' vol.
xiii.
1854, p.
157: see also Mr. Wallace's much fuller account in vol.
xx.
1857, p.
412, and in his 'Malay Archipelago.
') In another most beautiful species the head is bald, "and of a rich cobalt blue, crossed by several lines of black velvety feathers".
(74.
Wallace, 'The Malay Archipelago,' vol.
ii.
1869, p.
405.
) [Fig.
48.
Lophornis ornatus, male and female (from Brehm).
Fig.
49.
Spathura underwoodi, male and female (from Brehm).
] Male humming-birds (Figs.
48 and 49) almost vie with birds of paradise in their beauty, as every one will admit who has seen Mr. Gould's splendid volumes, or his rich collection.
It is very remarkable in how many different ways these birds are ornamented.
Almost every part of their plumage has been taken advantage of, and modified; and the modifications have been carried, as Mr. Gould shewed me, to a wonderful extreme in some species belonging to nearly every sub-group.
Such cases are curiously like those which we see in our fancy breeds, reared by man for the sake of ornament; certain individuals originally varied in one character, and other individuals of the same species in other characters; and these have been seized
The sole difference between these cases is that in the one, the result is due to man's selection, whilst in the other, as with humming- birds, birds of paradise, etc.
, it is due to the selection by the females of the more beautiful males.
I will mention only one other bird, remarkable from the extreme contrast in colour between the sexes, namely the famous bell-bird (Chasmorhynchus niveus) of S. America, the note of which can be distinguished at the distance of nearly three miles, and
The male is pure white, whilst the female is dusky-green; and white is a very rare colour in terrestrial species of moderate size and inoffensive habits.
The male, also, as described by Waterton, has a spiral tube, nearly three inches in length, which rises from the base of the beak.
It is jet-black, dotted over with minute downy feathers.
This tube can be inflated with air, through a communication with the palate; and when not inflated hangs down on one side.
The genus consists of four species, the males of which are very distinct, whilst the females, as described by Mr. Sclater in a very interesting paper, closely resemble each other, thus offering an excellent instance of the common rule that within the same
In a second species (C.
nudicollis) the male is likewise snow-white, with the exception of a large space of naked skin on the throat and round the eyes, which during the breeding-season is of a fine green colour.
In a third species (C.
tricarunculatus) the head and neck alone of the male are white, the rest of the body being chestnut-brown, and the male of this species is provided with three filamentous projections half as long as the body--one rising from the base of the beak, and the
(75.
Mr. Sclater, 'Intellectual Observer,' Jan.
1867.
Waterton's 'Wanderings,' p.
118.
See also Mr. Salvin's interesting paper, with a plate, in the 'Ibis,' 1865, p.
90.
) The coloured plumage and certain other ornaments of the adult males are either retained for life, or are periodically renewed during the summer and breeding-season.
At this same season the beak and naked skin about the head frequently change colour, as with some herons, ibises, gulls, one of the bell-birds just noticed, etc.
In the white ibis, the cheeks, the inflatable skin of the throat, and the basal portion of the beak then become crimson.
(76.
'Land and Water,' 1867, p.
394.
) In one of the rails, Gallicrex cristatus, a large red caruncle is developed during this period on the head of the male.
So it is with a thin horny crest on the beak of one of the pelicans, P. erythrorhynchus; for, after the breeding- season, these horny crests are shed, like horns from the heads of stags, and the shore of an island in a lake in Nevada was found covered with
(77.
Mr. D.G. Elliot, in 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1869, p.
589.
) Changes of colour in the plumage according to the season depend, firstly on a double annual moult, secondly on an actual change of colour in the feathers themselves, and thirdly on their dull-coloured margins being periodically shed, or on these three
The shedding of the deciduary margins may be compared with the shedding of their down by very young birds; for the down in most cases arises from the summits of the first true feathers.
(78.
Nitzsch's 'Pterylography,' edited by P.L. Sclater, Ray Society, 1867, p.
14.
) With respect to the birds which annually undergo a double moult, there are, firstly, some kinds, for instance snipes, swallow-plovers (Glareolae), and curlews, in which the two sexes resemble each other, and do not change colour at any season.
I do not know whether the winter plumage is thicker and warmer than the summer plumage, but warmth seems the most probable end attained of a double moult, where there is no change of colour.
Secondly, there are birds, for instance, certain species of Totanus and other Grallatores, the sexes of which resemble each other, but in which the summer and winter plumage differ slightly in colour.
The difference, however, in these cases is so small that it can hardly be an advantage to them; and it may, perhaps, be attributed to the direct action of the different conditions to which the birds are exposed during the two seasons.
Thirdly, there are many other birds the sexes of which are alike, but which are widely different in their summer and winter plumage.
Fourthly, there are birds the sexes of which differ from each other in colour; but the females, though moulting twice, retain the same colours throughout the year, whilst the males undergo a change of colour, sometimes a great one, as with certain
Fifthly and lastly, there are birds the sexes of which differ from each other in both their summer and winter plumage; but the male undergoes a greater amount of change at each recurrent season than the female--of which the ruff (Machetes pugnax) offers a
With respect to the cause or purpose of the differences in colour between the summer and winter plumage, this may in some instances, as with the ptarmigan (79.
The brown mottled summer plumage of the ptarmigan is of as much importance to it, as a protection, as the white winter plumage; for in Scandinavia during the spring, when the snow has disappeared, this bird is known to suffer greatly from birds of prey,
125.
), serve during both seasons as a protection.
When the difference between the two plumages is slight it may perhaps be attributed, as already remarked, to the direct action of the conditions of life.
But with many birds there can hardly be a doubt that the summer plumage is ornamental, even when both sexes are alike.
We may conclude that this is the case with many herons, egrets, etc.
, for they acquire their beautiful plumes only during the breeding-season.
Moreover, such plumes, top-knots, etc.
, though possessed by both sexes, are occasionally a little more developed in the male than in the female; and they resemble the plumes and ornaments possessed by the males alone of other birds.
It is also known that confinement, by affecting the reproductive system of male birds, frequently checks the development of their secondary sexual characters, but has no immediate influence on any other characters; and I am informed by Mr. Bartlett that
(80.
In regard to the previous statements on moulting, see, on snipes, etc.
, Macgillivray, 'Hist.
Brit.
Birds,' vol.
iv.
p.
371; on Glareolae, curlews, and bustards, Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
pp.
615, 630, 683; on Totanus, ibid.
p.
700; on the plumes of herons, ibid.
p.
738, and Macgillivray, vol.
iv.
pp.
435 and 444, and Mr. Stafford Allen, in the 'Ibis,' vol.
v.
1863, p.
33.
) From the foregoing facts, more especially from neither sex of certain birds changing colour during either annual moult, or changing so slightly that the change can hardly be of any service to them, and from the females of other species moulting twice yet
It appears at first sight a surprising circumstance that some closely- allied species should regularly undergo a double annual moult, and others only a single one.
The ptarmigan, for instance, moults twice or even thrice in the year, and the blackcock only once: some of the splendidly coloured honey-suckers (Nectariniae) of India and some sub-genera of obscurely coloured pipits (Anthus) have a double, whilst others
(81.
On the moulting of the ptarmigan, see Gould's 'Birds of Great Britain.
' On the honey-suckers, Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
i.
pp.
359, 365, 369.
On the moulting of Anthus, see Blyth, in 'Ibis,' 1867, p.
32.
) But the gradations in the manner of moulting, which are known to occur with various birds, shew us how species, or whole groups, might have originally acquired their double annual moult, or having once gained the habit, have again lost it.
With certain bustards and plovers the vernal moult is far from complete, some feathers being renewed, and some changed in colour.
There is also reason to believe that with certain bustards and rail-like birds, which properly undergo a double moult, some of the older males retain their nuptial plumage throughout the year.
A few highly modified feathers may merely be added during the spring to the plumage, as occurs with the disc-formed tail-feathers of certain drongos (Bhringa) in India, and with the elongated feathers on the back, neck, and crest of certain herons.
By such steps as these, the vernal moult might be rendered more and more complete, until a perfect double moult was acquired.
Some of the birds of paradise retain their nuptial feathers throughout the year, and thus have only a single moult; others cast them directly after the breeding-season, and thus have a double moult; and others again cast them at this season during the
There is also a great difference with many birds in the length of time during which the two annual plumages are retained; so that the one might come to be retained for the whole year, and the other completely lost.
Thus in the spring Machetes pugnax retains his ruff for barely two months.
In Natal the male widow-bird (Chera progne) acquires his fine plumage and long tail-feathers in December or January, and loses them in March; so that they are retained only for about three months.
Most species, which undergo a double moult, keep their ornamental feathers for about six months.
The male, however, of the wild Gallus bankiva retains his neck-hackles for nine or ten months; and when these are cast off, the underlying black feathers on the neck are fully exposed to view.
But with the domesticated descendant of this species, the neck-hackles of the male are immediately replaced by new ones; so that we here see, as to part of the plumage, a double moult changed under domestication into a single moult.
(82.
For the foregoing statements in regard to partial moults, and on old males retaining their nuptial plumage, see Jerdon, on bustards and plovers, in 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
pp.
617, 637, 709, 711.
Also Blyth in 'Land and Water,' 1867, p.
84.
On the moulting of Paradisea, see an interesting article by Dr. W. Marshall, 'Archives Neerlandaises,' tom.
vi.
1871.
On the Vidua, 'Ibis,' vol.
iii.
1861, p.
133.
On the Drongo- shrikes, Jerdon, ibid.
vol.
i.
p.
435.
On the vernal moult of the Herodias bubulcus, Mr. S.S. Allen, in 'Ibis,' 1863, p.
33.
On Gallus bankiva, Blyth, in 'Annals and Mag.
of Natural History,' vol.
i.
1848, p.
455; see, also, on this subject, my 'Variation of Animals under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
236.
) The common drake (Anas boschas), after the breeding-season, is well known to lose his male plumage for a period of three months, during which time he assumes that of the female.
The male pin-tail duck (Anas acuta) loses his plumage for the shorter period of six weeks or two months; and Montagu remarks that "this double moult within so short a time is a most extraordinary circumstance, that seems to bid defiance to all human
But the believer in the gradual modification of species will be far from feeling surprise at finding gradations of all kinds.
If the male pin-tail were to acquire his new plumage within a still shorter period, the new male feathers would almost necessarily be mingled with the old, and both with some proper to the female; and this apparently is the case with the male of a not
By a little further acceleration in the process, the double moult would be completely lost.
(83.
See Macgillivray, 'Hist.
British Birds' (vol.
v.
pp.
34, 70, and 223), on the moulting of the Anatidae, with quotations from Waterton and Montagu.
Also Yarrell, 'History of British Birds,' vol.
iii.
p.
243.
) Some male birds, as before stated, become more brightly coloured in the spring, not by a vernal moult, but either by an actual change of colour in the feathers, or by their obscurely-coloured deciduary margins being shed.
Changes of colour thus caused may last for a longer or shorter time.
In the Pelecanus onocrotalus a beautiful rosy tint, with lemon-coloured marks on the breast, overspreads the whole plumage in the spring; but these tints, as Mr. Sclater states, "do not last long, disappearing generally in about six weeks or two months
Certain finches shed the margins of their feathers in the spring, and then become brighter coloured, while other finches undergo no such change.
Thus the Fringilla tristis of the United States (as well as many other American species) exhibits its bright colours only when the winter is past, whilst our goldfinch, which exactly represents this bird in habits, and our siskin, which represents it still
But a difference of this kind in the plumage of allied species is not surprising, for with the common linnet, which belongs to the same family, the crimson forehead and breast are displayed only during the summer in England, whilst in Madeira these colours
(84.
On the pelican, see Sclater, in 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1868, p.
265.
On the American finches, see Audubon, 'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
i.
pp.
174, 221, and Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
ii.
p.
383.
On the Fringilla cannabina of Madeira, Mr. E. Vernon Harcourt, 'Ibis,' vol.
v.
1863, p.
230.
) DISPLAY BY MALE BIRDS OF THEIR PLUMAGE.
Ornaments of all kinds, whether permanently or temporarily gained, are sedulously displayed by the males, and apparently serve to excite, attract, or fascinate the females.
But the males will sometimes display their ornaments, when not in the presence of the females, as occasionally occurs with grouse at their balz-places, and as may be noticed with the peacock; this latter bird, however, evidently wishes for a spectator of
(85.
See also 'Ornamental Poultry,' by Rev.
E.S. Dixon, 1848, p.
8.
) All naturalists who have closely attended to the habits of birds, whether in a state of nature or under confinement, are unanimously of opinion that the males take delight in displaying their beauty.
Audubon frequently speaks of the male as endeavouring in various ways to charm the female.
Mr. Gould, after describing some peculiarities in a male humming- bird, says he has no doubt that it has the power of displaying them to the greatest advantage before the female.
Dr. Jerdon (86.
'Birds of India,' introduct.
, vol.
i.
p.
xxiv.
; on the peacock, vol.
iii.
p.
507.
See Gould's 'Introduction to Trochilidae,' 1861, pp.
15 and 111.
) insists that the beautiful plumage of the male serves "to fascinate and attract the female".
Mr. Bartlett, at the Zoological Gardens, expressed himself to me in the strongest terms to the same effect.
[Fig.
50.
Rupicola crocea, male (T.W. Wood).
] It must be a grand sight in the forests of India "to come suddenly on twenty or thirty pea-fowl, the males displaying their gorgeous trains, and strutting about in all the pomp of pride before the gratified females".
The wild turkey-cock erects his glittering plumage, expands his finely- zoned tail and barred wing-feathers, and altogether, with his crimson and blue wattles, makes a superb, though, to our eyes, grotesque appearance.
Similar facts have already been given with respect to grouse of various kinds.
Turning to another Order: The male Rupicola crocea (Fig.
50) is one of the most beautiful birds in the world, being of a splendid orange, with some of the feathers curiously truncated and plumose.
The female is brownish-green, shaded with red, and has a much smaller crest.
Sir R. Schomburgk has described their courtship; he found one of their meeting- places where ten males and two females were present.
The space was from four to five feet in diameter, and appeared to have been cleared of every blade of grass and smoothed as if by human hands.
A male "was capering, to the apparent delight of several others.
Now spreading its wings, throwing up its head, or opening its tail like a fan; now strutting about with a hopping gait until tired, when it gabbled some kind of note, and was relieved by another.
Thus three of them successively took the field, and then, with self-approbation, withdrew to rest".
The Indians, in order to obtain their skins, wait at one of the meeting-places till the birds are eagerly engaged in dancing, and then are able to kill with their poisoned arrows four or five males, one after the other.
(87.
'Journal of R. Geograph.
Soc.
' vol.
x.
1840, p.
236.
) With birds of paradise a dozen or more full-plumaged males congregate in a tree to hold a dancing-party, as it is called by the natives: and here they fly about, raise their wings, elevate their exquisite plumes, and make them vibrate, and the whole tree
When thus engaged, they become so absorbed that a skilful archer may shoot nearly the whole party.
These birds, when kept in confinement in the Malay Archipelago, are said to take much care in keeping their feathers clean; often spreading them out, examining them, and removing every speck of dirt.
One observer, who kept several pairs alive, did not doubt that the display of the male was intended to please the female.
(88.
'Annals and Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
xiii.
1854, p.
157; also Wallace, ibid.
vol.
xx.
1857, p.
412, and 'The Malay Archipelago,' vol.
ii.
1869, p.
252.
Also Dr. Bennett, as quoted by Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. iii.
s.
326.
) [Fig.
51.
Polyplectron chinquis, male (T.W. Wood).
] The Gold and Amherst pheasants during their courtship not only expand and raise their splendid frills, but twist them, as I have myself seen, obliquely towards the female on whichever side she may be standing, obviously in order that a large surface may
(89.
Mr. T.W. Wood has given ('The Student,' April 1870, p.
115) a full account of this manner of display, by the Gold pheasant and by the Japanese pheasant, Ph.
versicolor; and he calls it the lateral or one-sided display.
) They likewise turn their beautiful tails and tail-coverts a little towards the same side.
Mr. Bartlett has observed a male Polyplectron (Fig.
51) in the act of courtship, and has shewn me a specimen stuffed in the attitude then assumed.
The tail and wing-feathers of this bird are ornamented with beautiful ocelli, like those on the peacock's train.
Now when the peacock displays himself, he expands and erects his tail transversely to his body, for he stands in front of the female, and has to shew off, at the same time, his rich blue throat and breast.
But the breast of the Polyplectron is obscurely coloured, and the ocelli are not confined to the tail-feathers.
Consequently the Polyplectron does not stand in front of the female; but he erects and expands his tail-feathers a little obliquely, lowering the expanded wing on the same side, and raising that on the opposite side.
In this attitude the ocelli over the whole body are exposed at the same time before the eyes of the admiring female in one grand bespangled expanse.
To whichever side she may turn, the expanded wings and the obliquely-held tail are turned towards her.
The male Tragopan pheasant acts in nearly the same manner, for he raises the feathers of the body, though not the wing itself, on the side which is opposite to the female, and which would otherwise be concealed, so that nearly all the beautifully spotted
[Fig.
52.
Side view of male Argus pheasant, whilst displaying before the female.
Observed and sketched from nature by T.W. Wood.
] The Argus pheasant affords a much more remarkable case.
The immensely developed secondary wing-feathers are confined to the male; and each is ornamented with a row of from twenty to twenty-three ocelli, above an inch in diameter.
These feathers are also elegantly marked with oblique stripes and rows of spots of a dark colour, like those on the skin of a tiger and leopard combined.
These beautiful ornaments are hidden until the male shows himself off before the female.
He then erects his tail, and expands his wing-feathers into a great, almost upright, circular fan or shield, which is carried in front of the body.
The neck and head are held on one side, so that they are concealed by the fan; but the bird in order to see the female, before whom he is displaying himself, sometimes pushes his head between two of the long wing-feathers (as Mr. Bartlett has seen), and
This must be a frequent habit with the bird in a state of nature, for Mr. Bartlett and his son on examining some perfect skins sent from the East, found a place between two of the feathers which was much frayed, as if the head had here frequently been
Mr. Wood thinks that the male can also peep at the female on one side, beyond the margin of the fan.
The ocelli on the wing-feathers are wonderful objects; for they are so shaded that, as the Duke of Argyll remarks (90.
'The Reign of Law,' 1867, p.
203.
), they stand out like balls lying loosely within sockets.
When I looked at the specimen in the British Museum, which is mounted with the wings expanded and trailing downwards, I was however greatly disappointed, for the ocelli appeared flat, or even concave.
But Mr. Gould soon made the case clear to me, for he held the feathers erect, in the position in which they would naturally be displayed, and now, from the light shining on them from above, each ocellus at once resembled the ornament called a ball and
These feathers have been shown to several artists, and all have expressed their admiration at the perfect shading.
It may well be asked, could such artistically shaded ornaments have been formed by means of sexual selection?
But it will be convenient to defer giving an answer to this question until we treat in the next chapter of the principle of gradation.
The foregoing remarks relate to the secondary wing-feathers, but the primary wing-feathers, which in most gallinaceous birds are uniformly coloured, are in the Argus pheasant equally wonderful.
They are of a soft brown tint with numerous dark spots, each of which consists of two or three black dots with a surrounding dark zone.
But the chief ornament is a space parallel to the dark-blue shaft, which in outline forms a perfect second feather lying within the true feather.
This inner part is coloured of a lighter chestnut, and is thickly dotted with minute white points.
I have shewn this feather to several persons, and many have admired it even more than the ball and socket feathers, and have declared that it was more like a work of art than of nature.
Now these feathers are quite hidden on all ordinary occasions, but are fully displayed, together with the long secondary feathers, when they are all expanded together so as to form the great fan or shield.
The case of the male Argus pheasant is eminently interesting, because it affords good evidence that the most refined beauty may serve as a sexual charm, and for no other purpose.
We must conclude that this is the case, as the secondary and primary wing-feathers are not at all displayed, and the ball and socket ornaments are not exhibited in full perfection until the male assumes the attitude of courtship.
The Argus pheasant does not possess brilliant colours, so that his success in love appears to depend on the great size of his plumes, and on the elaboration of the most elegant patterns.
Many will declare that it is utterly incredible that a female bird should be able to appreciate fine shading and exquisite patterns.
It is undoubtedly a marvellous fact that she should possess this almost human degree of taste.
He who thinks that he can safely gauge the discrimination and taste of the lower animals may deny that the female Argus pheasant can appreciate such refined beauty; but he will then be compelled to admit that the extraordinary attitudes assumed by the male
Although so many pheasants and allied gallinaceous birds carefully display their plumage before the females, it is remarkable, as Mr. Bartlett informs me, that this is not the case with the dull-coloured Eared and Cheer pheasants (Crossoptilon auritum and
Mr. Bartlett has never seen the males of either of these species fighting together, though he has not had such good opportunities for observing the Cheer as the Eared pheasant.
Mr. Jenner Weir, also, finds that all male birds with rich or strongly-characterised plumage are more quarrelsome than the dull- coloured species belonging to the same groups.
The goldfinch, for instance, is far more pugnacious than the linnet, and the blackbird than the thrush.
Those birds which undergo a seasonal change of plumage likewise become much more pugnacious at the period when they are most gaily ornamented.
No doubt the males of some obscurely-coloured birds fight desperately together, but it appears that when sexual selection has been highly influential, and has given bright colours to the males of any species, it has also very often given a strong tendency
We shall meet with nearly analogous cases when we treat of mammals.
On the other hand, with birds the power of song and brilliant colours have rarely been both acquired by the males of the same species; but in this case the advantage gained would have been the same, namely success in charming the female.
Nevertheless it must be owned that the males of several brilliantly coloured birds have had their feathers specially modified for the sake of producing instrumental music, though the beauty of this cannot be compared, at least according to our taste, with
We will now turn to male birds which are not ornamented in any high degree, but which nevertheless display during their courtship whatever attractions they may possess.
These cases are in some respects more curious than the foregoing, and have been but little noticed.
I owe the following facts to Mr. Weir, who has long kept confined birds of many kinds, including all the British Fringillidae and Emberizidae.
The facts have been selected from a large body of valuable notes kindly sent me by him.
The bullfinch makes his advances in front of the female, and then puffs out his breast, so that many more of the crimson feathers are seen at once than otherwise would be the case.
At the same time he twists and bows his black tail from side to side in a ludicrous manner.
The male chaffinch also stands in front of the female, thus shewing his red breast and "blue bell," as the fanciers call his head; the wings at the same time being slightly expanded, with the pure white bands on the shoulders thus rendered conspicuous.
The common linnet distends his rosy breast, slightly expands his brown wings and tail, so as to make the best of them by exhibiting their white edgings.
We must, however, be cautious in concluding that the wings are spread out solely for display, as some birds do so whose wings are not beautiful.
This is the case with the domestic cock, but it is always the wing on the side opposite to the female which is expanded, and at the same time scraped on the ground.
The male goldfinch behaves differently from all other finches: his wings are beautiful, the shoulders being black, with the dark-tipped wing-feathers spotted with white and edged with golden yellow.
When he courts the female, he sways his body from side to side, and quickly turns his slightly expanded wings first to one side, then to the other, with a golden flashing effect.
Mr. Weir informs me that no other British finch turns thus from side to side during his courtship, not even the closely- allied male siskin, for he would not thus add to his beauty.
Most of the British Buntings are plain coloured birds; but in the spring the feathers on the head of the male reed-bunting (Emberiza schoeniculus) acquire a fine black colour by the abrasion of the dusky tips; and these are erected during the act of
Mr. Weir has kept two species of Amadina from Australia: the A. castanotis is a very small and chastely coloured finch, with a dark tail, white rump, and jet-black upper tail- coverts, each of the latter being marked with three large conspicuous oval spots
(91.
For the description of these birds, see Gould's 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
1865, p.
417.
) This species, when courting the female, slightly spreads out and vibrates these parti- coloured tail-coverts in a very peculiar manner.
The male Amadina Lathami behaves very differently, exhibiting before the female his brilliantly spotted breast, scarlet rump, and scarlet upper tail-coverts.
I may here add from Dr. Jerdon that the Indian bulbul (Pycnonotus hoemorrhous) has its under tail-coverts of a crimson colour, and these, it might be thought, could never be well exhibited; but the bird "when excited often spreads them out laterally, so
(92.
'Birds of India,' vol.
ii.
p.
96.
) The crimson under tail-coverts of some other birds, as with one of the woodpeckers, Picus major, can be seen without any such display.
The common pigeon has iridescent feathers on the breast, and every one must have seen how the male inflates his breast whilst courting the female, thus shewing them off to the best advantage.
One of the beautiful bronze-winged pigeons of Australia (Ocyphaps lophotes) behaves, as described to me by Mr. Weir, very differently: the male, whilst standing before the female, lowers his head almost to the ground, spreads out and raises his tail, and
He then alternately and slowly raises and depresses his body, so that the iridescent metallic feathers are all seen at once, and glitter in the sun.
Sufficient facts have now been given to shew with what care male birds display their various charms, and this they do with the utmost skill.
Whilst preening their feathers, they have frequent opportunities for admiring themselves, and of studying how best to exhibit their beauty.
But as all the males of the same species display themselves in exactly the same manner, it appears that actions, at first perhaps intentional, have become instinctive.
If so, we ought not to accuse birds of conscious vanity; yet when we see a peacock strutting about, with expanded and quivering tail- feathers, he seems the very emblem of pride and vanity.
The various ornaments possessed by the males are certainly of the highest importance to them, for in some cases they have been acquired at the expense of greatly impeded powers of flight or of running.
The African night-jar (Cosmetornis), which during the pairing-season has one of its primary wing-feathers developed into a streamer of very great length, is thereby much retarded in its flight, although at other times remarkable for its swiftness.
The "unwieldy size" of the secondary wing-feathers of the male Argus pheasant is said "almost entirely to deprive the bird of flight".
The fine plumes of male birds of paradise trouble them during a high wind.
The extremely long tail-feathers of the male widow-birds (Vidua) of Southern Africa render "their flight heavy;" but as soon as these are cast off they fly as well as the females.
As birds always breed when food is abundant, the males probably do not suffer much inconvenience in searching for food from their impeded powers of movement; but there can hardly be a doubt that they must be much more liable to be struck down by birds of
Nor can we doubt that the long train of the peacock and the long tail and wing-feathers of the Argus pheasant must render them an easier prey to any prowling tiger-cat than would otherwise be the case.
Even the bright colours of many male birds cannot fail to make them conspicuous to their enemies of all kinds.
Hence, as Mr. Gould has remarked, it probably is that such birds are generally of a shy disposition, as if conscious that their beauty was a source of danger, and are much more difficult to discover or approach, than the sombre coloured and comparatively
(93.
On the Cosmetornis, see Livingstone's 'Expedition to the Zambesi,' 1865, p.
66.
On the Argus pheasant, Jardine's 'Nat.
Hist.
Lib.
: Birds,' vol.
xiv.
p.
167.
On Birds of Paradise, Lesson, quoted by Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. iii.
s.
325.
On the widow-bird, Barrow's 'Travels in Africa,' vol.
i.
p.
243, and 'Ibis,' vol.
iii.
1861 p.
133.
Mr. Gould, on the shyness of male birds, 'Handbook to Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
1865, pp.
210, 457.
) It is a more curious fact that the males of some birds which are provided with special weapons for battle, and which in a state of nature are so pugnacious that they often kill each other, suffer from possessing certain ornaments.
Cock-fighters trim the hackles and cut off the combs and gills of their cocks; and the birds are then said to be dubbed.
An undubbed bird, as Mr. Tegetmeier insists, "is at a fearful disadvantage; the comb and gills offer an easy hold to his adversary's beak, and as a cock always strikes where he holds, when once he has seized his foe, he has him entirely in his power.
Even supposing that the bird is not killed, the loss of blood suffered by an undubbed cock is much greater than that sustained by one that has been trimmed".
(94.
Tegetmeier, 'The Poultry Book,' 1866, p.
139.
) Young turkey-cocks in fighting always seize hold of each other's wattles; and I presume that the old birds fight in the same manner.
It may perhaps be objected that the comb and wattles are not ornamental, and cannot be of service to the birds in this way; but even to our eyes, the beauty of the glossy black Spanish cock is much enhanced by his white face and crimson comb; and no one
From the foregoing facts we clearly see that the plumes and other ornaments of the males must be of the highest importance to them; and we further see that beauty is even sometimes more important than success in battle.
CHAPTER XIV.
BIRDS--continued.
Choice exerted by the female--Length of courtship--Unpaired birds--Mental qualities and taste for the beautiful--Preference or antipathy shewn by the female for particular males--Variability of birds--Variations sometimes abrupt--Laws of
When the sexes differ in beauty or in the power of singing, or in producing what I have called instrumental music, it is almost invariably the male who surpasses the female.
These qualities, as we have just seen, are evidently of high importance to the male.
When they are gained for only a part of the year it is always before the breeding-season.
It is the male alone who elaborately displays his varied attractions, and often performs strange antics on the ground or in the air, in the presence of the female.
Each male drives away, or if he can, kills his rivals.
Hence we may conclude that it is the object of the male to induce the female to pair with him, and for this purpose he tries to excite or charm her in various ways; and this is the opinion of all those who have carefully studied the habits of living birds.
But there remains a question which has an all important bearing on sexual selection, namely, does every male of the same species excite and attract the female equally?
Or does she exert a choice, and prefer certain males?
This latter question can be answered in the affirmative by much direct and indirect evidence.
It is far more difficult to decide what qualities determine the choice of the females; but here again we have some direct and indirect evidence that it is to a large extent the external attractions of the male; though no doubt his vigour, courage, and
We will begin with the indirect evidence.
LENGTH OF COURTSHIP.
The lengthened period during which both sexes of certain birds meet day after day at an appointed place probably depends partly on the courtship being a prolonged affair, and partly on reiteration in the act of pairing.
Thus in Germany and Scandinavia the balzen or leks of the black-cocks last from the middle of March, all through April into May.
As many as forty or fifty, or even more birds congregate at the leks; and the same place is often frequented during successive years.
The lek of the capercailzie lasts from the end of March to the middle or even end of May.
In North America "the partridge dances" of the Tetrao phasianellus "last for a month or more".
Other kinds of grouse, both in North America and Eastern Siberia (1.
Nordman describes ('Bull.
Soc.
Imp.
des Nat.
Moscou,' 1861, tom.
xxxiv.
p.
264) the balzen of Tetrao urogalloides in Amur Land.
He estimated the number of birds assembled at above a hundred, not counting the females, which lie hid in the surrounding bushes.
The noises uttered differ from those of T. urogallus.
), follow nearly the same habits.
The fowlers discover the hillocks where the ruffs congregate by the grass being trampled bare, and this shews that the same spot is long frequented.
The Indians of Guiana are well acquainted with the cleared arenas, where they expect to find the beautiful cocks of the Rock; and the natives of New Guinea know the trees where from ten to twenty male birds of paradise in full plumage congregate.
In this latter case it is not expressly stated that the females meet on the same trees, but the hunters, if not specially asked, would probably not mention their presence, as their skins are valueless.
Small parties of an African weaver (Ploceus) congregate, during the breeding-season, and perform for hours their graceful evolutions.
Large numbers of the Solitary snipe (Scolopax major) assemble during dusk in a morass; and the same place is frequented for the same purpose during successive years; here they may be seen running about "like so many large rats," puffing out their feathers,
(2.
With respect to the assemblages of the above named grouse, see Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. iv.
s.
350; also L. Lloyd, 'Game Birds of Sweden,' 1867, pp.
19, 78.
Richardson, 'Fauna Bor.
Americana: Birds,' p.
362.
References in regard to the assemblages of other birds have already been given.
On Paradisea, see Wallace, in 'Annals and Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
xx.
1857, p.
412.
On the snipe, Lloyd, ibid.
p.
221.
) Some of the above birds,--the black-cock, capercailzie, pheasant-grouse, ruff, solitary snipe, and perhaps others,--are, as is believed, polygamists.
With such birds it might have been thought that the stronger males would simply have driven away the weaker, and then at once have taken possession of as many females as possible; but if it be indispensable for the male to excite or please the female, we
Certain strictly monogamous species likewise hold nuptial assemblages; this seems to be the case in Scandinavia with one of the ptarmigans, and their leks last from the middle of March to the middle of May.
In Australia the lyre-bird (Menura superba) forms "small round hillocks," and the M. Alberti scratches for itself shallow holes, or, as they are called by the natives, "corroborying places," where it is believed both sexes assemble.
The meetings of the M. superba are sometimes very large; and an account has lately been published (3.
Quoted by Mr. T.W. Wood, in the 'Student,' April 1870, p.
125.
) by a traveller, who heard in a valley beneath him, thickly covered with scrub, "a din which completely astonished" him; on crawling onwards he beheld, to his amazement, about one hundred and fifty of the magnificent lyre-cocks, "ranged in order of
The bowers of the Bower- birds are the resort of both sexes during the breeding-season; and "here the males meet and contend with each other for the favours of the female, and here the latter assemble and coquet with the males".
With two of the genera, the same bower is resorted to during many years.
(4.
Gould, 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
pp.
300, 308, 448, 451.
On the ptarmigan, above alluded to, see Lloyd, ibid.
p.
129.
) The common magpie (Corvus pica, Linn.
), as I have been informed by the Rev.
W. Darwin Fox, used to assemble from all parts of Delamere Forest, in order to celebrate the "great magpie marriage".
Some years ago these birds abounded in extraordinary numbers, so that a gamekeeper killed in one morning nineteen males, and another killed by a single shot seven birds at roost together.
They then had the habit of assembling very early in the spring at particular spots, where they could be seen in flocks, chattering, sometimes fighting, bustling and flying about the trees.
The whole affair was evidently considered by the birds as one of the highest importance.
Shortly after the meeting they all separated, and were then observed by Mr. Fox and others to be paired for the season.
In any district in which a species does not exist in large numbers, great assemblages cannot, of course, be held, and the same species may have different habits in different countries.
For instance, I have heard of only one instance, from Mr. Wedderburn, of a regular assemblage of black game in Scotland, yet these assemblages are so well known in Germany and Scandinavia that they have received special names.
UNPAIRED BIRDS.
From the facts now given, we may conclude that the courtship of birds belonging to widely different groups, is often a prolonged, delicate, and troublesome affair.
There is even reason to suspect, improbable as this will at first appear, that some males and females of the same species, inhabiting the same district, do not always please each other, and consequently do not pair.
Many accounts have been published of either the male or female of a pair having been shot, and quickly replaced by another.
This has been observed more frequently with the magpie than with any other bird, owing perhaps to its conspicuous appearance and nest.
The illustrious Jenner states that in Wiltshire one of a pair was daily shot no less than seven times successively, "but all to no purpose, for the remaining magpie soon found another mate"; and the last pair reared their young.
A new partner is generally found on the succeeding day; but Mr. Thompson gives the case of one being replaced on the evening of the same day.
Even after the eggs are hatched, if one of the old birds is destroyed a mate will often be found; this occurred after an interval of two days, in a case recently observed by one of Sir J. Lubbock's keepers.
(5.
On magpies, Jenner, in 'Philosophical Transactions,' 1824, p.
21.
Macgillivray, 'Hist.
British Birds,' vol.
i.
p.
570.
Thompson, in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
viii.
1842, p.
494.
) The first and most obvious conjecture is that male magpies must be much more numerous than females; and that in the above cases, as well as in many others which could be given, the males alone had been killed.
This apparently holds good in some instances, for the gamekeepers in Delamere Forest assured Mr. Fox that the magpies and carrion-crows which they formerly killed in succession in large numbers near their nests, were all males; and they accounted for this
Macgillivray, however, gives, on the authority of an excellent observer, an instance of three magpies successively killed on the same nest, which were all females; and another case of six magpies successively killed whilst sitting on the same eggs, which
Sir J. Lubbock's gamekeeper has repeatedly shot, but how often he could not say, one of a pair of jays (Garrulus glandarius), and has never failed shortly afterwards to find the survivor re-matched.
Mr. Fox, Mr. F. Bond, and others have shot one of a pair of carrion-crows (Corvus corone), but the nest was soon again tenanted by a pair.
These birds are rather common; but the peregrine-falcon (Falco peregrinus) is rare, yet Mr. Thompson states that in Ireland "if either an old male or female be killed in the breeding-season (not an uncommon circumstance), another mate is found within a
Mr. Jenner Weir has known the same thing with the peregrine-falcons at Beachy Head.
The same observer informs me that three kestrels (Falco tinnunculus), all males, were killed one after the other whilst attending the same nest; two of these were in mature plumage, but the third was in the plumage of the previous year.
Even with the rare golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos), Mr. Birkbeck was assured by a trustworthy gamekeeper in Scotland, that if one is killed, another is soon found.
So with the white owl (Strix flammea), "the survivor readily found a mate, and the mischief went on".
White of Selborne, who gives the case of the owl, adds that he knew a man, who from believing that partridges when paired were disturbed by the males fighting, used to shoot them; and though he had widowed the same female several times, she always soon
This same naturalist ordered the sparrows, which deprived the house-martins of their nests, to be shot; but the one which was left, "be it cock or hen, presently procured a mate, and so for several times following".
I could add analogous cases relating to the chaffinch, nightingale, and redstart.
With respect to the latter bird (Phoenicura ruticilla), a writer expresses much surprise how the sitting female could so soon have given effectual notice that she was a widow, for the species was not common in the neighbourhood.
Mr. Jenner Weir has mentioned to me a nearly similar case; at Blackheath he never sees or hears the note of the wild bullfinch, yet when one of his caged males has died, a wild one in the course of a few days has generally come and perched near the widowed
I will give only one other fact, on the authority of this same observer; one of a pair of starlings (Sturnus vulgaris) was shot in the morning; by noon a new mate was found; this was again shot, but before night the pair was complete; so that the
Mr. Engleheart also informs me that he used during several years to shoot one of a pair of starlings which built in a hole in a house at Blackheath; but the loss was always immediately repaired.
During one season he kept an account, and found that he had shot thirty-five birds from the same nest; these consisted of both males and females, but in what proportion he could not say: nevertheless, after all this destruction, a brood was reared.
(6.
On the peregrine falcon, see Thompson, 'Nat.
Hist.
of Ireland: Birds,' vol.
i.
1849, p.
39.
On owls, sparrows, and partridges, see White, 'Nat.
Hist.
of Selborne,' edit.
of 1825, vol.
i.
p.
139.
On the Phoenicura, see Loudon's 'Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
vii.
1834, p.
245.
Brehm ('Thierleben,' B. iv.
s.
991) also alludes to cases of birds thrice mated during the same day.
) These facts well deserve attention.
How is it that there are birds enough ready to replace immediately a lost mate of either sex?
Magpies, jays, carrion-crows, partridges, and some other birds, are always seen during the spring in pairs, and never by themselves; and these offer at first sight the most perplexing cases.
But birds of the same sex, although of course not truly paired, sometimes live in pairs or in small parties, as is known to be the case with pigeons and partridges.
Birds also sometimes live in triplets, as has been observed with starlings, carrion-crows, parrots, and partridges.
With partridges two females have been known to live with one male, and two males with one female.
In all such cases it is probable that the union would be easily broken; and one of the three would readily pair with a widow or widower.
The males of certain birds may occasionally be heard pouring forth their love-song long after the proper time, shewing that they have either lost or never gained a mate.
Death from accident or disease of one of a pair would leave the other free and single; and there is reason to believe that female birds during the breeding-season are especially liable to premature death.
Again, birds which have had their nests destroyed, or barren pairs, or retarded individuals, would easily be induced to desert their mates, and would probably be glad to take what share they could of the pleasures and duties of rearing offspring although
(7.
See White ('Nat.
Hist.
of Selborne,' 1825, vol.
i.
p.
140) on the existence, early in the season, of small coveys of male partridges, of which fact I have heard other instances.
See Jenner, on the retarded state of the generative organs in certain birds, in 'Phil.
Transact.
' 1824.
In regard to birds living in triplets, I owe to Mr. Jenner Weir the cases of the starlings and parrots, and to Mr. Fox, of partridges; on carrion-crows, see the 'Field,' 1868, p.
415.
On various male birds singing after the proper period, see Rev.
L. Jenyns, 'Observations in Natural History,' 1846, p.
87.
) Such contingencies as these probably explain most of the foregoing cases.
(8.
The following case has been given ('The Times,' Aug.
6, 1868) by the Rev.
F.O. Morris, on the authority of the Hon.
and Rev.
O.W. Forester.
"The gamekeeper here found a hawk's nest this year, with five young ones on it.
He took four and killed them, but left one with its wings clipped as a decoy to destroy the old ones by.
They were both shot next day, in the act of feeding the young one, and the keeper thought it was done with.
The next day he came again and found two other charitable hawks, who had come with an adopted feeling to succour the orphan.
These two he killed, and then left the nest.
On returning afterwards he found two more charitable individuals on the same errand of mercy.
One of these he killed; the other he also shot, but could not find.
No more came on the like fruitless errand".
) Nevertheless, it is a strange fact that within the same district, during the height of the breeding-season, there should be so many males and females always ready to repair the loss of a mated bird.
Why do not such spare birds immediately pair together?
Have we not some reason to suspect, and the suspicion has occurred to Mr. Jenner Weir, that as the courtship of birds appears to be in many cases prolonged and tedious, so it occasionally happens that certain males and females do not succeed, during the
This suspicion will appear somewhat less improbable after we have seen what strong antipathies and preferences female birds occasionally evince towards particular males.
MENTAL QUALITIES OF BIRDS, AND THEIR TASTE FOR THE BEAUTIFUL.
Before we further discuss the question whether the females select the more attractive males or accept the first whom they may encounter, it will be advisable briefly to consider the mental powers of birds.
Their reason is generally, and perhaps justly, ranked as low; yet some facts could be given leading to an opposite conclusion.
(9.
I am indebted to Prof.
Newton for the following passage from Mr. Adam's 'Travels of a Naturalist,' 1870, p.
278.
Speaking of Japanese nut-hatches in confinement, he says: "Instead of the more yielding fruit of the yew, which is the usual food of the nut- hatch of Japan, at one time I substituted hard hazel-nuts.
As the bird was unable to crack them, he placed them one by one in his water-glass, evidently with the notion that they would in time become softer--an interesting proof of intelligence on the part of these birds".
) Low powers of reasoning, however, are compatible, as we see with mankind, with strong affections, acute perception, and a taste for the beautiful; and it is with these latter qualities that we are here concerned.
It has often been said that parrots become so deeply attached to each other that when one dies the other pines for a long time; but Mr. Jenner Weir thinks that with most birds the strength of their affection has been much exaggerated.
Nevertheless when one of a pair in a state of nature has been shot, the survivor has been heard for days afterwards uttering a plaintive call; and Mr. St. John gives various facts proving the attachment of mated birds.
(10.
'A Tour in Sutherlandshire,' vol.
i.
1849, p.
185.
Dr. Buller says ('Birds of New Zealand,' 1872, p.
56) that a male King Lory was killed; and the female "fretted and moped, refused her food, and died of a broken heart".
) Mr. Bennett relates (11.
'Wanderings in New South Wales,' vol.
ii.
1834, p.
62.
) that in China after a drake of the beautiful mandarin Teal had been stolen, the duck remained disconsolate, though sedulously courted by another mandarin drake, who displayed before her all his charms.
After an interval of three weeks the stolen drake was recovered, and instantly the pair recognised each other with extreme joy.
On the other hand, starlings, as we have seen, may be consoled thrice in the same day for the loss of their mates.
Pigeons have such excellent local memories, that they have been known to return to their former homes after an interval of nine months, yet, as I hear from Mr. Harrison Weir, if a pair which naturally would remain mated for life be separated for a few
Birds sometimes exhibit benevolent feelings; they will feed the deserted young ones even of distinct species, but this perhaps ought to be considered as a mistaken instinct.
They will feed, as shewn in an earlier part of this work, adult birds of their own species which have become blind.
Mr. Buxton gives a curious account of a parrot which took care of a frost-bitten and crippled bird of a distinct species, cleansed her feathers, and defended her from the attacks of the other parrots which roamed freely about his garden.
It is a still more curious fact that these birds apparently evince some sympathy for the pleasures of their fellows.
When a pair of cockatoos made a nest in an acacia tree, "it was ridiculous to see the extravagant interest taken in the matter by the others of the same species".
These parrots, also, evinced unbounded curiosity, and clearly had "the idea of property and possession".
(12.
'Acclimatization of Parrots,' by C. Buxton, M.P., 'Annals and Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' Nov.
1868, p.
381.
) They have good memories, for in the Zoological Gardens they have plainly recognised their former masters after an interval of some months.
Birds possess acute powers of observation.
Every mated bird, of course, recognises its fellow.
Audubon states that a certain number of mocking- thrushes (Mimus polyglottus) remain all the year round in Louisiana, whilst others migrate to the Eastern States; these latter, on their return, are instantly recognised, and always attacked, by their
Birds under confinement distinguish different persons, as is proved by the strong and permanent antipathy or affection which they shew, without any apparent cause, towards certain individuals.
I have heard of numerous instances with jays, partridges, canaries, and especially bullfinches.
Mr. Hussey has described in how extraordinary a manner a tamed partridge recognised everybody: and its likes and dislikes were very strong.
This bird seemed "fond of gay colours, and no new gown or cap could be put on without catching his attention".
(13.
The 'Zoologist,' 1847-48, p.
1602.
) Mr. Hewitt has described the habits of some ducks (recently descended from wild birds), which, at the approach of a strange dog or cat, would rush headlong into the water, and exhaust themselves in their attempts to escape; but they knew Mr. Hewitt's own
They always moved away from a strange man, and so they would from the lady who attended them if she made any great change in her dress.
Audubon relates that he reared and tamed a wild turkey which always ran away from any strange dog; this bird escaped into the woods, and some days afterwards Audubon saw, as he thought, a wild turkey, and made his dog chase it; but, to his astonishment,
(14.
Hewitt on wild ducks, 'Journal of Horticulture,' Jan.
13, 1863, p.
39.
Audubon on the wild turkey, 'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
i.
p.
14.
On the mocking-thrush, ibid.
vol.
i.
p.
110.
) Mr. Jenner Weir is convinced that birds pay particular attention to the colours of other birds, sometimes out of jealousy, and sometimes as a sign of kinship.
Thus he turned a reed-bunting (Emberiza schoeniculus), which had acquired its black head-dress, into his aviary, and the new-comer was not noticed by any bird, except by a bullfinch, which is likewise black- headed.
This bullfinch was a very quiet bird, and had never before quarrelled with any of its comrades, including another reed-bunting, which had not as yet become black-headed: but the reed-bunting with a black head was so unmercifully treated that it had to be
Spiza cyanea, during the breeding-season, is of a bright blue colour; and though generally peaceable, it attacked S. ciris, which has only the head blue, and completely scalped the unfortunate bird.
Mr. Weir was also obliged to turn out a robin, as it fiercely attacked all the birds in his aviary with any red in their plumage, but no other kinds; it actually killed a red- breasted crossbill, and nearly killed a goldfinch.
On the other hand, he has observed that some birds, when first introduced, fly towards the species which resemble them most in colour, and settle by their sides.
As male birds display their fine plumage and other ornaments with so much care before the females, it is obviously probable that these appreciate the beauty of their suitors.
It is, however, difficult to obtain direct evidence of their capacity to appreciate beauty.
When birds gaze at themselves in a looking-glass (of which many instances have been recorded) we cannot feel sure that it is not from jealousy of a supposed rival, though this is not the conclusion of some observers.
In other cases it is difficult to distinguish between mere curiosity and admiration.
It is perhaps the former feeling which, as stated by Lord Lilford (15.
The 'Ibis,' vol.
ii.
1860, p.
344.
), attracts the ruff towards any bright object, so that, in the Ionian Islands, "it will dart down to a bright- coloured handkerchief, regardless of repeated shots".
The common lark is drawn down from the sky, and is caught in large numbers, by a small mirror made to move and glitter in the sun.
Is it admiration or curiosity which leads the magpie, raven, and some other birds to steal and secrete bright objects, such as silver articles or jewels?
Mr. Gould states that certain humming-birds decorate the outsides of their nests "with the utmost taste; they instinctively fasten thereon beautiful pieces of flat lichen, the larger pieces in the middle, and the smaller on the part attached to the branch.
Now and then a pretty feather is intertwined or fastened to the outer sides, the stem being always so placed that the feather stands out beyond the surface".
The best evidence, however, of a taste for the beautiful is afforded by the three genera of Australian bower-birds already mentioned.
Their bowers (Fig.
46), where the sexes congregate and play strange antics, are variously constructed, but what most concerns us is, that they are decorated by the several species in a different manner.
The Satin bower-bird collects gaily- coloured articles, such as the blue tail-feathers of parrakeets, bleached bones and shells, which it sticks between the twigs or arranges at the entrance.
Mr. Gould found in one bower a neatly-worked stone tomahawk and a slip of blue cotton, evidently procured from a native encampment.
These objects are continually re-arranged, and carried about by the birds whilst at play.
The bower of the Spotted bower-bird "is beautifully lined with tall grasses, so disposed that the heads nearly meet, and the decorations are very profuse".
Round stones are used to keep the grass-stems in their proper places, and to make divergent paths leading to the bower.
The stones and shells are often brought from a great distance.
The Regent bird, as described by Mr. Ramsay, ornaments its short bower with bleached land-shells belonging to five or six species, and with "berries of various colours, blue, red, and black, which give it when fresh a very pretty appearance.
Besides these there were several newly-picked leaves and young shoots of a pinkish colour, the whole showing a decided taste for the beautiful".
Well may Mr. Gould say that "these highly decorated halls of assembly must be regarded as the most wonderful instances of bird- architecture yet discovered;" and the taste, as we see, of the several species certainly differs.
(16.
On the ornamented nests of humming-birds, Gould, 'Introduction to the Trochilidae,' 1861, p.
19.
On the bower-birds, Gould, 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' 1865, vol.
i.
pp.
444-461.
Ramsay, in the 'Ibis,' 1867, p.
456.
) PREFERENCE FOR PARTICULAR MALES BY THE FEMALES.
Having made these preliminary remarks on the discrimination and taste of birds, I will give all the facts known to me which bear on the preference shewn by the female for particular males.
It is certain that distinct species of birds occasionally pair in a state of nature and produce hybrids.
Many instances could be given: thus Macgillivray relates how a male blackbird and female thrush "fell in love with each other," and produced offspring.
(17.
'History of Brit.
Birds,' vol.
ii.
p.
92.
) Several years ago eighteen cases had been recorded of the occurrence in Great Britain of hybrids between the black grouse and pheasant (18.
'Zoologist,' 1853-1854, p.
3946.
); but most of these cases may perhaps be accounted for by solitary birds not finding one of their own species to pair with.
With other birds, as Mr. Jenner Weir has reason to believe, hybrids are sometimes the result of the casual intercourse of birds building in close proximity.
But these remarks do not apply to the many recorded instances of tamed or domestic birds, belonging to distinct species, which have become absolutely fascinated with each other, although living with their own species.
Thus Waterton (19.
Waterton, 'Essays on Nat.
Hist.
' 2nd series, pp.
42 and 117.
For the following statements see on the wigeon, 'Loudon's Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
ix.
p.
616; L. Lloyd, 'Scandinavian Adventures,' vol.
i.
1854, p.
452.
Dixon, 'Ornamental and Domestic Poultry,' p.
137; Hewitt, in 'Journal of Horticulture,' Jan.
13, 1863, p.
40; Bechstein, 'Stubenvgel,' 1840, s.
230.
Mr. J. Jenner Weir has lately given me an analogous case with ducks of two species.
) states that out of a flock of twenty-three Canada geese, a female paired with a solitary Bernicle gander, although so different in appearance and size; and they produced hybrid offspring.
A male wigeon (Mareca penelope), living with females of the same species, has been known to pair with a pintail duck, Querquedula acuta.
Lloyd describes the remarkable attachment between a shield-drake (Tadorna vulpanser) and a common duck.
Many additional instances could be given; and the Rev.
E.S. Dixon remarks that "those who have kept many different species of geese together well know what unaccountable attachments they are frequently forming, and that they are quite as likely to pair and rear young with individuals of a race (species)
The Rev.
W.D. Fox informs me that he possessed at the same time a pair of Chinese geese (Anser cygnoides), and a common gander with three geese.
The two lots kept quite separate, until the Chinese gander seduced one of the common geese to live with him.
Moreover, of the young birds hatched from the eggs of the common geese, only four were pure, the other eighteen proving hybrids; so that the Chinese gander seems to have had prepotent charms over the common gander.
I will give only one other case; Mr. Hewitt states that a wild duck, reared in captivity, "after breeding a couple of seasons with her own mallard, at once shook him off on my placing a male Pintail on the water.
It was evidently a case of love at first sight, for she swam about the new-comer caressingly, though he appeared evidently alarmed and averse to her overtures of affection.
From that hour she forgot her old partner.
Winter passed by, and the next spring the pintail seemed to have become a convert to her blandishments, for they nested and produced seven or eight young ones".
What the charm may have been in these several cases, beyond mere novelty, we cannot even conjecture.
Colour, however, sometimes comes into play; for in order to raise hybrids from the siskin (Fringilla spinus) and the canary, it is much the best plan, according to Bechstein, to place birds of the same tint together.
Mr. Jenner Weir turned a female canary into his aviary, where there were male linnets, goldfinches, siskins, greenfinches, chaffinches, and other birds, in order to see which she would choose; but there never was any doubt, and the greenfinch carried the
They paired and produced hybrid offspring.
The fact of the female preferring to pair with one male rather than with another of the same species is not so likely to excite attention, as when this occurs, as we have just seen, between distinct species.
The former cases can best be observed with domesticated or confined birds; but these are often pampered by high feeding, and sometimes have their instincts vitiated to an extreme degree.
Of this latter fact I could give sufficient proofs with pigeons, and especially with fowls, but they cannot be here related.
Vitiated instincts may also account for some of the hybrid unions above mentioned; but in many of these cases the birds were allowed to range freely over large ponds, and there is no reason to suppose that they were unnaturally stimulated by high feeding.
With respect to birds in a state of nature, the first and most obvious supposition which will occur to every one is that the female at the proper season accepts the first male whom she may encounter; but she has at least the opportunity for exerting a
Audubon--and we must remember that he spent a long life in prowling about the forests of the United States and observing the birds-- does not doubt that the female deliberately chooses her mate; thus, speaking of a woodpecker, he says the hen is followed
The female of the red-winged starling (Agelaeus phoeniceus) is likewise pursued by several males, "until, becoming fatigued, she alights, receives their addresses, and soon makes a choice".
He describes also how several male night-jars repeatedly plunge through the air with astonishing rapidity, suddenly turning, and thus making a singular noise; "but no sooner has the female made her choice than the other males are driven away".
With one of the vultures (Cathartes aura) of the United States, parties of eight, ten, or more males and females assemble on fallen logs, "exhibiting the strongest desire to please mutually," and after many caresses, each male leads off his partner on the
Audubon likewise carefully observed the wild flocks of Canada geese (Anser canadensis), and gives a graphic description of their love-antics; he says that the birds which had been previously mated "renewed their courtship as early as the month of January,
I have observed also that the older the birds the shorter were the preliminaries of their courtship.
The bachelors and old maids whether in regret, or not caring to be disturbed by the bustle, quietly moved aside and lay down at some distance from the rest".
(20.
Audubon, 'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
i.
pp.
191, 349; vol.
ii.
pp.
42, 275; vol.
iii.
p.
2.
) Many similar statements with respect to other birds could be cited from this same observer.
Turning now to domesticated and confined birds, I will commence by giving what little I have learnt respecting the courtship of fowls.
I have received long letters on this subject from Messrs.
Hewitt and Tegetmeier, and almost an essay from the late Mr. Brent.
It will be admitted by every one that these gentlemen, so well known from their published works, are careful and experienced observers.
They do not believe that the females prefer certain males on account of the beauty of their plumage; but some allowance must be made for the artificial state under which these birds have long been kept.
Mr. Tegetmeier is convinced that a gamecock, though disfigured by being dubbed and with his hackles trimmed, would be accepted as readily as a male retaining all his natural ornaments.
Mr. Brent, however, admits that the beauty of the male probably aids in exciting the female; and her acquiescence is necessary.
Mr. Hewitt is convinced that the union is by no means left to mere chance, for the female almost invariably prefers the most vigorous, defiant, and mettlesome male; hence it is almost useless, as he remarks, "to attempt true breeding if a game- cock in
Under ordinary circumstances the males and females of the fowl seem to come to a mutual understanding by means of certain gestures, described to me by Mr. Brent.
But hens will often avoid the officious attentions of young males.
Old hens, and hens of a pugnacious disposition, as the same writer informs me, dislike strange males, and will not yield until well beaten into compliance.
Ferguson, however, describes how a quarrelsome hen was subdued by the gentle courtship of a Shanghai cock.
(21.
'Rare and Prize Poultry,' 1854, p.
27.
) There is reason to believe that pigeons of both sexes prefer pairing with birds of the same breed; and dovecot-pigeons dislike all the highly improved breeds.
(22.
'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
p.
103.
) Mr. Harrison Weir has lately heard from a trustworthy observer, who keeps blue pigeons, that these drive away all other coloured varieties, such as white, red, and yellow; and from another observer, that a female dun carrier could not, after repeated
Again, Mr. Tegetmeier had a female blue turbit that obstinately refused to pair with two males of the same breed, which were successively shut up with her for weeks; but on being let out she would have immediately accepted the first blue dragon that
As she was a valuable bird, she was then shut up for many weeks with a silver (i.
e.
, very pale blue) male, and at last mated with him.
Nevertheless, as a general rule, colour appears to have little influence on the pairing of pigeons.
Mr. Tegetmeier, at my request, stained some of his birds with magenta, but they were not much noticed by the others.
Female pigeons occasionally feel a strong antipathy towards certain males, without any assignable cause.
Thus MM.
Boitard and Corbie, whose experience extended over forty-five years, state: "Quand une femelle prouve de l'antipathie pour un mle avec lequel on veut l'accoupler, malgr tous les feux de l'amour, malgr l'alpiste et le chenevis dont on la nourrit
(23.
Boitard and Corbie, 'Les Pigeons,' etc.
, 1824, p.
12.
Prosper Lucas ('Trait de l'Hrd.
Nat.
' tom.
ii.
1850, p.
296) has himself observed nearly similar facts with pigeons.
) On the other hand, Mr. Harrison Weir has himself observed, and has heard from several breeders, that a female pigeon will occasionally take a strong fancy for a particular male, and will desert her own mate for him.
Some females, according to another experienced observer, Riedel (24.
Die Taubenzucht, 1824, s.
86.
), are of a profligate disposition, and prefer almost any stranger to their own mate.
Some amorous males, called by our English fanciers "gay birds," are so successful in their gallantries, that, as Mr. H. Weir informs me, they must be shut up on account of the mischief which they cause.
Wild turkeys in the United States, according to Audubon, "sometimes pay their addresses to the domesticated females, and are generally received by them with great pleasure".
So that these females apparently prefer the wild to their own males.
(25.
'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
i.
p.
13.
See to the same effect, Dr. Bryant, in Allen's 'Mammals and Birds of Florida,' p.
344.
) Here is a more curious case.
Sir R. Heron during many years kept an account of the habits of the peafowl, which he bred in large numbers.
He states that "the hens have frequently great preference to a particular peafowl.
They were all so fond of an old pied cock, that one year, when he was confined, though still in view, they were constantly assembled close to the trellice-walls of his prison, and would not suffer a japanned peacock to touch them.
On his being let out in the autumn, the oldest of the hens instantly courted him and was successful in her courtship.
The next year he was shut up in a stable, and then the hens all courted his rival".
(26.
'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1835, p.
54.
The japanned peacock is considered by Mr. Sclater as a distinct species, and has been named Pavo nigripennis; but the evidence seems to me to show that it is only a variety.
) This rival was a japanned or black-winged peacock, to our eyes a more beautiful bird than the common kind.
Lichtenstein, who was a good observer and had excellent opportunities of observation at the Cape of Good Hope, assured Rudolphi that the female widow-bird (Chera progne) disowns the male when robbed of the long tail- feathers with which he is ornamented
I presume that this observation must have been made on birds under confinement.
(27.
Rudolphi, 'Beitrge zur Anthropologie,' 1812, s.
184.
) Here is an analogous case; Dr. Jaeger (28.
'Die Darwin'sche Theorie, und ihre Stellung zu Moral und Religion,' 1869, s.
59.
), director of the Zoological Gardens of Vienna, states that a male silver-pheasant, who had been triumphant over all other males and was the accepted lover of the females, had his ornamental plumage spoiled.
He was then immediately superseded by a rival, who got the upper hand and afterwards led the flock.
It is a remarkable fact, as shewing how important colour is in the courtship of birds, that Mr. Boardman, a well-known collector and observer of birds for many years in the Northern United States, has never in his large experience seen an albino paired
(29.
This statement is given by Mr. A. Leith Adams, in his 'Field and Forest Rambles,' 1873, p.
76, and accords with his own experience.
) It can hardly be maintained that albinos in a state of nature are incapable of breeding, as they can be raised with the greatest facility under confinement.
It appears, therefore, that we must attribute the fact that they do not pair to their rejection by their normally coloured comrades.
Female birds not only exert a choice, but in some few cases they court the male, or even fight together for his possession.
Sir R. Heron states that with peafowl, the first advances are always made by the female; something of the same kind takes place, according to Audubon, with the older females of the wild turkey.
With the capercailzie, the females flit round the male whilst he is parading at one of the places of assemblage, and solicit his attention.
(30.
In regard to peafowl, see Sir R. Heron, 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1835, p.
54, and the Rev.
E.S. Dixon, 'Ornamental Poultry,' 1848, p.
8.
For the turkey, Audubon, ibid.
p.
4.
For the capercailzie, Lloyd, 'Game Birds of Sweden,' 1867, p.
23.
) We have seen that a tame wild-duck seduced an unwilling pintail drake after a long courtship.
Mr. Bartlett believes that the Lophophorus, like many other gallinaceous birds, is naturally polygamous, but two females cannot be placed in the same cage with a male, as they fight so much together.
The following instance of rivalry is more surprising as it relates to bullfinches, which usually pair for life.
Mr. Jenner Weir introduced a dull-coloured and ugly female into his aviary, and she immediately attacked another mated female so unmercifully that the latter had to be separated.
The new female did all the courtship, and was at last successful, for she paired with the male; but after a time she met with a just retribution, for, ceasing to be pugnacious, she was replaced by the old female, and the male then deserted his new and
In all ordinary cases the male is so eager that he will accept any female, and does not, as far as we can judge, prefer one to the other; but, as we shall hereafter see, exceptions to this rule apparently occur in some few groups.
With domesticated birds, I have heard of only one case of males shewing any preference for certain females, namely, that of the domestic cock, who, according to the high authority of Mr. Hewitt, prefers the younger to the older hens.
On the other hand, in effecting hybrid unions between the male pheasant and common hens, Mr. Hewitt is convinced that the pheasant invariably prefers the older birds.
He does not appear to be in the least influenced by their colour; but "is most capricious in his attachments" (31.
Mr. Hewitt, quoted in Tegetmeier's 'Poultry Book,' 1866, p.
165.
): from some inexplicable cause he shews the most determined aversion to certain hens, which no care on the part of the breeder can overcome.
Mr. Hewitt informs me that some hens are quite unattractive even to the males of their own species, so that they may be kept with several cocks during a whole season, and not one egg out of forty or fifty will prove fertile.
On the other hand, with the long-tailed duck (Harelda glacialis), "it has been remarked," says M. Ekstrom, "that certain females are much more courted than the rest.
Frequently, indeed, one sees an individual surrounded by six or eight amorous males".
Whether this statement is credible, I know not; but the native sportsmen shoot these females in order to stuff them as decoys.
(32.
Quoted in Lloyd's 'Game Birds of Sweden,' p.
345.
) With respect to female birds feeling a preference for particular males, we must bear in mind that we can judge of choice being exerted only by analogy.
If an inhabitant of another planet were to behold a number of young rustics at a fair courting a pretty girl, and quarrelling about her like birds at one of their places of assemblage, he would, by the eagerness of the wooers to please her and to display
Now with birds the evidence stands thus: they have acute powers of observation, and they seem to have some taste for the beautiful both in colour and sound.
It is certain that the females occasionally exhibit, from unknown causes, the strongest antipathies and preferences for particular males.
When the sexes differ in colour or in other ornaments the males with rare exceptions are the more decorated, either permanently or temporarily during the breeding-season.
They sedulously display their various ornaments, exert their voices, and perform strange antics in the presence of the females.
Even well-armed males, who, it might be thought, would altogether depend for success on the law of battle, are in most cases highly ornamented; and their ornaments have been acquired at the expense of some loss of power.
In other cases ornaments have been acquired, at the cost of increased risk from birds and beasts of prey.
With various species many individuals of both sexes congregate at the same spot, and their courtship is a prolonged affair.
There is even reason to suspect that the males and females within the same district do not always succeed in pleasing each other and pairing.
What then are we to conclude from these facts and considerations?
Does the male parade his charms with so much pomp and rivalry for no purpose?
Are we not justified in believing that the female exerts a choice, and that she receives the addresses of the male who pleases her most?
It is not probable that she consciously deliberates; but she is most excited or attracted by the most beautiful, or melodious, or gallant males.
Nor need it be supposed that the female studies each stripe or spot of colour; that the peahen, for instance, admires each detail in the gorgeous train of the peacock--she is probably struck only by the general effect.
Nevertheless, after hearing how carefully the male Argus pheasant displays his elegant primary wing-feathers, and erects his ocellated plumes in the right position for their full effect; or again, how the male goldfinch alternately displays his
We can judge, as already remarked, of choice being exerted, only from analogy; and the mental powers of birds do not differ fundamentally from ours.
From these various considerations we may conclude that the pairing of birds is not left to chance; but that those males, which are best able by their various charms to please or excite the female, are under ordinary circumstances accepted.
If this be admitted, there is not much difficulty in understanding how male birds have gradually acquired their ornamental characters.
All animals present individual differences, and as man can modify his domesticated birds by selecting the individuals which appear to him the most beautiful, so the habitual or even occasional preference by the female of the more attractive males would
VARIABILITY OF BIRDS, AND ESPECIALLY OF THEIR SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS.
Variability and inheritance are the foundations for the work of selection.
That domesticated birds have varied greatly, their variations being inherited, is certain.
That birds in a state of nature have been modified into distinct races is now universally admitted.
(33.
According to Dr. Blasius ('Ibis,' vol.
ii.
1860, p.
297), there are 425 indubitable species of birds which breed in Europe, besides sixty forms, which are frequently regarded as distinct species.
Of the latter, Blasius thinks that only ten are really doubtful, and that the other fifty ought to be united with their nearest allies; but this shews that there must be a considerable amount of variation with some of our European birds.
It is also an unsettled point with naturalists, whether several North American birds ought to be ranked as specifically distinct from the corresponding European species.
So again many North American forms which until lately were named as distinct species, are now considered to be local races.
) Variations may be divided into two classes; those which appear to our ignorance to arise spontaneously, and those which are directly related to the surrounding conditions, so that all or nearly all the individuals of the same species are similarly
Cases of the latter kind have recently been observed with care by Mr. J.A. Allen (34.
'Mammals and Birds of East Florida,' also an 'Ornithological Reconnaissance of Kansas,' etc.
Notwithstanding the influence of climate on the colours of birds, it is difficult to account for the dull or dark tints of almost all the species inhabiting certain countries, for instance, the Galapagos Islands under the equator, the wide temperate plains
747).
These countries are open, and afford little shelter to birds; but it seems doubtful whether the absence of brightly coloured species can be explained on the principle of protection, for on the Pampas, which are equally open, though covered by green grass,
I have sometimes speculated whether the prevailing dull tints of the scenery in the above named countries may not have affected the appreciation of bright colours by the birds inhabiting them.
), who shews that in the United States many species of birds gradually become more strongly coloured in proceeding southward, and more lightly coloured in proceeding westward to the arid plains of the interior.
Both sexes seem generally to be affected in a like manner, but sometimes one sex more than the other.
This result is not incompatible with the belief that the colours of birds are mainly due to the accumulation of successive variations through sexual selection; for even after the sexes have been greatly differentiated, climate might produce an equal effect
Individual differences between the members of the same species are admitted by every one to occur under a state of nature.
Sudden and strongly marked variations are rare; it is also doubtful whether if beneficial they would often be preserved through selection and transmitted to succeeding generations.
(35.
'Origin of Species' fifth edit.
1869, p.
104.
I had always perceived, that rare and strongly-marked deviations of structure, deserving to be called monstrosities, could seldom be preserved through natural selection, and that the preservation of even highly-beneficial variations would depend to a
I had also fully appreciated the importance of mere individual differences, and this led me to insist so strongly on the importance of that unconscious form of selection by man, which follows from the preservation of the most valued individuals of each
But until I read an able article in the 'North British Review' (March 1867, p.
289, et seq.
), which has been of more use to me than any other Review, I did not see how great the chances were against the preservation of variations, whether slight or strongly pronounced, occurring only in single individuals.
) Nevertheless, it may be worth while to give the few cases which I have been able to collect, relating chiefly to colour,--simple albinism and melanism being excluded.
Mr. Gould is well known to admit the existence of few varieties, for he esteems very slight differences as specific; yet he states (36.
'Introduction to the Trochlidae,' p.
102.
) that near Bogota certain humming-birds belonging to the genus Cynanthus are divided into two or three races or varieties, which differ from each other in the colouring of the tail--"some having the whole of the feathers blue, while others have the eight
It does not appear that intermediate gradations have been observed in this or the following cases.
In the males alone of one of the Australian parrakeets "the thighs in some are scarlet, in others grass-green".
In another parrakeet of the same country "some individuals have the band across the wing-coverts bright-yellow, while in others the same part is tinged with red".
(37.
Gould, 'Handbook to Birds of Australia,' vol.
ii.
pp.
32 and 68.
) In the United States some few of the males of the scarlet tanager (Tanagra rubra) have "a beautiful transverse band of glowing red on the smaller wing- coverts" (38.
Audubon, 'Ornithological Biography,' 1838, vol.
iv.
p.
389.
); but this variation seems to be somewhat rare, so that its preservation through sexual selection would follow only under usually favourable circumstances.
In Bengal the Honey buzzard (Pernis cristata) has either a small rudimental crest on its head, or none at all: so slight a difference, however, would not have been worth notice, had not this same species possessed in Southern India a well-marked occipital
(39.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
i.
p.
108; and Mr. Blyth, in 'Land and Water,' 1868, p.
381.
) The following case is in some respects more interesting.
A pied variety of the raven, with the head, breast, abdomen, and parts of the wings and tail- feathers white, is confined to the Feroe Islands.
It is not very rare there, for Graba saw during his visit from eight to ten living specimens.
Although the characters of this variety are not quite constant, yet it has been named by several distinguished ornithologists as a distinct species.
The fact of the pied birds being pursued and persecuted with much clamour by the other ravens of the island was the chief cause which led Brunnich to conclude that they were specifically distinct; but this is now known to be an error.
(40.
Graba, 'Tagebuch Reise nach Faro,' 1830, ss.
51-54.
Macgillivray, 'History of British Birds,' vol.
iii.
p.
745, 'Ibis,' vol.
v.
1863, p.
469.
) This case seems analogous to that lately given of albino birds not pairing from being rejected by their comrades.
In various parts of the northern seas a remarkable variety of the common Guillemot (Uria troile) is found; and in Feroe, one out of every five birds, according to Graba's estimation, presents this variation.
It is characterised (41.
Graba, ibid.
s.
54.
Macgillivray, ibid.
vol.
v.
p.
327.
) by a pure white ring round the eye, with a curved narrow white line, an inch and a half in length, extending back from the ring.
This conspicuous character has caused the bird to be ranked by several ornithologists as a distinct species under the name of U. lacrymans, but it is now known to be merely a variety.
It often pairs with the common kind, yet intermediate gradations have never been seen; nor is this surprising, for variations which appear suddenly, are often, as I have elsewhere shewn (42.
'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
p.
92.
), transmitted either unaltered or not at all.
We thus see that two distinct forms of the same species may co-exist in the same district, and we cannot doubt that if the one had possessed any advantage over the other, it would soon have been multiplied to the exclusion of the latter.
If, for instance, the male pied ravens, instead of being persecuted by their comrades, had been highly attractive (like the above pied peacock) to the black female ravens their numbers would have rapidly increased.
And this would have been a case of sexual selection.
With respect to the slight individual differences which are common, in a greater or less degree, to all the members of the same species, we have every reason to believe that they are by far the most important for the work of selection.
Secondary sexual characters are eminently liable to vary, both with animals in a state of nature and under domestication.
(43.
On these points see also 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
253; vol ii.
pp.
73, 75.
) There is also reason to believe, as we have seen in our eighth chapter, that variations are more apt to occur in the male than in the female sex.
All these contingencies are highly favourable for sexual selection.
Whether characters thus acquired are transmitted to one sex or to both sexes, depends, as we shall see in the following chapter, on the form of inheritance which prevails.
It is sometimes difficult to form an opinion whether certain slight differences between the sexes of birds are simply the result of variability with sexually-limited inheritance, without the aid of sexual selection, or whether they have been augmented
I do not here refer to the many instances where the male displays splendid colours or other ornaments, of which the female partakes to a slight degree; for these are almost certainly due to characters primarily acquired by the male having been more or less
But what are we to conclude with respect to certain birds in which, for instance, the eyes differ slightly in colour in the two sexes?
(44.
See, for instance, on the irides of a Podica and Gallicrex in 'Ibis,' vol.
ii.
1860, p.
206; and vol.
v.
1863, p.
426.
) In some cases the eyes differ conspicuously; thus with the storks of the genus Xenorhynchus, those of the male are blackish- hazel, whilst those of the females are gamboge-yellow; with many hornbills (Buceros), as I hear from Mr. Blyth (45.
See also Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
i.
pp.
243-245.
), the males have intense crimson eyes, and those of the females are white.
In the Buceros bicornis, the hind margin of the casque and a stripe on the crest of the beak are black in the male, but not so in the female.
Are we to suppose that these black marks and the crimson colour of the eyes have been preserved or augmented through sexual selection in the males?
This is very doubtful; for Mr. Bartlett shewed me in the Zoological Gardens that the inside of the mouth of this Buceros is black in the male and flesh-coloured in the female; and their external appearance or beauty would not be thus affected.
I observed in Chile (46.
'Zoology of the Voyage of H.M.S. "Beagle,"' 1841, p.
6.
) that the iris in the condor, when about a year old, is dark-brown, but changes at maturity into yellowish-brown in the male, and into bright red in the female.
The male has also a small, longitudinal, leaden-coloured, fleshy crest or comb.
The comb of many gallinaceous birds is highly ornamental, and assumes vivid colours during the act of courtship; but what are we to think of the dull- coloured comb of the condor, which does not appear to us in the least ornamental?
The same question may be asked in regard to various other characters, such as the knob on the base of the beak of the Chinese goose (Anser cygnoides), which is much larger in the male than in the female.
No certain answer can be given to these questions; but we ought to be cautious in assuming that knobs and various fleshy appendages cannot be attractive to the female, when we remember that with savage races of man various hideous deformities--deep scars
Whether or not unimportant differences between the sexes, such as those just specified, have been preserved through sexual selection, these differences, as well as all others, must primarily depend on the laws of variation.
On the principle of correlated development, the plumage often varies on different parts of the body, or over the whole body, in the same manner.
We see this well illustrated in certain breeds of the fowl.
In all the breeds the feathers on the neck and loins of the males are elongated, and are called hackles; now when both sexes acquire a top-knot, which is a new character in the genus, the feathers on the head of the male become hackle-shaped, evidently on
The colour also of the hackles forming the top-knot of the male, is often correlated with that of the hackles on the neck and loins, as may be seen by comparing these feathers in the golden and silver-spangled Polish, the Houdans, and Creve-coeur breeds.
In some natural species we may observe exactly the same correlation in the colours of these same feathers, as in the males of the splendid Gold and Amherst pheasants.
The structure of each individual feather generally causes any change in its colouring to be symmetrical; we see this in the various laced, spangled, and pencilled breeds of the fowl; and on the principle of correlation the feathers over the whole body are
We are thus enabled without much trouble to rear breeds with their plumage marked almost as symmetrically as in natural species.
In laced and spangled fowls the coloured margins of the feathers are abruptly defined; but in a mongrel raised by me from a black Spanish cock glossed with green, and a white game-hen, all the feathers were greenish-black, excepting towards their
In some instances the shaft of the feather determines the distribution of the tints; thus with the body-feathers of a mongrel from the same black Spanish cock and a silver-spangled Polish hen, the shaft, together with a narrow space on each side, was
In these cases we have feathers symmetrically shaded, like those which give so much elegance to the plumage of many natural species.
I have also noticed a variety of the common pigeon with the wing-bars symmetrically zoned with three bright shades, instead of being simply black on a slaty-blue ground, as in the parent-species.
In many groups of birds the plumage is differently coloured in the several species, yet certain spots, marks, or stripes are retained by all.
Analogous cases occur with the breeds of the pigeon, which usually retain the two wing-bars, though they may be coloured red, yellow, white, black, or blue, the rest of the plumage being of some wholly different tint.
Here is a more curious case, in which certain marks are retained, though coloured in a manner almost exactly the opposite of what is natural; the aboriginal pigeon has a blue tail, with the terminal halves of the outer webs of the two outer tail feathers
(47.
Bechstein, 'Naturgeschichte Deutschlands,' B. iv.
1795, s.
31, on a sub-variety of the Monck pigeon.
) FORMATION AND VARIABILITY OF THE OCELLI OR EYE-LIKE SPOTS ON THE PLUMAGE OF BIRDS.
[Fig.
53.
Cyllo leda, Linn.
, from a drawing by Mr. Trimen, shewing the extreme range of variation in the ocelli.
A. Specimen, from Mauritius, upper surface of fore-wing.
A1.
Specimen, from Natal, ditto.
B. Specimen, from Java, upper surface of hind-wing.
B1.
Specimen, from Mauritius, ditto.
] As no ornaments are more beautiful than the ocelli on the feathers of various birds, on the hairy coats of some mammals, on the scales of reptiles and fishes, on the skin of amphibians, on the wings of many Lepidoptera and other insects, they deserve to
An ocellus consists of a spot within a ring of another colour, like the pupil within the iris, but the central spot is often surrounded by additional concentric zones.
The ocelli on the tail-coverts of the peacock offer a familiar example, as well as those on the wings of the peacock-butterfly (Vanessa).
Mr. Trimen has given me a description of a S. African moth (Gynanisa isis), allied to our Emperor moth, in which a magnificent ocellus occupies nearly the whole surface of each hinder wing; it consists of a black centre, including a semi-transparent
Although we do not know the steps by which these wonderfully beautiful and complex ornaments have been developed, the process has probably been a simple one, at least with insects; for, as Mr. Trimen writes to me, "no characters of mere marking or
Mr. Wallace, who first called my attention to this subject, shewed me a series of specimens of our common meadow-brown butterfly (Hipparchia janira) exhibiting numerous gradations from a simple minute black spot to an elegantly-shaded ocellus.
In a S. African butterfly (Cyllo leda, Linn.
), belonging to the same family, the ocelli are even still more variable.
In some specimens (A, Fig.
53) large spaces on the upper surface of the wings are coloured black, and include irregular white marks; and from this state a complete gradation can be traced into a tolerably perfect ocellus (A1), and this results from the contraction of the irregular
In another series of specimens a gradation can be followed from excessively minute white dots, surrounded by a scarcely visible black line (B), into perfectly symmetrical and large ocelli (B1).
(48.
This woodcut has been engraved from a beautiful drawing, most kindly made for me by Mr. Trimen; see also his description of the wonderful amount of variation in the coloration and shape of the wings of this butterfly, in his 'Rhopalocera Africae
186.
) In cases like these, the development of a perfect ocellus does not require a long course of variation and selection.
With birds and many other animals, it seems to follow from the comparison of allied species that circular spots are often generated by the breaking up and contraction of stripes.
In the Tragopan pheasant faint white lines in the female represent the beautiful white spots in the male (49.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
517.
); and something of the same kind may be observed in the two sexes of the Argus pheasant.
However this may be, appearances strongly favour the belief that on the one hand, a dark spot is often formed by the colouring matter being drawn towards a central point from a surrounding zone, which latter is thus rendered lighter; and, on the other
In either case an ocellus is the result.
The colouring matter seems to be a nearly constant quantity, but is redistributed, either centripetally or centrifugally.
The feathers of the common guinea-fowl offer a good instance of white spots surrounded by darker zones; and wherever the white spots are large and stand near each other, the surrounding dark zones become confluent.
In the same wing-feather of the Argus pheasant dark spots may be seen surrounded by a pale zone, and white spots by a dark zone.
Thus the formation of an ocellus in its most elementary state appears to be a simple affair.
By what further steps the more complex ocelli, which are surrounded by many successive zones of colour, have been generated, I will not pretend to say.
But the zoned feathers of the mongrels from differently coloured fowls, and the extraordinary variability of the ocelli on many Lepidoptera, lead us to conclude that their formation is not a complex process, but depends on some slight and graduated change
GRADATION OF SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS.
[Fig.
54.
Feather of Peacock, about two-thirds of natural size, drawn by Mr. Ford.
The transparent zone is represented by the outermost white zone, confined to the upper end of the disc.
] Cases of gradation are important, as shewing us that highly complex ornaments may be acquired by small successive steps.
In order to discover the actual steps by which the male of any existing bird has acquired his magnificent colours or other ornaments, we ought to behold the long line of his extinct progenitors; but this is obviously impossible.
We may, however, generally gain a clue by comparing all the species of the same group, if it be a large one; for some of them will probably retain, at least partially, traces of their former characters.
Instead of entering on tedious details respecting various groups, in which striking instances of gradation could be given, it seems the best plan to take one or two strongly marked cases, for instance that of the peacock, in order to see if light can be
The peacock is chiefly remarkable from the extraordinary length of his tail-coverts; the tail itself not being much elongated.
The barbs along nearly the whole length of these feathers stand separate or are decomposed; but this is the case with the feathers of many species, and with some varieties of the domestic fowl and pigeon.
The barbs coalesce towards the extremity of the shaft forming the oval disc or ocellus, which is certainly one of the most beautiful objects in the world.
It consists of an iridescent, intensely blue, indented centre, surrounded by a rich green zone, this by a broad coppery-brown zone, and this by five other narrow zones of slightly different iridescent shades.
A trifling character in the disc deserves notice; the barbs, for a space along one of the concentric zones are more or less destitute of their barbules, so that a part of the disc is surrounded by an almost transparent zone, which gives it a highly
But I have elsewhere described (50.
'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
254.
) an exactly analogous variation in the hackles of a sub-variety of the game- cock, in which the tips, having a metallic lustre, "are separated from the lower part of the feather by a symmetrically shaped transparent zone, composed of the naked portions of
The lower margin or base of the dark-blue centre of the ocellus is deeply indented on the line of the shaft.
The surrounding zones likewise shew traces, as may be seen in the drawing (Fig.
54), of indentations, or rather breaks.
These indentations are common to the Indian and Javan peacocks (Pavo cristatus and P. muticus); and they seem to deserve particular attention, as probably connected with the development of the ocellus; but for a long time I could not conjecture their
If we admit the principle of gradual evolution, there must formerly have existed many species which presented every successive step between the wonderfully elongated tail-coverts of the peacock and the short tail- coverts of all ordinary birds; and again
Let us look to the allied Gallinaceae for any still-existing gradations.
The species and sub- species of Polyplectron inhabit countries adjacent to the native land of the peacock; and they so far resemble this bird that they are sometimes called peacock-pheasants.
I am also informed by Mr. Bartlett that they resemble the peacock in their voice and in some of their habits.
During the spring the males, as previously described, strut about before the comparatively plain-coloured females, expanding and erecting their tail and wing-feathers, which are ornamented with numerous ocelli.
I request the reader to turn back to the drawing (Fig.
51) of a Polyplectron; In P. napoleonis the ocelli are confined to the tail, and the back is of a rich metallic blue; in which respects this species approaches the Java peacock.
P. hardwickii possesses a peculiar top-knot, which is also somewhat like that of the Java peacock.
In all the species the ocelli on the wings and tail are either circular or oval, and consist of a beautiful, iridescent, greenish-blue or greenish-purple disc, with a black border.
This border in P. chinquis shades into brown, edged with cream colour, so that the ocellus is here surrounded with variously shaded, though not bright, concentric zones.
The unusual length of the tail-coverts is another remarkable character in Polyplectron; for in some of the species they are half, and in others two-thirds as long as the true tail-feathers.
The tail-coverts are ocellated as in the peacock.
Thus the several species of Polyplectron manifestly make a graduated approach to the peacock in the length of their tail-coverts, in the zoning of the ocelli, and in some other characters.
[Fig.
55.
Part of a tail-covert of Polyplectron chinquis, with the two ocelli of natural size.
Fig.
56.
Part of a tail-covert of Polyplectron malaccense, with the two ocelli, partially confluent, of natural size.
] Notwithstanding this approach, the first species of Polyplectron which I examined almost made me give up the search; for I found not only that the true tail-feathers, which in the peacock are quite plain, were ornamented with ocelli, but that the ocelli
55), one on each side of the shaft.
Hence I concluded that the early progenitors of the peacock could not have resembled a Polyplectron.
But on continuing my search, I observed that in some of the species the two ocelli stood very near each other; that in the tail-feathers of P. hardwickii they touched each other; and, finally, that on the tail-coverts of this same species as well as of P.
56) they were actually confluent.
As the central part alone is confluent, an indentation is left at both the upper and lower ends; and the surrounding coloured zones are likewise indented.
A single ocellus is thus formed on each tail-covert, though still plainly betraying its double origin.
These confluent ocelli differ from the single ocelli of the peacock in having an indentation at both ends, instead of only at the lower or basal end.
The explanation, however, of this difference is not difficult; in some species of Polyplectron the two oval ocelli on the same feather stand parallel to each other; in other species (as in P. chinquis) they converge towards one end; now the partial
It is also manifest that if the convergence were strongly pronounced and the confluence complete, the indentation at the convergent end would tend to disappear.
The tail-feathers in both species of the peacock are entirely destitute of ocelli, and this apparently is related to their being covered up and concealed by the long tail-coverts.
In this respect they differ remarkably from the tail-feathers of Polyplectron, which in most of the species are ornamented with larger ocelli than those on the tail-coverts.
Hence I was led carefully to examine the tail-feathers of the several species, in order to discover whether their ocelli shewed any tendency to disappear; and to my great satisfaction, this appeared to be so.
The central tail-feathers of P. napoleonis have the two ocelli on each side of the shaft perfectly developed; but the inner ocellus becomes less and less conspicuous on the more exterior tail-feathers, until a mere shadow or rudiment is left on the inner
Again, in P. malaccense, the ocelli on the tail-coverts are, as we have seen, confluent; and these feathers are of unusual length, being two-thirds of the length of the tail-feathers, so that in both these respects they approach the tail-coverts of the
Now in P. malaccense, the two central tail-feathers alone are ornamented, each with two brightly-coloured ocelli, the inner ocellus having completely disappeared from all the other tail-feathers.
Consequently the tail- coverts and tail-feathers of this species of Polyplectron make a near approach in structure and ornamentation to the corresponding feathers of the peacock.
As far, then, as gradation throws light on the steps by which the magnificent train of the peacock has been acquired, hardly anything more is needed.
If we picture to ourselves a progenitor of the peacock in an almost exactly intermediate condition between the existing peacock, with his enormously elongated tail-coverts, ornamented with single ocelli, and an ordinary gallinaceous bird with short
The indentation of the central disc and of the surrounding zones of the ocellus, in both species of peacock, speaks plainly in favour of this view, and is otherwise inexplicable.
The males of Polyplectron are no doubt beautiful birds, but their beauty, when viewed from a little distance, cannot be compared with that of the peacock.
Many female progenitors of the peacock must, during a long line of descent, have appreciated this superiority; for they have unconsciously, by the continued preference for the most beautiful males, rendered the peacock the most splendid of living birds.
ARGUS PHEASANT.
Another excellent case for investigation is offered by the ocelli on the wing-feathers of the Argus pheasant, which are shaded in so wonderful a manner as to resemble balls lying loose within sockets, and consequently differ from ordinary ocelli.
No one, I presume, will attribute the shading, which has excited the admiration of many experienced artists, to chance--to the fortuitous concourse of atoms of colouring matter.
That these ornaments should have been formed through the selection of many successive variations, not one of which was originally intended to produce the ball-and-socket effect, seems as incredible as that one of Raphael's Madonnas should have been formed
In order to discover how the ocelli have been developed, we cannot look to a long line of progenitors, nor to many closely-allied forms, for such do not now exist.
But fortunately the several feathers on the wing suffice to give us a clue to the problem, and they prove to demonstration that a gradation is at least possible from a mere spot to a finished ball-and-socket ocellus.
[Fig.
57.
Part of secondary wing-feather of Argus pheasant, shewing two perfect ocelli, a and b.
A, B, C, D, etc.
, are dark stripes running obliquely down, each to an ocellus.
[Much of the web on both sides, especially to the left of the shaft, has been cut off.
] Fig.
59.
Portion of one of the secondary wing-feathers near to the body, shewing the so-called elliptic ornaments.
The right-hand figure is given merely as a diagram for the sake of the letters of reference.
A, B, C, D, etc.
Rows of spots running down to and forming the elliptic ornaments.
b.
Lowest spot or mark in row B. c.
The next succeeding spot or mark in the same row.
d.
Apparently a broken prolongation of the spot c.
in the same row B.] The wing-feathers, bearing the ocelli, are covered with dark stripes (Fig.
57) or with rows of dark spots (Fig.
59), each stripe or row of spots running obliquely down the outer side of the shaft to one of the ocelli.
The spots are generally elongated in a line transverse to the row in which they stand.
They often become confluent either in the line of the row--and then they form a longitudinal stripe--or transversely, that is, with the spots in the adjoining rows, and then they form transverse stripes.
A spot sometimes breaks up into smaller spots, which still stand in their proper places.
It will be convenient first to describe a perfect ball-and-socket ocellus.
This consists of an intensely black circular ring, surrounding a space shaded so as exactly to resemble a ball.
The figure here given has been admirably drawn by Mr. Ford and well engraved, but a woodcut cannot exhibit the exquisite shading of the original.
The ring is almost always slightly broken or interrupted (Fig.
57) at a point in the upper half, a little to the right of and above the white shade on the enclosed ball; it is also sometimes broken towards the base on the right hand.
These little breaks have an important meaning.
The ring is always much thickened, with the edges ill-defined towards the left-hand upper corner, the feather being held erect, in the position in which it is here drawn.
Beneath this thickened part there is on the surface of the ball an oblique almost pure- white mark, which shades off downwards into a pale-leaden hue, and this into yellowish and brown tints, which insensibly become darker and darker towards the lower part
It is this shading which gives so admirably the effect of light shining on a convex surface.
If one of the balls be examined, it will be seen that the lower part is of a brown tint and is indistinctly separated by a curved oblique line from the upper part, which is yellower and more leaden; this curved oblique line runs at right angles to the
It should be particularly observed that each ocellus stands in obvious connection either with a dark stripe, or with a longitudinal row of dark spots, for both occur indifferently on the same feather.
Thus in Fig.
57 stripe A runs to ocellus a; B runs to ocellus b; stripe C is broken in the upper part, and runs down to the next succeeding ocellus, not represented in the woodcut; D to the next lower one, and so with the stripes E and F. Lastly, the several ocelli are
[Fig.
58.
Basal part of the secondary wing feather, nearest to the body.
] I will next describe the other extreme of the series, namely, the first trace of an ocellus.
The short secondary wing-feather (Fig.
58), nearest to the body, is marked like the other feathers, with oblique, longitudinal, rather irregular, rows of very dark spots.
The basal spot, or that nearest the shaft, in the five lower rows (excluding the lowest one) is a little larger than the other spots of the same row, and a little more elongated in a transverse direction.
It differs also from the other spots by being bordered on its upper side with some dull fulvous shading.
But this spot is not in any way more remarkable than those on the plumage of many birds, and might easily be overlooked.
The next higher spot does not differ at all from the upper ones in the same row.
The larger basal spots occupy exactly the same relative position on these feathers as do the perfect ocelli on the longer wing-feathers.
By looking to the next two or three succeeding wing-feathers, an absolutely insensible gradation can be traced from one of the last-described basal spots, together with the next higher one in the same row, to a curious ornament, which cannot be called an
These are shewn in the accompanying figure (Fig.
59).
We here see several oblique rows, A, B, C, D, etc.
(see the lettered diagram on the right hand), of dark spots of the usual character.
Each row of spots runs down to and is connected with one of the elliptic ornaments, in exactly the same manner as each stripe in Fig.
57 runs down to and is connected with one of the ball-and-socket ocelli.
Looking to any one row, for instance, B, in Fig.
59, the lowest mark (b) is thicker and considerably longer than the upper spots, and has its left extremity pointed and curved upwards.
This black mark is abruptly bordered on its upper side by a rather broad space of richly shaded tints, beginning with a narrow brown zone, which passes into orange, and this into a pale leaden tint, with the end towards the shaft much paler.
These shaded tints together fill up the whole inner space of the elliptic ornament.
The mark (b) corresponds in every respect with the basal shaded spot of the simple feather described in the last paragraph (Fig.
58), but is more highly developed and more brightly coloured.
Above and to the right of this spot (b, Fig.
59), with its bright shading, there is a long narrow, black mark (c), belonging to the same row, and which is arched a little downwards so as to face (b).
This mark is sometimes broken into two portions.
It is also narrowly edged on the lower side with a fulvous tint.
To the left of and above c, in the same oblique direction, but always more or less distinct from it, there is another black mark (d).
This mark is generally sub-triangular and irregular in shape, but in the one lettered in the diagram it is unusually narrow, elongated, and regular.
It apparently consists of a lateral and broken prolongation of the mark (c), together with its confluence with a broken and prolonged part of the next spot above; but I do not feel sure of this.
These three marks, b, c, and d, with the intervening bright shades, form together the so-called elliptic ornament.
These ornaments placed parallel to the shaft, manifestly correspond in position with the ball-and-socket ocelli.
Their extremely elegant appearance cannot be appreciated in the drawing, as the orange and leaden tints, contrasting so well with the black marks, cannot be shewn.
[Fig.
60.
An ocellus in an intermediate condition between the elliptic ornament and the perfect ball-and-socket ocellus.
] Between one of the elliptic ornaments and a perfect ball-and-socket ocellus, the gradation is so perfect that it is scarcely possible to decide when the latter term ought to be used.
The passage from the one into the other is effected by the elongation and greater curvature in opposite directions of the lower black mark (b, Fig.
59), and more especially of the upper one (c), together with the contraction of the elongated sub- triangular or narrow mark (d), so that at last these three marks become confluent, forming an irregular elliptic ring.
This ring is gradually rendered more and more circular and regular, increasing at the same time in diameter.
I have here given a drawing (Fig.
60) of the natural size of an ocellus not as yet quite perfect.
The lower part of the black ring is much more curved than is the lower mark in the elliptic ornament (b, Fig.
59).
The upper part of the ring consists of two or three separate portions; and there is only a trace of the thickening of the portion which forms the black mark above the white shade.
This white shade itself is not as yet much concentrated; and beneath it the surface is brighter coloured than in a perfect ball-and-socket ocellus.
Even in the most perfect ocelli traces of the junction of three or four elongated black marks, by which the ring has been formed, may often be detected.
The irregular sub-triangular or narrow mark (d, Fig.
59), manifestly forms, by its contraction and equalisation, the thickened portion of the ring above the white shade on a perfect ball-and-socket ocellus.
The lower part of the ring is invariably a little thicker than the other parts (Fig.
57), and this follows from the lower black mark of the elliptic ornament (b, Fig.
59) having originally been thicker than the upper mark (c).
Every step can be followed in the process of confluence and modification; and the black ring which surrounds the ball of the ocellus is unquestionably formed by the union and modification of the three black marks, b, c, d, of the elliptic ornament.
The irregular zigzag black marks between the successive ocelli (Fig.
57) are plainly due to the breaking up of the somewhat more regular but similar marks between the elliptic ornaments.
The successive steps in the shading of the ball-and-socket ocelli can be followed out with equal clearness.
The brown, orange, and pale-leadened narrow zones, which border the lower black mark of the elliptic ornament, can be seen gradually to become more and more softened and shaded into each other, with the upper lighter part towards the left-hand corner
But even in the most perfect ball-and-socket ocelli a slight difference in the tints, though not in the shading, between the upper and lower parts of the ball can be perceived, as before noticed; and the line of separation is oblique, in the same direction
Thus almost every minute detail in the shape and colouring of the ball-and-socket ocelli can be shewn to follow from gradual changes in the elliptic ornaments; and the development of the latter can be traced by equally small steps from the union of two
58) having some dull fulvous shading on its upper side.
[Fig.
61.
Portion near summit of one of the secondary wing-feathers, bearing perfect ball-and-socket ocelli.
a.
Ornamented upper part.
b.
Uppermost, imperfect ball-and-socket ocellus.
(The shading above the white mark on the summit of the ocellus is here a little too dark.
) c.
Perfect ocellus.
] The extremities of the longer secondary feathers which bear the perfect ball-and-socket ocelli, are peculiarly ornamented (Fig.
61).
The oblique longitudinal stripes suddenly cease upwards and become confused; and above this limit the whole upper end of the feather (a) is covered with white dots, surrounded by little black rings, standing on a dark ground.
The oblique stripe belonging to the uppermost ocellus (b) is barely represented by a very short irregular black mark with the usual, curved, transverse base.
As this stripe is thus abruptly cut off, we can perhaps understand from what has gone before, how it is that the upper thickened part of the ring is here absent; for, as before stated, this thickened part apparently stands in some relation with a broken
From the absence of the upper and thickened part of the ring, the uppermost ocellus, though perfect in all other respects, appears as if its top had been obliquely sliced off.
It would, I think, perplex any one, who believes that the plumage of the Argus pheasant was created as we now see it, to account for the imperfect condition of the uppermost ocellus.
I should add that on the secondary wing-feather farthest from the body all the ocelli are smaller and less perfect than on the other feathers, and have the upper part of the ring deficient, as in the case just mentioned.
The imperfection here seems to be connected with the fact that the spots on this feather shew less tendency than usual to become confluent into stripes; they are, on the contrary, often broken up into smaller spots, so that two or three rows run down to
There still remains another very curious point, first observed by Mr. T.W. Wood (51.
The 'Field,' May 28, 1870.
), which deserves attention.
In a photograph, given me by Mr. Ward, of a specimen mounted as in the act of display, it may be seen that on the feathers which are held perpendicularly, the white marks on the ocelli, representing light reflected from a convex surface, are at the upper
But here comes the curious point; the outer feathers are held almost horizontally, and their ocelli ought likewise to appear as if illuminated from above, and consequently the white marks ought to be placed on the upper sides of the ocelli; and, wonderful
Hence the ocelli on the several feathers, though occupying very different positions with respect to the light, all appear as if illuminated from above, just as an artist would have shaded them.
Nevertheless they are not illuminated from strictly the same point as they ought to be; for the white marks on the ocelli of the feathers which are held almost horizontally, are placed rather too much towards the further end; that is, they are not
We have, however, no right to expect absolute perfection in a part rendered ornamental through sexual selection, any more than we have in a part modified through natural selection for real use; for instance, in that wondrous organ the human eye.
And we know what Helmholtz, the highest authority in Europe on the subject, has said about the human eye; that if an optician had sold him an instrument so carelessly made, he would have thought himself fully justified in returning it.
(52.
'Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects,' Eng.
trans.
1873, pp.
219, 227, 269, 390.
) We have now seen that a perfect series can be followed, from simple spots to the wonderful ball-and-socket ornaments.
Mr. Gould, who kindly gave me some of these feathers, fully agrees with me in the completeness of the gradation.
It is obvious that the stages in development exhibited by the feathers on the same bird do not at all necessarily shew us the steps passed through by the extinct progenitors of the species; but they probably give us the clue to the actual steps, and they
Bearing in mind how carefully the male Argus pheasant displays his plumes before the female, as well as the many facts rendering it probable that female birds prefer the more attractive males, no one who admits the agency of sexual selection in any case
These latter ornaments have been shewn to many persons, and all have admitted that they are beautiful, some thinking them even more so than the ball-and-socket ocelli.
As the secondary plumes became lengthened through sexual selection, and as the elliptic ornaments increased in diameter, their colours apparently became less bright; and then the ornamentation of the plumes had to be gained by an improvement in the pattern
Thus we can understand--and in no other way as it seems to me--the present condition and origin of the ornaments on the wing-feathers of the Argus pheasant.
From the light afforded by the principle of gradation--from what we know of the laws of variation--from the changes which have taken place in many of our domesticated birds--and, lastly, from the character (as we shall hereafter see more clearly) of the
Mr. Gould several years ago pointed out to me a humming-bird, the Urosticte benjamini, remarkable for the curious differences between the sexes.
The male, besides a splendid gorget, has greenish-black tail-feathers, with the four CENTRAL ones tipped with white; in the female, as with most of the allied species, the three OUTER tail-feathers on each side are tipped with white, so that the male has
What makes the case more curious is that, although the colouring of the tail differs remarkably in both sexes of many kinds of humming-birds, Mr. Gould does not know a single species, besides the Urosticte, in which the male has the four central feathers
The Duke of Argyll, in commenting on this case (53.
'The Reign of Law,' 1867, p.
247.
), passes over sexual selection, and asks, "What explanation does the law of natural selection give of such specific varieties as these"?
He answers "none whatever"; and I quite agree with him.
But can this be so confidently said of sexual selection?
Seeing in how many ways the tail-feathers of humming-birds differ, why should not the four central feathers have varied in this one species alone, so as to have acquired white tips?
The variations may have been gradual, or somewhat abrupt as in the case recently given of the humming-birds near Bogota, in which certain individuals alone have the "central tail-feathers tipped with beautiful green".
In the female of the Urosticte I noticed extremely minute or rudimental white tips to the two outer of the four central black tail- feathers; so that here we have an indication of change of some kind in the plumage of this species.
If we grant the possibility of the central tail- feathers of the male varying in whiteness, there is nothing strange in such variations having been sexually selected.
The white tips, together with the small white ear-tufts, certainly add, as the Duke of Argyll admits, to the beauty of the male; and whiteness is apparently appreciated by other birds, as may be inferred from such cases as the snow-white male of the
The statement made by Sir R. Heron should not be forgotten, namely, that his peahens, when debarred from access to the pied peacock, would not unite with any other male, and during that season produced no offspring.
Nor is it strange that variations in the tail-feathers of the Urosticte should have been specially selected for the sake of ornament, for the next succeeding genus in the family takes its name of Metallura from the splendour of these feathers.
We have, moreover, good evidence that humming-birds take especial pains in displaying their tail-feathers; Mr. Belt (54.
'The Naturalist in Nicaragua,' 1874, p.
112.
), after describing the beauty of the Florisuga mellivora, says, "I have seen the female sitting on a branch, and two males displaying their charms in front of her.
One would shoot up like a rocket, then suddenly expanding the snow-white tail, like an inverted parachute, slowly descend in front of her, turning round gradually to shew off back and front...
The expanded white tail covered more space than all the rest of the bird, and was evidently the grand feature in the performance.
Whilst one male was descending, the other would shoot up and come slowly down expanded.
The entertainment would end in a fight between the two performers; but whether the most beautiful or the most pugnacious was the accepted suitor, I know not".
Mr. Gould, after describing the peculiar plumage of the Urosticte, adds, "that ornament and variety is the sole object, I have myself but little doubt".
(55.
'Introduction to the Trochilidae,' 1861, p.
110.
) If this be admitted, we can perceive that the males which during former times were decked in the most elegant and novel manner would have gained an advantage, not in the ordinary struggle for life, but in rivalry with other males, and would have left a
CHAPTER XV.
Birds--continued.
Discussion as to why the males alone of some species, and both sexes of others, are brightly coloured--On sexually-limited inheritance, as applied to various structures and to brightly-coloured plumage--Nidification in relation to colour--Loss of nuptial
We have in this chapter to consider why the females of many birds have not acquired the same ornaments as the male; and why, on the other hand, both sexes of many other birds are equally, or almost equally, ornamented?
In the following chapter we shall consider the few cases in which the female is more conspicuously coloured than the male.
In my 'Origin of Species' (1.
Fourth edition, 1866, p.
241.
) I briefly suggested that the long tail of the peacock would be inconvenient and the conspicuous black colour of the male capercailzie dangerous, to the female during the period of incubation: and consequently that the transmission of these characters
I still think that this may have occurred in some few instances: but after mature reflection on all the facts which I have been able to collect, I am now inclined to believe that when the sexes differ, the successive variations have generally been from the
Since my remarks appeared, the subject of sexual coloration has been discussed in some very interesting papers by Mr. Wallace (2.
'Westminster Review,' July 1867.
'Journal of Travel,' vol.
i.
1868, p.
73.
), who believes that in almost all cases the successive variations tended at first to be transmitted equally to both sexes; but that the female was saved, through natural selection, from acquiring the conspicuous colours of the male, owing to the danger
This view necessitates a tedious discussion on a difficult point, namely, whether the transmission of a character, which is at first inherited by both sexes can be subsequently limited in its transmission to one sex alone by means of natural selection.
We must bear in mind, as shewn in the preliminary chapter on sexual selection, that characters which are limited in their development to one sex are always latent in the other.
An imaginary illustration will best aid us in seeing the difficulty of the case; we may suppose that a fancier wished to make a breed of pigeons, in which the males alone should be coloured of a pale blue, whilst the females retained their former slaty
As with pigeons characters of all kinds are usually transmitted to both sexes equally, the fancier would have to try to convert this latter form of inheritance into sexually-limited transmission.
All that he could do would be to persevere in selecting every male pigeon which was in the least degree of a paler blue; and the natural result of this process, if steadily carried on for a long time, and if the pale variations were strongly inherited or
But our fancier would be compelled to match, generation after generation, his pale blue males with slaty females, for he wishes to keep the latter of this colour.
The result would generally be the production either of a mongrel piebald lot, or more probably the speedy and complete loss of the pale-blue tint; for the primordial slaty colour would be transmitted with prepotent force.
Supposing, however, that some pale-blue males and slaty females were produced during each successive generation, and were always crossed together, then the slaty females would have, if I may use the expression, much blue blood in their veins, for their
, will all have been blue birds.
Under these circumstances it is conceivable (though I know of no distinct facts rendering it probable) that the slaty females might acquire so strong a latent tendency to pale-blueness, that they would not destroy this colour in their male offspring, their
If so, the desired end of making a breed with the two sexes permanently different in colour might be gained.
The extreme importance, or rather necessity in the above case of the desired character, namely, pale-blueness, being present though in a latent state in the female, so that the male offspring should not be deteriorated, will be best appreciated as follows:
Now if the female Soemmerring pheasant with her SHORT tail were crossed with the male common pheasant, there can be no doubt that the male hybrid offspring would have a much LONGER tail than that of the pure offspring of the common pheasant.
On the other hand, if the female common pheasant, with a tail much longer than that of the female Soemmerring pheasant, were crossed with the male of the latter, the male hybrid offspring would have a much SHORTER tail than that of the pure offspring of
(3.
Temminck says that the tail of the female Phasianus Soemmerringii is only six inches long, 'Planches coloriees,' vol.
v.
1838, pp.
487 and 488: the measurements above given were made for me by Mr. Sclater.
For the common pheasant, see Macgillivray, 'History of British Birds,' vol.
i.
pp.
118-121.
) Our fancier, in order to make his new breed with the males of a pale-blue tint, and the females unchanged, would have to continue selecting the males during many generations; and each stage of paleness would have to be fixed in the males, and rendered
The task would be an extremely difficult one, and has never been tried, but might possibly be successfully carried out.
The chief obstacle would be the early and complete loss of the pale-blue tint, from the necessity of reiterated crosses with the slaty female, the latter not having at first any LATENT tendency to produce pale-blue offspring.
On the other hand, if one or two males were to vary ever so slightly in paleness, and the variations were from the first limited in their transmission to the male sex, the task of making a new breed of the desired kind would be easy, for such males would
An analogous case has actually occurred, for there are breeds of the pigeon in Belgium (4.
Dr. Chapuis, 'Le Pigeon Voyageur Belge,' 1865, p.
87.
) in which the males alone are marked with black striae.
So again Mr. Tegetmeier has recently shewn (5.
The 'Field,' Sept.
1872.
) that dragons not rarely produce silver-coloured birds, which are almost always hens; and he himself has bred ten such females.
It is on the other hand a very unusual event when a silver male is produced; so that nothing would be easier, if desired, than to make a breed of dragons with blue males and silver females.
This tendency is indeed so strong that when Mr. Tegetmeier at last got a silver male and matched him with one of the silver females, he expected to get a breed with both sexes thus coloured; he was however disappointed, for the young male reverted to the
No doubt with patience this tendency to reversion in the males, reared from an occasional silver male matched with a silver hen, might be eliminated, and then both sexes would be coloured alike; and this very process has been followed with success by Mr.
With fowls, variations of colour, limited in their transmission to the male sex, habitually occur.
When this form of inheritance prevails, it might well happen that some of the successive variations would be transferred to the female, who would then slightly resemble the male, as actually occurs in some breeds.
Or again, the greater number, but not all, of the successive steps might be transferred to both sexes, and the female would then closely resemble the male.
There can hardly be a doubt that this is the cause of the male pouter pigeon having a somewhat larger crop, and of the male carrier pigeon having somewhat larger wattles, than their respective females; for fanciers have not selected one sex more than the
The same process would have to be followed, and the same difficulties encountered, if it were desired to make a breed with the females alone of some new colour.
Lastly, our fancier might wish to make a breed with the two sexes differing from each other, and both from the parent species.
Here the difficulty would be extreme, unless the successive variations were from the first sexually limited on both sides, and then there would be no difficulty.
We see this with the fowl; thus the two sexes of the pencilled Hamburghs differ greatly from each other, and from the two sexes of the aboriginal Gallus bankiva; and both are now kept constant to their standard of excellence by continued selection, which
The Spanish fowl offers a more curious case; the male has an immense comb, but some of the successive variations, by the accumulation of which it was acquired, appear to have been transferred to the female; for she has a comb many times larger than that of
But the comb of the female differs in one respect from that of the male, for it is apt to lop over; and within a recent period it has been ordered by the fancy that this should always be the case, and success has quickly followed the order.
Now the lopping of the comb must be sexually limited in its transmission, otherwise it would prevent the comb of the male from being perfectly upright, which would be abhorrent to every fancier.
On the other hand, the uprightness of the comb in the male must likewise be a sexually- limited character, otherwise it would prevent the comb of the female from lopping over.
From the foregoing illustrations, we see that even with almost unlimited time at command, it would be an extremely difficult and complex, perhaps an impossible process, to change one form of transmission into the other through selection.
Therefore, without distinct evidence in each case, I am unwilling to admit that this has been effected in natural species.
On the other hand, by means of successive variations, which were from the first sexually limited in their transmission, there would not be the least difficulty in rendering a male bird widely different in colour or in any other character from the female;
As bright colours are of service to the males in their rivalry with other males, such colours would be selected whether or not they were transmitted exclusively to the same sex.
Consequently the females might be expected often to partake of the brightness of the males to a greater or less degree; and this occurs with a host of species.
If all the successive variations were transmitted equally to both sexes, the females would be indistinguishable from the males; and this likewise occurs with many birds.
If, however, dull colours were of high importance for the safety of the female during incubation, as with many ground birds, the females which varied in brightness, or which received through inheritance from the males any marked accession of brightness,
But the tendency in the males to continue for an indefinite period transmitting to their female offspring their own brightness, would have to be eliminated by a change in the form of inheritance; and this, as shewn by our previous illustration, would be
The more probable result of the long-continued destruction of the more brightly-coloured females, supposing the equal form of transmission to prevail, would be the lessening or annihilation of the bright colours of the males, owing to their continual
It would be tedious to follow out all the other possible results; but I may remind the reader that if sexually-limited variations in brightness occurred in the females, even if they were not in the least injurious to them and consequently were not
In the eighth chapter instances were given, to which many might here be added, of variations occurring at various ages, and inherited at the corresponding age.
It was also shewn that variations which occur late in life are commonly transmitted to the same sex in which they first appear; whilst variations occurring early in life are apt to be transmitted to both sexes; not that all the cases of sexually-limited
It was further shewn that if a male bird varied by becoming brighter whilst young, such variations would be of no service until the age for reproduction had arrived, and there was competition between rival males.
But in the case of birds living on the ground and commonly in need of the protection of dull colours, bright tints would be far more dangerous to the young and inexperienced than to the adult males.
Consequently the males which varied in brightness whilst young would suffer much destruction and be eliminated through natural selection; on the other hand, the males which varied in this manner when nearly mature, notwithstanding that they were exposed to
As a relation often exists between the period of variation and the form of transmission, if the bright-coloured young males were destroyed and the mature ones were successful in their courtship, the males alone would acquire brilliant colours and would
But I by no means wish to maintain that the influence of age on the form of transmission, is the sole cause of the great difference in brilliancy between the sexes of many birds.
When the sexes of birds differ in colour, it is interesting to determine whether the males alone have been modified by sexual selection, the females having been left unchanged, or only partially and indirectly thus changed; or whether the females have been
I will therefore discuss this question at some length, even more fully than its intrinsic importance deserves; for various curious collateral points may thus be conveniently considered.
Before we enter on the subject of colour, more especially in reference to Mr. Wallace's conclusions, it may be useful to discuss some other sexual differences under a similar point of view.
A breed of fowls formerly existed in Germany (6.
Bechstein, 'Naturgeschichte Deutschlands,' 1793, B. iii.
339.
) in which the hens were furnished with spurs; they were good layers, but they so greatly disturbed their nests with their spurs that they could not be allowed to sit on their own eggs.
Hence at one time it appeared to me probable that with the females of the wild Gallinaceae the development of spurs had been checked through natural selection, from the injury thus caused to their nests.
This seemed all the more probable, as wing-spurs, which would not be injurious during incubation, are often as well-developed in the female as in the male; though in not a few cases they are rather larger in the male.
When the male is furnished with leg-spurs the female almost always exhibits rudiments of them,--the rudiment sometimes consisting of a mere scale, as in Gallus.
Hence it might be argued that the females had aboriginally been furnished with well-developed spurs, but that these had subsequently been lost through disuse or natural selection.
But if this view be admitted, it would have to be extended to innumerable other cases; and it implies that the female progenitors of the existing spur-bearing species were once encumbered with an injurious appendage.
In some few genera and species, as in Galloperdix, Acomus, and the Javan peacock (Pavo muticus), the females, as well as the males, possess well- developed leg-spurs.
Are we to infer from this fact that they construct a different sort of nest from that made by their nearest allies, and not liable to be injured by their spurs; so that the spurs have not been removed?
Or are we to suppose that the females of these several species especially require spurs for their defence?
It is a more probable conclusion that both the presence and absence of spurs in the females result from different laws of inheritance having prevailed, independently of natural selection.
With the many females in which spurs appear as rudiments, we may conclude that some few of the successive variations, through which they were developed in the males, occurred very early in life, and were consequently transferred to the females.
In the other and much rarer cases, in which the females possess fully developed spurs, we may conclude that all the successive variations were transferred to them; and that they gradually acquired and inherited the habit of not disturbing their nests.
The vocal organs and the feathers variously modified for producing sound, as well as the proper instincts for using them, often differ in the two sexes, but are sometimes the same in both.
Can such differences be accounted for by the males having acquired these organs and instincts, whilst the females have been saved from inheriting them, on account of the danger to which they would have been exposed by attracting the attention of birds or
This does not seem to me probable, when we think of the multitude of birds which with impunity gladden the country with their voices during the spring.
(7.
Daines Barrington, however, thought it probable ('Philosophical Transactions,' 1773, p.
164) that few female birds sing, because the talent would have been dangerous to them during incubation.
He adds, that a similar view may possibly account for the inferiority of the female to the male in plumage.
) It is a safer conclusion that, as vocal and instrumental organs are of special service only to the males during their courtship, these organs were developed through sexual selection and their constant use in that sex alone--the successive variations and
Many analogous cases could be adduced; those for instance of the plumes on the head being generally longer in the male than in the female, sometimes of equal length in both sexes, and occasionally absent in the female,-- these several cases occurring in
It would be difficult to account for such a difference between the sexes by the female having been benefited by possessing a slightly shorter crest than the male, and its consequent diminution or complete suppression through natural selection.
But I will take a more favourable case, namely the length of the tail.
The long train of the peacock would have been not only inconvenient but dangerous to the peahen during the period of incubation and whilst accompanying her young.
Hence there is not the least a priori improbability in the development of her tail having been checked through natural selection.
But the females of various pheasants, which apparently are exposed on their open nests to as much danger as the peahen, have tails of considerable length.
The females as well as the males of the Menura superba have long tails, and they build a domed nest, which is a great anomaly in so large a bird.
Naturalists have wondered how the female Menura could manage her tail during incubation; but it is now known (8.
Mr. Ramsay, in 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1868, p.
50.
) that she "enters the nest head first, and then turns round with her tail sometimes over her back, but more often bent round by her side.
Thus in time the tail becomes quite askew, and is a tolerable guide to the length of time the bird has been sitting".
Both sexes of an Australian kingfisher (Tanysiptera sylvia) have the middle tail-feathers greatly lengthened, and the female makes her nest in a hole; and as I am informed by Mr. R.B. Sharpe these feathers become much crumpled during incubation.
In these two latter cases the great length of the tail-feathers must be in some degree inconvenient to the female; and as in both species the tail- feathers of the female are somewhat shorter than those of the male, it might be argued that their full
But if the development of the tail of the peahen had been checked only when it became inconveniently or dangerously great, she would have retained a much longer tail than she actually possesses; for her tail is not nearly so long, relatively to the size of
It must also be borne in mind that, in accordance with this view, as soon as the tail of the peahen became dangerously long, and its development was consequently checked, she would have continually reacted on her male progeny, and thus have prevented the
We may therefore infer that the length of the tail in the peacock and its shortness in the peahen are the result of the requisite variations in the male having been from the first transmitted to the male offspring alone.
We are led to a nearly similar conclusion with respect to the length of the tail in the various species of pheasants.
In the Eared pheasant (Crossoptilon auritum) the tail is of equal length in both sexes, namely sixteen or seventeen inches; in the common pheasant it is about twenty inches long in the male and twelve in the female; in Soemmerring's pheasant, thirty-seven
Thus in the several species, the tail of the female differs much in length, irrespectively of that of the male; and this can be accounted for, as it seems to me, with much more probability, by the laws of inheritance,--that is by the successive variations
We may now consider Mr. Wallace's arguments in regard to the sexual coloration of birds.
He believes that the bright tints originally acquired through sexual selection by the males would in all, or almost all cases, have been transmitted to the females, unless the transference had been checked through natural selection.
I may here remind the reader that various facts opposed to this view have already been given under reptiles, amphibians, fishes and lepidoptera.
Mr. Wallace rests his belief chiefly, but not exclusively, as we shall see in the next chapter, on the following statement (9.
'Journal of Travel,' edited by A. Murray, vol.
i.
1868, p.
78.
), that when both sexes are coloured in a very conspicuous manner, the nest is of such a nature as to conceal the sitting bird; but when there is a marked contrast of colour between the sexes, the male being gay and the female dull-coloured, the nest is
This coincidence, as far as it goes, certainly seems to favour the belief that the females which sit on open nests have been specially modified for the sake of protection; but we shall presently see that there is another and more probable explanation,
Mr. Wallace admits that there are, as might have been expected, some exceptions to his two rules, but it is a question whether the exceptions are not so numerous as seriously to invalidate them.
There is in the first place much truth in the Duke of Argyll's remark (10.
'Journal of Travel,' edited by A. Murray, vol.
i.
1868, p.
281.
) that a large domed nest is more conspicuous to an enemy, especially to all tree- haunting carnivorous animals, than a smaller open nest.
Nor must we forget that with many birds which build open nests, the male sits on the eggs and aids the female in feeding the young: this is the case, for instance, with Pyranga aestiva (11.
Audubon, 'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
i.
p.
233.
), one of the most splendid birds in the United States, the male being vermilion, and the female light brownish-green.
Now if brilliant colours had been extremely dangerous to birds whilst sitting on their open nests, the males in these cases would have suffered greatly.
It might, however, be of such paramount importance to the male to be brilliantly coloured, in order to beat his rivals, that this may have more than compensated some additional danger.
Mr. Wallace admits that with the King-crows (Dicrurus), Orioles, and Pittidae, the females are conspicuously coloured, yet build open nests; but he urges that the birds of the first group are highly pugnacious and could defend themselves; that those of the
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
ii.
p.
108.
Gould's 'Handbook of the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
p.
463.
); and that with the birds of the third group the females are brightly coloured chiefly on the under surface.
Besides these cases, pigeons which are sometimes brightly, and almost always conspicuously coloured, and which are notoriously liable to the attacks of birds of prey, offer a serious exception to the rule, for they almost always build open and exposed
In another large family, that of the humming-birds, all the species build open nests, yet with some of the most gorgeous species the sexes are alike; and in the majority, the females, though less brilliant than the males, are brightly coloured.
Nor can it be maintained that all female humming-birds, which are brightly coloured, escape detection by their tints being green, for some display on their upper surfaces red, blue, and other colours.
(13.
For instance, the female Eupetomena macroura has the head and tail dark blue with reddish loins; the female Lampornis porphyrurus is blackish-green on the upper surface, with the lores and sides of the throat crimson; the female Eulampis jugularis has the
Many other instances of highly conspicuous females could be given.
See Mr. Gould's magnificent work on this family.
) In regard to birds which build in holes or construct domed nests, other advantages, as Mr. Wallace remarks, besides concealment are gained, such as shelter from the rain, greater warmth, and in hot countries protection from the sun (14.
Mr. Salvin noticed in Guatemala ('Ibis,' 1864, p.
375) that humming-birds were much more unwilling to leave their nests during very hot weather, when the sun was shining brightly, as if their eggs would be thus injured, than during cool, cloudy, or rainy weather.
); so that it is no valid objection to his view that many birds having both sexes obscurely coloured build concealed nests.
(15.
I may specify, as instances of dull- coloured birds building concealed nests, the species belonging to eight Australian genera described in Gould's 'Handbook of the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
pp.
340, 362, 365, 383, 387, 389, 391, 414.
) The female Horn-bill (Buceros), for instance, of India and Africa is protected during incubation with extraordinary care, for she plasters up with her own excrement the orifice of the hole in which she sits on her eggs, leaving only a small orifice
Mr. C. Horne, 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1869.
p.
243.
); yet female horn-bills are not more conspicuously coloured than many other birds of equal size which build open nests.
It is a more serious objection to Mr. Wallace's view, as is admitted by him, that in some few groups the males are brilliantly coloured and the females obscure, and yet the latter hatch their eggs in domed nests.
This is the case with the Grallinae of Australia, the Superb Warblers (Maluridae) of the same country, the Sun-birds (Nectariniae), and with several of the Australian Honey-suckers or Meliphagidae.
(17.
On the nidification and colours of these latter species, see Gould's 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
pp.
504, 527.
) If we look to the birds of England we shall see that there is no close and general relation between the colours of the female and the nature of the nest which is constructed.
About forty of our British birds (excluding those of large size which could defend themselves) build in holes in banks, rocks, or trees, or construct domed nests.
If we take the colours of the female goldfinch, bullfinch, or blackbird, as a standard of the degree of conspicuousness, which is not highly dangerous to the sitting female, then out of the above forty birds the females of only twelve can be considered as
(18.
I have consulted, on this subject, Macgillivray's 'British Birds,' and though doubts may be entertained in some cases in regard to the degree of concealment of the nest, and to the degree of conspicuousness of the female, yet the following birds, which all
); Erithacus (?
); Fruticola, 2 sp.
; Saxicola; Ruticilla, 2 sp.
; Sylvia, 3 sp.
; Parus, 3 sp.
; Mecistura; Anorthura; Certhia; Sitta; Yunx; Muscicapa, 2 sp.
; Hirundo, 3 sp.
; and Cypselus.
The females of the following 12 birds may be considered as conspicuous according to the same standard, viz.
, Pastor, Motacilla alba, Parus major and P. caeruleus, Upupa, Picus, 4 sp.
, Coracias, Alcedo, and Merops.
) Nor is there any close relation within the same genus between a well-pronounced difference in colour between the sexes, and the nature of the nest constructed.
Thus the male house sparrow (Passer domesticus) differs much from the female, the male tree-sparrow (P.
montanus) hardly at all, and yet both build well-concealed nests.
The two sexes of the common fly-catcher (Muscicapa grisola) can hardly be distinguished, whilst the sexes of the pied fly-catcher (M.
luctuosa) differ considerably, and both species build in holes or conceal their nests.
The female blackbird (Turdus merula) differs much, the female ring- ouzel (T.
torquatus) differs less, and the female common thrush (T.
musicus) hardly at all from their respective males; yet all build open nests.
On the other hand, the not very distantly-allied water-ouzel (Cinclus aquaticus) builds a domed nest, and the sexes differ about as much as in the ring-ouzel.
The black and red grouse (Tetrao tetrix and T. scoticus) build open nests in equally well-concealed spots, but in the one species the sexes differ greatly, and in the other very little.
Notwithstanding the foregoing objections, I cannot doubt, after reading Mr. Wallace's excellent essay, that looking to the birds of the world, a large majority of the species in which the females are conspicuously coloured (and in this case the males with
Mr. Wallace enumerates (19.
'Journal of Travel,' edited by A. Murray, vol.
i.
p.
78.
) a long series of groups in which this rule holds good; but it will suffice here to give, as instances, the more familiar groups of kingfishers, toucans, trogons, puff-birds (Capitonidae), plantain-eaters (Musophagae, woodpeckers, and parrots.
Mr. Wallace believes that in these groups, as the males gradually acquired through sexual selection their brilliant colours, these were transferred to the females and were not eliminated by natural selection, owing to the protection which they already
According to this view, their present manner of nesting was acquired before their present colours.
But it seems to me much more probable that in most cases, as the females were gradually rendered more and more brilliant from partaking of the colours of the male, they were gradually led to change their instincts (supposing that they originally built open
No one who studies, for instance, Audubon's account of the differences in the nests of the same species in the Northern and Southern United States (20.
See many statements in the 'Ornithological Biography.
' See also some curious observations on the nests of Italian birds by Eugenio Bettoni, in the 'Atti della Societ Italiana,' vol.
xi.
1869, p.
487.
), will feel any great difficulty in admitting that birds, either by a change (in the strict sense of the word) of their habits, or through the natural selection of so-called spontaneous variations of instinct, might readily be led to modify their manner
This way of viewing the relation, as far as it holds good, between the bright colours of female birds and their manner of nesting, receives some support from certain cases occurring in the Sahara Desert.
Here, as in most other deserts, various birds, and many other animals, have had their colours adapted in a wonderful manner to the tints of the surrounding surface.
Nevertheless there are, as I am informed by the Rev.
Mr. Tristram, some curious exceptions to the rule; thus the male of the Monticola cyanea is conspicuous from his bright blue colour, and the female almost equally conspicuous from her mottled brown and white plumage; both sexes of two species of Dromolaea
With respect to the above groups in which the females are conspicuously coloured and build concealed nests, it is not necessary to suppose that each separate species had its nidifying instinct specially modified; but only that the early progenitors of each
As far as it can be trusted, the conclusion is interesting, that sexual selection together with equal or nearly equal inheritance by both sexes, have indirectly determined the manner of nidification of whole groups of birds.
According to Mr. Wallace, even in the groups in which the females, from being protected in domed nests during incubation, have not had their bright colours eliminated through natural selection, the males often differ in a slight, and occasionally in a
This is a significant fact, for such differences in colour must be accounted for by some of the variations in the males having been from the first limited in transmission to the same sex; as it can hardly be maintained that these differences, especially
Thus all the species in the splendid group of the Trogons build in holes; and Mr. Gould gives figures (21.
See his Monograph of the Trogonidae, 1st edition.
) of both sexes of twenty-five species, in all of which, with one partial exception, the sexes differ sometimes slightly, sometimes conspicuously, in colour,--the males being always finer than the females, though the latter are likewise beautiful.
All the species of kingfishers build in holes, and with most of the species the sexes are equally brilliant, and thus far Mr. Wallace's rule holds good; but in some of the Australian species the colours of the females are rather less vivid than those of
(22.
Namely, Cyanalcyon, Gould's 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
p.
133; see, also, pp.
130, 136.
) Mr. R.B. Sharpe, who has especially studied this group, has shewn me some American species (Ceryle) in which the breast of the male is belted with black.
Again, in Carcineutes, the difference between the sexes is conspicuous: in the male the upper surface is dull-blue banded with black, the lower surface being partly fawn-coloured, and there is much red about the head; in the female the upper surface is
It is an interesting fact, as shewing how the same peculiar style of sexual colouring often characterises allied forms, that in three species of Dacelo the male differs from the female only in the tail being dull-blue banded with black, whilst that of the
With parrots, which likewise build in holes, we find analogous cases: in most of the species, both sexes are brilliantly coloured and indistinguishable, but in not a few species the males are coloured rather more vividly than the females, or even very
Thus, besides other strongly-marked differences, the whole under surface of the male King Lory (Aprosmictus scapulatus) is scarlet, whilst the throat and chest of the female is green tinged with red: in the Euphema splendida there is a similar difference,
(23.
Every gradation of difference between the sexes may be followed in the parrots of Australia.
See Gould's 'Handbook,' etc.
, vol.
ii.
pp.
14-102.
) In the family of the tits (Parinae), which build concealed nests, the female of our common blue tomtit (Parus caeruleus), is "much less brightly coloured" than the male: and in the magnificent Sultan yellow tit of India the difference is greater.
(24.
Macgillivray's 'British Birds,' vol.
ii.
p.
433.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
ii.
p.
282.
) Again, in the great group of the woodpeckers (25.
All the following facts are taken from M. Malherbe's magnificent 'Monographie des Picidees,' 1861.
), the sexes are generally nearly alike, but in the Megapicus validus all those parts of the head, neck, and breast, which are crimson in the male are pale brown in the female.
As in several woodpeckers the head of the male is bright crimson, whilst that of the female is plain, it occurred to me that this colour might possibly make the female dangerously conspicuous, whenever she put her head out of the hole containing her nest,
This view is strengthened by what Malherbe states with respect to Indopicus carlotta; namely, that the young females, like the young males, have some crimson about their heads, but that this colour disappears in the adult female, whilst it is intensified
Nevertheless the following considerations render this view extremely doubtful: the male takes a fair share in incubation (26.
Audubon's 'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
ii.
p.
75; see also the 'Ibis,' vol.
i.
p.
268.
), and would be thus almost equally exposed to danger; both sexes of many species have their heads of an equally bright crimson; in other species the difference between the sexes in the amount of scarlet is so slight that it can hardly make any appreciable
The cases, as yet given, of slight and graduated differences in colour between the males and females in the groups, in which as a general rule the sexes resemble each other, all relate to species which build domed or concealed nests.
But similar gradations may likewise be observed in groups in which the sexes as a general rule resemble each other, but which build open nests.
As I have before instanced the Australian parrots, so I may here instance, without giving any details, the Australian pigeons.
(27.
Gould's 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
ii.
pp.
109-149.
) It deserves especial notice that in all these cases the slight differences in plumage between the sexes are of the same general nature as the occasionally greater differences.
A good illustration of this fact has already been afforded by those kingfishers in which either the tail alone or the whole upper surface of the plumage differs in the same manner in the two sexes.
Similar cases may be observed with parrots and pigeons.
The differences in colour between the sexes of the same species are, also, of the same general nature as the differences in colour between the distinct species of the same group.
For when in a group in which the sexes are usually alike, the male differs considerably from the female, he is not coloured in a quite new style.
Hence we may infer that within the same group the special colours of both sexes when they are alike, and the colours of the male, when he differs slightly or even considerably from the female, have been in most cases determined by the same general cause;
It is not probable, as has already been remarked, that differences in colour between the sexes, when very slight, can be of service to the female as a protection.
Assuming, however, that they are of service, they might be thought to be cases of transition; but we have no reason to believe that many species at any one time are undergoing change.
Therefore we can hardly admit that the numerous females which differ very slightly in colour from their males are now all commencing to become obscure for the sake of protection.
Even if we consider somewhat more marked sexual differences, is it probable, for instance, that the head of the female chaffinch,--the crimson on the breast of the female bullfinch,--the green of the female greenfinch,--the crest of the female
I cannot think so; and still less with the slight differences between the sexes of those birds which build concealed nests.
On the other hand, the differences in colour between the sexes, whether great or small, may to a large extent be explained on the principle of the successive variations, acquired by the males through sexual selection, having been from the first more or
That the degree of limitation should differ in different species of the same group will not surprise any one who has studied the laws of inheritance, for they are so complex that they appear to us in our ignorance to be capricious in their action.
(28.
See remarks to this effect in 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
chap.
xii.
) As far as I can discover there are few large groups of birds in which all the species have both sexes alike and brilliantly coloured, but I hear from Mr. Sclater, that this appears to be the case with the Musophagae or plantain-eaters.
Nor do I believe that any large group exists in which the sexes of all the species are widely dissimilar in colour: Mr. Wallace informs me that the chatterers of S. America (Cotingidae) offer one of the best instances; but with some of the species, in
Nevertheless we have a near approach to close sexual similarity or dissimilarity throughout several groups: and this, from what has just been said of the fluctuating nature of inheritance, is a somewhat surprising circumstance.
But that the same laws should largely prevail with allied animals is not surprising.
The domestic fowl has produced a great number of breeds and sub-breeds, and in these the sexes generally differ in plumage; so that it has been noticed as an unusual circumstance when in certain sub-breeds they resemble each other.
On the other hand, the domestic pigeon has likewise produced a vast number of distinct breeds and sub-breeds, and in these, with rare exceptions, the two sexes are identically alike.
Therefore if other species of Gallus and Columba were domesticated and varied, it would not be rash to predict that similar rules of sexual similarity and dissimilarity, depending on the form of transmission, would hold good in both cases.
In like manner the same form of transmission has generally prevailed under nature throughout the same groups, although marked exceptions to this rule occur.
Thus within the same family or even genus, the sexes may be identically alike, or very different in colour.
Instances have already been given in the same genus, as with sparrows, fly- catchers, thrushes and grouse.
In the family of pheasants the sexes of almost all the species are wonderfully dissimilar, but are quite alike in the eared pheasant or Crossoptilon auritum.
In two species of Chloephaga, a genus of geese, the male cannot be distinguished from the females, except by size; whilst in two others, the sexes are so unlike that they might easily be mistaken for distinct species.
(29.
The 'Ibis,' vol.
vi.
1864, p.
122.
) The laws of inheritance can alone account for the following cases, in which the female acquires, late in life, certain characters proper to the male, and ultimately comes to resemble him more or less completely.
Here protection can hardly have come into play.
Mr. Blyth informs me that the females of Oriolus melanocephalus and of some allied species, when sufficiently mature to breed, differ considerably in plumage from the adult males; but after the second or third moults they differ only in their beaks having
In the dwarf bitterns (Ardetta), according to the same authority, "the male acquires his final livery at the first moult, the female not before the third or fourth moult; in the meanwhile she presents an intermediate garb, which is ultimately exchanged for
So again the female Falco peregrinus acquires her blue plumage more slowly than the male.
Mr. Swinhoe states that with one of the Drongo shrikes (Dicrurus macrocercus) the male, whilst almost a nestling, moults his soft brown plumage and becomes of a uniform glossy greenish-black; but the female retains for a long time the white striae and
The same excellent observer remarks that in the spring of the second year the female spoon- bill (Platalea) of China resembles the male of the first year, and that apparently it is not until the third spring that she acquires the same adult plumage as that
The female Bombycilla carolinensis differs very little from the male, but the appendages, which like beads of red sealing-wax ornament the wing-feathers (30.
When the male courts the female, these ornaments are vibrated, and "are shewn off to great advantage," on the outstretched wings: A. Leith Adams, 'Field and Forest Rambles,' 1873, p.
153.
), are not developed in her so early in life as in the male.
In the male of an Indian parrakeet (Palaeornis javanicus) the upper mandible is coral-red from his earliest youth, but in the female, as Mr. Blyth has observed with caged and wild birds, it is at first black and does not become red until the bird is at
Both sexes of the wild turkey are ultimately furnished with a tuft of bristles on the breast, but in two-year-old birds the tuft is about four inches long in the male and hardly apparent in the female; when, however, the latter has reached her fourth year,
(31.
On Ardetta, Translation of Cuvier's 'Regne Animal,' by Mr. Blyth, footnote, p.
159.
On the Peregrine Falcon, Mr. Blyth, in Charlesworth's 'Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
i.
1837, p.
304.
On Dicrurus, 'Ibis,' 1863, p.
44.
On the Platalea, 'Ibis,' vol.
vi.
1864, p.
366.
On the Bombycilla, Audubon's 'Ornitholog.
Biography,' vol.
i.
p.
229.
On the Palaeornis, see, also, Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
i.
p.
263.
On the wild turkey, Audubon, ibid.
vol.
i.
p.
15; but I hear from Judge Caton that in Illinois the female very rarely acquires a tuft.
Analogous cases with the females of Petrocossyphus are given by Mr. R. Sharpe, 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' 1872, p.
496.
) These cases must not be confounded with those where diseased or old females abnormally assume masculine characters, nor with those where fertile females, whilst young, acquire the characters of the male, through variation or some unknown cause.
(32.
Of these latter cases Mr. Blyth has recorded (Translation of Cuvier's 'Regne Animal,' p.
158) various instances with Lanius, Ruticilla, Linaria, and Anas.
Audubon has also recorded a similar case ('Ornitholog.
Biography,' vol.
v.
p.
519) with Pyranga aestiva.
) But all these cases have so much in common that they depend, according to the hypothesis of pangenesis, on gemmules derived from each part of the male being present, though latent, in the female; their development following on some slight change in the
A few words must be added on changes of plumage in relation to the season of the year.
From reasons formerly assigned there can be little doubt that the elegant plumes, long pendant feathers, crests, etc.
, of egrets, herons, and many other birds, which are developed and retained only during the summer, serve for ornamental and nuptial purposes, though common to both sexes.
The female is thus rendered more conspicuous during the period of incubation than during the winter; but such birds as herons and egrets would be able to defend themselves.
As, however, plumes would probably be inconvenient and certainly of no use during the winter, it is possible that the habit of moulting twice in the year may have been gradually acquired through natural selection for the sake of casting off inconvenient
But this view cannot be extended to the many waders, whose summer and winter plumages differ very little in colour.
With defenceless species, in which both sexes, or the males alone, become extremely conspicuous during the breeding-season,--or when the males acquire at this season such long wing or tail-feathers as to impede their flight, as with Cosmetornis and
We must, however, remember that many birds, such as some of the Birds of Paradise, the Argus pheasant and peacock, do not cast their plumes during the winter; and it can hardly be maintained that the constitution of these birds, at least of the
(33.
See Gould's 'Birds of Great Britain.
') Hence it must be considered as doubtful whether the many species which moult their ornamental plumes or lose their bright colours during the winter, have acquired this habit on account of the inconvenience or danger which they would otherwise have
I conclude, therefore, that the habit of moulting twice in the year was in most or all cases first acquired for some distinct purpose, perhaps for gaining a warmer winter covering; and that variations in the plumage occurring during the summer were
This appears more probable than that the species in all cases originally tended to retain their ornamental plumage during the winter, but were saved from this through natural selection, resulting from the inconvenience or danger thus caused.
I have endeavoured in this chapter to shew that the arguments are not trustworthy in favour of the view that weapons, bright colours, and various ornaments, are now confined to the males owing to the conversion, by natural selection, of the equal
It is also doubtful whether the colours of many female birds are due to the preservation, for the sake of protection, of variations which were from the first limited in their transmission to the female sex.
But it will be convenient to defer any further discussion on this subject until I treat, in the following chapter, of the differences in plumage between the young and old.
CHAPTER XVI.
BIRDS--concluded.
The immature plumage in relation to the character of the plumage in both sexes when adult--Six classes of cases--Sexual differences between the males of closely-allied or representative species--The female assuming the characters of the male--Plumage of
We must now consider the transmission of characters, as limited by age, in reference to sexual selection.
The truth and importance of the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages need not here be discussed, as enough has already been said on the subject.
Before giving the several rather complex rules or classes of cases, under which the differences in plumage between the young and the old, as far as known to me, may be included, it will be well to make a few preliminary remarks.
With animals of all kinds when the adults differ in colour from the young, and the colours of the latter are not, as far as we can see, of any special service, they may generally be attributed, like various embryological structures, to the retention of a
But this view can be maintained with confidence, only when the young of several species resemble each other closely, and likewise resemble other adult species belonging to the same group; for the latter are the living proofs that such a state of things was
Young lions and pumas are marked with feeble stripes or rows of spots, and as many allied species both young and old are similarly marked, no believer in evolution will doubt that the progenitor of the lion and puma was a striped animal, and that the young
Many species of deer, which when mature are not spotted, are whilst young covered with white spots, as are likewise some few species in the adult state.
So again the young in the whole family of pigs (Suidae), and in certain rather distantly allied animals, such as the tapir, are marked with dark longitudinal stripes; but here we have a character apparently derived from an extinct progenitor, and now
In all such cases the old have had their colours changed in the course of time, whilst the young have remained but little altered, and this has been effected through the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages.
This same principle applies to many birds belonging to various groups, in which the young closely resemble each other, and differ much from their respective adult parents.
The young of almost all the Gallinaceae, and of some distantly allied birds such as ostriches, are covered with longitudinally striped down; but this character points back to a state of things so remote that it hardly concerns us.
Young cross-bills (Loxia) have at first straight beaks like those of other finches, and in their immature striated plumage they resemble the mature red-pole and female siskin, as well as the young of the goldfinch, greenfinch, and some other allied
The young of many kinds of buntings (Emberiza) resemble one another, and likewise the adult state of the common bunting, E. miliaria.
In almost the whole large group of thrushes the young have their breasts spotted--a character which is retained throughout life by many species, but is quite lost by others, as by the Turdus migratorius.
So again with many thrushes, the feathers on the back are mottled before they are moulted for the first time, and this character is retained for life by certain eastern species.
The young of many species of shrikes (Lanius), of some woodpeckers, and of an Indian pigeon (Chalcophaps indicus), are transversely striped on the under surface; and certain allied species or whole genera are similarly marked when adult.
In some closely-allied and resplendent Indian cuckoos (Chrysococcyx), the mature species differ considerably from one another in colour, but the young cannot be distinguished.
The young of an Indian goose (Sarkidiornis melanonotus) closely resemble in plumage an allied genus, Dendrocygna, when mature.
(1.
In regard to thrushes, shrikes, and woodpeckers, see Mr. Blyth, in Charlesworth's 'Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
i.
1837, p.
304; also footnote to his translation of Cuvier's 'Regne Animal,' p.
159.
I give the case of Loxia on Mr. Blyth's information.
On thrushes, see also Audubon, 'Ornith.
Biog.
' vol.
ii.
p.
195.
On Chrysococcyx and Chalcophaps, Blyth, as quoted in Jerdon's 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
485.
On Sarkidiornis, Blyth, in 'Ibis,' 1867, p.
175.
) Similar facts will hereafter be given in regard to certain herons.
Young black-grouse (Tetrao tetrix) resemble the young as well as the old of certain other species, for instance the red-grouse or T. scoticus.
Finally, as Mr. Blyth, who has attended closely to this subject, has well remarked, the natural affinities of many species are best exhibited in their immature plumage; and as the true affinities of all organic beings depend on their descent from a common
Although many young birds, belonging to various families, thus give us a glimpse of the plumage of their remote progenitors, yet there are many other birds, both dull-coloured and bright-coloured, in which the young closely resemble their parents.
In such cases the young of the different species cannot resemble each other more closely than do the parents; nor can they strikingly resemble allied forms when adult.
They give us but little insight into the plumage of their progenitors, excepting in so far that, when the young and the old are coloured in the same general manner throughout a whole group of species, it is probable that their progenitors were similarly
We may now consider the classes of cases, under which the differences and resemblances between the plumage of the young and the old, in both sexes or in one sex alone, may be grouped.
Rules of this kind were first enounced by Cuvier; but with the progress of knowledge they require some modification and amplification.
This I have attempted to do, as far as the extreme complexity of the subject permits, from information derived from various sources; but a full essay on this subject by some competent ornithologist is much needed.
In order to ascertain to what extent each rule prevails, I have tabulated the facts given in four great works, namely, by Macgillivray on the birds of Britain, Audubon on those of North America, Jerdon on those of India, and Gould on those of Australia.
I may here premise, first, that the several cases or rules graduate into each other; and secondly, that when the young are said to resemble their parents, it is not meant that they are identically alike, for their colours are almost always less vivid, and
RULES OR CLASSES OF CASES.
I. When the adult male is more beautiful or conspicuous than the adult female, the young of both sexes in their first plumage closely resemble the adult female, as with the common fowl and peacock; or, as occasionally occurs, they resemble her much more
II.
When the adult female is more conspicuous than the adult male, as sometimes though rarely occurs, the young of both sexes in their first plumage resemble the adult male.
III.
When the adult male resembles the adult female, the young of both sexes have a peculiar first plumage of their own, as with the robin.
IV.
When the adult male resembles the adult female, the young of both sexes in their first plumage resemble the adults, as with the kingfisher, many parrots, crows, hedge-warblers.
V. When the adults of both sexes have a distinct winter and summer plumage, whether or not the male differs from the female, the young resemble the adults of both sexes in their winter dress, or much more rarely in their summer dress, or they resemble the
Or the young may have an intermediate character; or again they may differ greatly from the adults in both their seasonal plumages.
VI.
In some few cases the young in their first plumage differ from each other according to sex; the young males resembling more or less closely the adult males, and the young females more or less closely the adult females.
CLASS I. In this class, the young of both sexes more or less closely resemble the adult female, whilst the adult male differs from the adult female, often in the most conspicuous manner.
Innumerable instances in all Orders could be given; it will suffice to call to mind the common pheasant, duck, and house-sparrow.
The cases under this class graduate into others.
Thus the two sexes when adult may differ so slightly, and the young so slightly from the adults, that it is doubtful whether such cases ought to come under the present, or under the third or fourth classes.
So again the young of the two sexes, instead of being quite alike, may differ in a slight degree from each other, as in our sixth class.
These transitional cases, however, are few, or at least are not strongly pronounced, in comparison with those which come strictly under the present class.
The force of the present law is well shewn in those groups, in which, as a general rule, the two sexes and the young are all alike; for when in these groups the male does differ from the female, as with certain parrots, kingfishers, pigeons, etc.
, the young of both sexes resemble the adult female.
(2.
See, for instance, Mr. Gould's account ('Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
p.
133) of Cyanalcyon (one of the Kingfishers), in which, however, the young male, though resembling the adult female, is less brilliantly coloured.
In some species of Dacelo the males have blue tails, and the females brown ones; and Mr. R.B. Sharpe informs me that the tail of the young male of D. gaudichaudi is at first brown.
Mr. Gould has described (ibid.
vol.
ii.
pp.
14, 20, 37) the sexes and the young of certain black Cockatoos and of the King Lory, with which the same rule prevails.
Also Jerdon ('Birds of India,' vol.
i.
p.
260) on the Palaeornis rosa, in which the young are more like the female than the male.
See Audubon ('Ornithological Biography,' vol.
ii.
p.
475) on the two sexes and the young of Columba passerina.
) We see the same fact exhibited still more clearly in certain anomalous cases; thus the male of Heliothrix auriculata (one of the humming-birds) differs conspicuously from the female in having a splendid gorget and fine ear-tufts, but the female is
(3.
I owe this information to Mr. Gould, who shewed me the specimens; see also his 'Introduction to the Trochilidae,' 1861, p.
120.
) Again, the plumage of the male goosander (Mergus merganser) is more conspicuously coloured than that of the female, with the scapular and secondary wing-feathers much longer; but differently from what occurs, as far as I know, in any other bird, the
Now the young of both sexes entirely resemble the adult female, so that their crests are actually of greater length, though narrower, than in the adult male.
(4.
Macgillivray, 'Hist.
Brit.
Birds,' vol.
v.
pp.
207-214.
) When the young and the females closely resemble each other and both differ from the males, the most obvious conclusion is that the males alone have been modified.
Even in the anomalous cases of the Heliothrix and Mergus, it is probable that originally both adult sexes were furnished--the one species with a much elongated tail, and the other with a much elongated crest--these characters having since been partially
The belief that in the present class the male alone has been modified, as far as the differences between the male and the female together with her young are concerned, is strongly supported by some remarkable facts recorded by Mr. Blyth (5.
See his admirable paper in the 'Journal of the Asiatic Soc.
of Bengal,' vol.
xix.
1850, p.
223; see also Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
i.
introduction, p.
xxix.
In regard to Tanysiptera, Prof.
Schlegel told Mr. Blyth that he could distinguish several distinct races, solely by comparing the adult males.
), with respect to closely-allied species which represent each other in distinct countries.
For with several of these representative species the adult males have undergone a certain amount of change and can be distinguished; the females and the young from the distinct countries being indistinguishable, and therefore absolutely unchanged.
This is the case with certain Indian chats (Thamnobia), with certain honey-suckers (Nectarinia), shrikes (Tephrodornis), certain kingfishers (Tanysiptera), Kalij pheasants (Gallophasis), and tree-partridges (Arboricola).
In some analogous cases, namely with birds having a different summer and winter plumage, but with the two sexes nearly alike, certain closely-allied species can easily be distinguished in their summer or nuptial plumage, yet are indistinguishable in their
This is the case with some of the closely-allied Indian wagtails or Motacillae.
Mr. Swinhoe (6.
See also Mr. Swinhoe, in 'Ibis,' July 1863, p.
131; and a previous paper, with an extract from a note by Mr. Blyth, in 'Ibis,' January, 1861, p.
25.
) informs me that three species of Ardeola, a genus of herons, which represent one another on separate continents, are "most strikingly different" when ornamented with their summer plumes, but are hardly, if at all, distinguishable during the winter.
The young also of these three species in their immature plumage closely resemble the adults in their winter dress.
This case is all the more interesting, because with two other species of Ardeola both sexes retain, during the winter and summer, nearly the same plumage as that possessed by the three first species during the winter and in their immature state; and this
In all these cases, the nuptial plumage which we may assume was originally acquired by the adult males during the breeding-season, and transmitted to the adults of both sexes at the corresponding season, has been modified, whilst the winter and immature
The question naturally arises, how is it that in these latter cases the winter plumage of both sexes, and in the former cases the plumage of the adult females, as well as the immature plumage of the young, have not been at all affected?
The species which represent each other in distinct countries will almost always have been exposed to somewhat different conditions, but we can hardly attribute to this action the modification of the plumage in the males alone, seeing that the females and
Hardly any fact shews us more clearly how subordinate in importance is the direct action of the conditions of life, in comparison with the accumulation through selection of indefinite variations, than the surprising difference between the sexes of many
Nevertheless we are not precluded from believing that in the course of time new conditions may produce some direct effect either on both sexes, or from their constitutional differences chiefly on one sex.
We see only that this is subordinate in importance to the accumulated results of selection.
Judging, however, from a wide-spread analogy, when a species migrates into a new country (and this must precede the formation of representative species), the changed conditions to which they will almost always have been exposed will cause them to undergo a
In this case sexual selection, which depends on an element liable to change--the taste or admiration of the female--will have had new shades of colour or other differences to act on and accumulate; and as sexual selection is always at work, it would (from
These remarks likewise apply to the nuptial or summer plumage, whether confined to the males, or common to both sexes.
Although the females of the above closely-allied or representative species, together with their young, differ hardly at all from one another, so that the males alone can be distinguished, yet the females of most species within the same genus obviously
The differences, however, are rarely as great as between the males.
We see this clearly in the whole family of the Gallinaceae: the females, for instance, of the common and Japan pheasant, and especially of the gold and Amherst pheasant --of the silver pheasant and the wild fowl--resemble one another very closely in
So it is with the females of most of the Cotingidae, Fringillidae, and many other families.
There can indeed be no doubt that, as a general rule, the females have been less modified than the males.
Some few birds, however, offer a singular and inexplicable exception; thus the females of Paradisea apoda and P. papuana differ from each other more than do their respective males (7.
Wallace, 'The Malay Archipelago,' vol.
ii.
1869, p.
394.
); the female of the latter species having the under surface pure white, whilst the female P. apoda is deep brown beneath.
So, again, as I hear from Professor Newton, the males of two species of Oxynotus (shrikes), which represent each other in the islands of Mauritius and Bourbon (8.
These species are described with coloured figures, by M. F. Pollen, in 'Ibis,' 1866, p.
275.
), differ but little in colour, whilst the females differ much.
In the Bourbon species the female appears to have partially retained an immature condition of plumage, for at first sight she "might be taken for the young of the Mauritian species".
These differences may be compared with those inexplicable ones, which occur independently of man's selection in certain sub-breeds of the game-fowl, in which the females are very different, whilst the males can hardly be distinguished.
(9.
'Variation of Animals,' etc.
, vol.
i.
p.
251.
) As I account so largely by sexual selection for the differences between the males of allied species, how can the differences between the females be accounted for in all ordinary cases?
We need not here consider the species which belong to distinct genera; for with these, adaptation to different habits of life, and other agencies, will have come into play.
In regard to the differences between the females within the same genus, it appears to me almost certain, after looking through various large groups, that the chief agent has been the greater or less transference to the female of the characters acquired by
In the several British finches, the two sexes differ either very slightly or considerably; and if we compare the females of the greenfinch, chaffinch, goldfinch, bullfinch, crossbill, sparrow, etc.
, we shall see that they differ from one another chiefly in the points in which they partially resemble their respective males; and the colours of the males may safely be attributed to sexual selection.
With many gallinaceous species the sexes differ to an extreme degree, as with the peacock, pheasant, and fowl, whilst with other species there has been a partial or even complete transference of character from the male to the female.
The females of the several species of Polyplectron exhibit in a dim condition, and chiefly on the tail, the splendid ocelli of their males.
The female partridge differs from the male only in the red mark on her breast being smaller; and the female wild turkey only in her colours being much duller.
In the guinea-fowl the two sexes are indistinguishable.
There is no improbability in the plain, though peculiarly spotted plumage of this latter bird having been acquired through sexual selection by the males, and then transmitted to both sexes; for it is not essentially different from the much more beautifully
It should be observed that, in some instances, the transference of characters from the male to the female has been effected apparently at a remote period, the male having subsequently undergone great changes, without transferring to the female any of his
For instance, the female and the young of the black-grouse (Tetrao tetrix) resemble pretty closely both sexes and the young of the red-grouse (T.
scoticus); and we may consequently infer that the black-grouse is descended from some ancient species, of which both sexes were coloured in nearly the same manner as the red-grouse.
As both sexes of this latter species are more distinctly barred during the breeding-season than at any other time, and as the male differs slightly from the female in his more strongly- pronounced red and brown tints (10.
Macgillivray, 'History of British Birds,' vol.
i.
pp.
172-174.
), we may conclude that his plumage has been influenced by sexual selection, at least to a certain extent.
If so, we may further infer that nearly similar plumage of the female black-grouse was similarly produced at some former period.
But since this period the male black-grouse has acquired his fine black plumage, with his forked and outwardly-curled tail-feathers; but of these characters there has hardly been any transference to the female, excepting that she shews in her tail a trace
We may therefore conclude that the females of distinct though allied species have often had their plumage rendered more or less different by the transference in various degrees of characters acquired by the males through sexual selection, both during
But it deserves especial attention that brilliant colours have been transferred much more rarely than other tints.
For instance, the male of the red-throated blue- breast (Cyanecula suecica) has a rich blue breast, including a sub- triangular red mark; now marks of nearly the same shape have been transferred to the female, but the central space is fulvous instead of
The Gallinaceae offer many analogous cases; for none of the species, such as partridges, quails, guinea-fowls, etc.
, in which the colours of the plumage have been largely transferred from the male to the female, are brilliantly coloured.
This is well exemplified with the pheasants, in which the male is generally so much more brilliant than the female; but with the Eared and Cheer pheasants (Crossoptilon auritum and Phasianus wallichii) the sexes closely resemble each other and their
We may go so far as to believe that if any part of the plumage in the males of these two pheasants had been brilliantly coloured, it would not have been transferred to the females.
These facts strongly support Mr. Wallace's view that with birds which are exposed to much danger during incubation, the transference of bright colours from the male to the female has been checked through natural selection.
We must not, however, forget that another explanation, before given, is possible; namely, that the males which varied and became bright, whilst they were young and inexperienced, would have been exposed to much danger, and would generally have been
Now variations occurring late in life tend to be transmitted exclusively to the same sex, so that in this case extremely bright tints would not have been transmitted to the females.
On the other hand, ornaments of a less conspicuous kind, such as those possessed by the Eared and Cheer pheasants, would not have been dangerous, and if they appeared during early youth, would generally have been transmitted to both sexes.
In addition to the effects of the partial transference of characters from the males to the females, some of the differences between the females of closely allied species may be attributed to the direct or definite action of the conditions of life.
(11.
See, on this subject, chap.
xxiii.
in the 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication.
') With the males, any such action would generally have been masked by the brilliant colours gained through sexual selection; but not so with the females.
Each of the endless diversities in plumage which we see in our domesticated birds is, of course, the result of some definite cause; and under natural and more uniform conditions, some one tint, assuming that it was in no way injurious, would almost
The free intercrossing of the many individuals belonging to the same species would ultimately tend to make any change of colour, thus induced, uniform in character.
No one doubts that both sexes of many birds have had their colours adapted for the sake of protection; and it is possible that the females alone of some species may have been modified for this end.
Although it would be a difficult, perhaps an impossible process, as shewn in the last chapter, to convert one form of transmission into another through selection, there would not be the least difficulty in adapting the colours of the female, independently
If the variations were not thus limited, the bright tints of the male would be deteriorated or destroyed.
Whether the females alone of many species have been thus specially modified, is at present very doubtful.
I wish I could follow Mr. Wallace to the full extent; for the admission would remove some difficulties.
Any variations which were of no service to the female as a protection would be at once obliterated, instead of being lost simply by not being selected, or from free intercrossing, or from being eliminated when transferred to the male and in any way
Thus the plumage of the female would be kept constant in character.
It would also be a relief if we could admit that the obscure tints of both sexes of many birds had been acquired and preserved for the sake of protection,--for example, of the hedge-warbler or kitty-wren (Accentor modularis and Troglodytes vulgaris), with
We ought, however, to be cautious in concluding that colours which appear to us dull, are not attractive to the females of certain species; we should bear in mind such cases as that of the common house-sparrow, in which the male differs much from the
No one probably will dispute that many gallinaceous birds which live on the open ground, have acquired their present colours, at least in part, for the sake of protection.
We know how well they are thus concealed; we know that ptarmigans, whilst changing from their winter to their summer plumage, both of which are protective, suffer greatly from birds of prey.
But can we believe that the very slight differences in tints and markings between, for instance, the female black-grouse and red-grouse serve as a protection?
Are partridges, as they are now coloured, better protected than if they had resembled quails?
Do the slight differences between the females of the common pheasant, the Japan and gold pheasants, serve as a protection, or might not their plumages have been interchanged with impunity?
From what Mr. Wallace has observed of the habits of certain gallinaceous birds in the East, he thinks that such slight differences are beneficial.
For myself, I will only say that I am not convinced.
Formerly when I was inclined to lay much stress on protection as accounting for the duller colours of female birds, it occurred to me that possibly both sexes and the young might aboriginally have been equally bright coloured; but that subsequently, the
But this view is not supported by any evidence, and is not probable; for we thus in imagination expose during past times the females and the young to danger, from which it has subsequently been necessary to shield their modified descendants.
We have, also, to reduce, through a gradual process of selection, the females and the young to almost exactly the same tints and markings, and to transmit them to the corresponding sex and period of life.
On the supposition that the females and the young have partaken during each stage of the process of modification of a tendency to be as brightly coloured as the males, it is also a somewhat strange fact that the females have never been rendered
A partial exception, however, is offered by the young of certain woodpeckers, for they have "the whole upper part of the head tinged with red," which afterwards either decreases into a mere circular red line in the adults of both sexes, or quite disappears
(12.
Audubon, 'Ornith.
Biography,' vol.
i.
p.
193.
Macgillivray, 'History of British Birds,' vol.
iii.
p.
85.
See also the case before given of Indopicus carlotta.
) Finally, with respect to our present class of cases, the most probable view appears to be that successive variations in brightness or in other ornamental characters, occurring in the males at a rather late period of life have alone been preserved; and
Any variations in brightness occurring in the females or in the young, would have been of no service to them, and would not have been selected; and moreover, if dangerous, would have been eliminated.
Thus the females and the young will either have been left unmodified, or (as is much more common) will have been partially modified by receiving through transference from the males some of his successive variations.
Both sexes have perhaps been directly acted on by the conditions of life to which they have long been exposed: but the females from not being otherwise much modified, will best exhibit any such effects.
These changes and all others will have been kept uniform by the free intercrossing of many individuals.
In some cases, especially with ground birds, the females and the young may possibly have been modified, independently of the males, for the sake of protection, so as to have acquired the same dull-coloured plumage.
CLASS II.
WHEN THE ADULT FEMALE IS MORE CONSPICUOUS THAN THE ADULT MALE, THE YOUNG OF BOTH SEXES IN THEIR FIRST PLUMAGE RESEMBLE THE ADULT MALE.
This class is exactly the reverse of the last, for the females are here brighter coloured or more conspicuous than the males; and the young, as far as they are known, resemble the adult males instead of the adult females.
But the difference between the sexes is never nearly so great as with many birds in the first class, and the cases are comparatively rare.
Mr. Wallace, who first called attention to the singular relation which exists between the less bright colours of the males and their performing the duties of incubation, lays great stress on this point (13.
'Westminster Review,' July 1867, and A. Murray, 'Journal of Travel,' 1868, p.
83.
), as a crucial test that obscure colours have been acquired for the sake of protection during the period of nesting.
A different view seems to me more probable.
As the cases are curious and not numerous, I will briefly give all that I have been able to find.
In one section of the genus Turnix, quail-like birds, the female is invariably larger than the male (being nearly twice as large in one of the Australian species), and this is an unusual circumstance with the Gallinaceae.
In most of the species the female is more distinctly coloured and brighter than the male (14.
For the Australian species, see Gould's 'Handbook,' etc.
, vol.
ii.
pp.
178, 180, 186, and 188.
In the British Museum specimens of the Australian Plain-wanderer (Pedionomus torquatus) may be seen, shewing similar sexual differences.
), but in some few species the sexes are alike.
In Turnix taigoor of India the male "wants the black on the throat and neck, and the whole tone of the plumage is lighter and less pronounced than that of the female".
The female appears to be noisier, and is certainly much more pugnacious than the male; so that the females and not the males are often kept by the natives for fighting, like game-cocks.
As male birds are exposed by the English bird-catchers for a decoy near a trap, in order to catch other males by exciting their rivalry, so the females of this Turnix are employed in India.
When thus exposed the females soon begin their "loud purring call, which can be heard a long way off, and any females within ear-shot run rapidly to the spot, and commence fighting with the caged bird".
In this way from twelve to twenty birds, all breeding females, may be caught in the course of a single day.
The natives assert that the females after laying their eggs associate in flocks, and leave the males to sit on them.
There is no reason to doubt the truth of this assertion, which is supported by some observations made in China by Mr. Swinhoe.
(15.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
596.
Mr. Swinhoe, in 'Ibis,' 1865, p.
542; 1866, pp.
131, 405.
) Mr. Blyth believes, that the young of both sexes resemble the adult male.
[Fig.
62.
Rhynchaea capensis (from Brehm).
] The females of the three species of Painted Snipes (Rhynchaea, Fig.
62) "are not only larger but much more richly coloured than the males".
(16.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
677.
) With all other birds in which the trachea differs in structure in the two sexes it is more developed and complex in the male than in the female; but in the Rhynchaea australis it is simple in the male, whilst in the female it makes four distinct
(17.
Gould's 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
ii.
p.
275.
) The female therefore of this species has acquired an eminently masculine character.
Mr. Blyth ascertained, by examining many specimens, that the trachea is not convoluted in either sex of R. bengalensis, which species resembles R. australis so closely, that it can hardly be distinguished except by its shorter toes.
This fact is another striking instance of the law that secondary sexual characters are often widely different in closely-allied forms, though it is a very rare circumstance when such differences relate to the female sex.
The young of both sexes of R. bengalensis in their first plumage are said to resemble the mature male.
(18.
'The Indian Field,' Sept.
1858, p.
3.
) There is also reason to believe that the male undertakes the duty of incubation, for Mr. Swinhoe (19.
'Ibis,' 1866, p.
298.
) found the females before the close of the summer associated in flocks, as occurs with the females of the Turnix.
The females of Phalaropus fulicarius and P. hyperboreus are larger, and in their summer plumage "more gaily attired than the males".
But the difference in colour between the sexes is far from conspicuous.
According to Professor Steenstrup, the male alone of P. fulicarius undertakes the duty of incubation; this is likewise shewn by the state of his breast- feathers during the breeding-season.
The female of the dotterel plover (Eudromias morinellus) is larger than the male, and has the red and black tints on the lower surface, the white crescent on the breast, and the stripes over the eyes, more strongly pronounced.
The male also takes at least a share in hatching the eggs; but the female likewise attends to the young.
(20.
For these several statements, see Mr. Gould's 'Birds of Great Britain.
' Prof.
Newton informs me that he has long been convinced, from his own observations and from those of others, that the males of the above- named species take either the whole or a large share of the duties of incubation, and that they "shew much greater devotion
So it is, as he informs me, with Limosa lapponica and some few other Waders, in which the females are larger and have more strongly contrasted colours than the males.
) I have not been able to discover whether with these species the young resemble the adult males more closely than the adult females; for the comparison is somewhat difficult to make on account of the double moult.
Turning now to the ostrich Order: the male of the common cassowary (Casuarius galeatus) would be thought by any one to be the female, from his smaller size and from the appendages and naked skin about his head being much less brightly coloured; and I am
(21.
The natives of Ceram (Wallace, 'Malay Archipelago,' vol.
ii.
p.
150) assert that the male and female sit alternately on the eggs; but this assertion, as Mr. Bartlett thinks, may be accounted for by the female visiting the nest to lay her eggs.
) The female is said by Mr. T.W. Wood (22.
The 'Student,' April 1870, p.
124.
) to exhibit during the breeding-season a most pugnacious disposition; and her wattles then become enlarged and more brilliantly coloured.
So again the female of one of the emus (Dromoeus irroratus) is considerably larger than the male, and she possesses a slight top-knot, but is otherwise indistinguishable in plumage.
She appears, however, "to have greater power, when angry or otherwise excited, of erecting, like a turkey-cock, the feathers of her neck and breast.
She is usually the more courageous and pugilistic.
She makes a deep hollow guttural boom especially at night, sounding like a small gong.
The male has a slenderer frame and is more docile, with no voice beyond a suppressed hiss when angry, or a croak".
He not only performs the whole duty of incubation, but has to defend the young from their mother; "for as soon as she catches sight of her progeny she becomes violently agitated, and notwithstanding the resistance of the father appears to use her utmost
For months afterwards it is unsafe to put the parents together, violent quarrels being the inevitable result, in which the female generally comes off conqueror".
(23.
See the excellent account of the habits of this bird under confinement, by Mr. A.W. Bennett, in 'Land and Water,' May 1868, p.
233.
) So that with this emu we have a complete reversal not only of the parental and incubating instincts, but of the usual moral qualities of the two sexes; the females being savage, quarrelsome, and noisy, the males gentle and good.
The case is very different with the African ostrich, for the male is somewhat larger than the female and has finer plumes with more strongly contrasted colours; nevertheless he undertakes the whole duty of incubation.
(24.
Mr. Sclater, on the incubation of the Struthiones, 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' June 9, 1863.
So it is with the Rhea darwinii: Captain Musters says ('At Home with the Patagonians,' 1871, p.
128), that the male is larger, stronger and swifter than the female, and of slightly darker colours; yet he takes sole charge of the eggs and of the young, just as does the male of the common species of Rhea.
) I will specify the few other cases known to me, in which the female is more conspicuously coloured than the male, although nothing is known about the manner of incubation.
With the carrion-hawk of the Falkland Islands (Milvago leucurus) I was much surprised to find by dissection that the individuals, which had all their tints strongly pronounced, with the cere and legs orange-coloured, were the adult females; whilst those
In an Australian tree- creeper (Climacteris erythrops) the female differs from the male in "being adorned with beautiful, radiated, rufous markings on the throat, the male having this part quite plain".
Lastly, in an Australian night-jar "the female always exceeds the male in size and in the brilliance of her tints; the males, on the other hand, have two white spots on the primaries more conspicuous than in the female".
(25.
For the Milvago, see 'Zoology of the Voyage of the "Beagle," Birds,' 1841, p.
16.
For the Climacteris and night-jar (Eurostopodus), see Gould's 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
pp.
602 and 97.
The New Zealand shieldrake (Tadorna variegata) offers a quite anomalous case; the head of the female is pure white, and her back is redder than that of the male; the head of the male is of a rich dark bronzed colour, and his back is clothed with finely
He is larger and more pugnacious than the female, and does not sit on the eggs.
So that in all these respects this species comes under our first class of cases; but Mr. Sclater ('Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' 1866, p.
150) was much surprised to observe that the young of both sexes, when about three months old, resembled in their dark heads and necks the adult males, instead of the adult females; so that it would appear in this case that the females have been modified,
) We thus see that the cases in which female birds are more conspicuously coloured than the males, with the young in their immature plumage resembling the adult males instead of the adult females, as in the previous class, are not numerous, though they are
The amount of difference, also, between the sexes is incomparably less than that which frequently occurs in the last class; so that the cause of the difference, whatever it may have been, has here acted on the females either less energetically or less
Mr. Wallace believes that the males have had their colours rendered less conspicuous for the sake of protection during the period of incubation; but the difference between the sexes in hardly any of the foregoing cases appears sufficiently great for this
In some of the cases, the brighter tints of the female are almost confined to the lower surface, and the males, if thus coloured, would not have been exposed to danger whilst sitting on the eggs.
It should also be borne in mind that the males are not only in a slight degree less conspicuously coloured than the females, but are smaller and weaker.
They have, moreover, not only acquired the maternal instinct of incubation, but are less pugnacious and vociferous than the females, and in one instance have simpler vocal organs.
Thus an almost complete transposition of the instincts, habits, disposition, colour, size, and of some points of structure, has been effected between the two sexes.
Now if we might assume that the males in the present class have lost some of that ardour which is usual to their sex, so that they no longer search eagerly for the females; or, if we might assume that the females have become much more numerous than the
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
598.
)--then it is not improbable that the females would have been led to court the males, instead of being courted by them.
This indeed is the case to a certain extent with some birds, as we have seen with the peahen, wild turkey, and certain kinds of grouse.
Taking as our guide the habits of most male birds, the greater size and strength as well as the extraordinary pugnacity of the females of the Turnix and emu, must mean that they endeavour to drive away rival females, in order to gain possession of the
Sexual selection would then do its work, steadily adding to the attractions of the females; the males and the young being left not at all, or but little modified.
CLASS III.
WHEN THE ADULT MALE RESEMBLES THE ADULT FEMALE, THE YOUNG OF BOTH SEXES HAVE A PECULIAR FIRST PLUMAGE OF THEIR OWN.
In this class the sexes when adult resemble each other, and differ from the young.
This occurs with many birds of many kinds.
The male robin can hardly be distinguished from the female, but the young are widely different, with their mottled dusky-olive and brown plumage.
The male and female of the splendid scarlet ibis are alike, whilst the young are brown; and the scarlet colour, though common to both sexes, is apparently a sexual character, for it is not well developed in either sex under confinement; and a loss of
With many species of herons the young differ greatly from the adults; and the summer plumage of the latter, though common to both sexes, clearly has a nuptial character.
Young swans are slate-coloured, whilst the mature birds are pure white; but it would be superfluous to give additional instances.
These differences between the young and the old apparently depend, as in the last two classes, on the young having retained a former or ancient state of plumage, whilst the old of both sexes have acquired a new one.
When the adults are bright coloured, we may conclude from the remarks just made in relation to the scarlet ibis and to many herons, and from the analogy of the species in the first class, that such colours have been acquired through sexual selection by the
Consequently, the sexes when mature resemble each other and differ from the young.
CLASS IV.
WHEN THE ADULT MALE RESEMBLES THE ADULT FEMALE, THE YOUNG OF BOTH SEXES IN THEIR FIRST PLUMAGE RESEMBLE THE ADULTS.
In this class the young and the adults of both sexes, whether brilliantly or obscurely coloured, resemble each other.
Such cases are, I think, more common than those in the last class.
We have in England instances in the kingfisher, some woodpeckers, the jay, magpie, crow, and many small dull- coloured birds, such as the hedge-warbler or kitty-wren.
But the similarity in plumage between the young and the old is never complete, and graduates away into dissimilarity.
Thus the young of some members of the kingfisher family are not only less vividly coloured than the adults, but many of the feathers on the lower surface are edged with brown (27.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
i.
pp.
222, 228.
Gould's 'Handbook to the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
pp.
124, 130.
),--a vestige probably of a former state of the plumage.
Frequently in the same group of birds, even within the same genus, for instance in an Australian genus of parrakeets (Platycercus), the young of some species closely resemble, whilst the young of other species differ considerably, from their parents of
(28.
Gould, ibid.
vol.
ii.
pp.
37, 46, 56.
) Both sexes and the young of the common jay are closely similar; but in the Canada jay (Perisoreus canadensis) the young differ so much from their parents that they were formerly described as distinct species.
(29.
Audubon, 'Ornith.
Biography,' vol.
ii.
p.
55.
) I may remark before proceeding that, under the present and next two classes of cases, the facts are so complex and the conclusions so doubtful, that any one who feels no especial interest in the subject had better pass them over.
The brilliant or conspicuous colours which characterise many birds in the present class, can rarely or never be of service to them as a protection; so that they have probably been gained by the males through sexual selection, and then transferred to the
It is, however, possible that the males may have selected the more attractive females; and if these transmitted their characters to their offspring of both sexes, the same results would follow as from the selection of the more attractive males by the
But there is evidence that this contingency has rarely, if ever, occurred in any of those groups of birds in which the sexes are generally alike; for, if even a few of the successive variations had failed to be transmitted to both sexes, the females would
Exactly the reverse occurs under nature; for, in almost every large group in which the sexes generally resemble each other, the males of some few species are in a slight degree more brightly coloured than the females.
It is again possible that the females may have selected the more beautiful males, these males having reciprocally selected the more beautiful females; but it is doubtful whether this double process of selection would be likely to occur, owing to the
It is, therefore, the most probable view that sexual selection has acted, in the present class, as far as ornamental characters are concerned, in accordance with the general rule throughout the animal kingdom, that is, on the males; and that these have
Another point is more doubtful, namely, whether the successive variations first appeared in the males after they had become nearly mature, or whilst quite young.
In either case sexual selection must have acted on the male when he had to compete with rivals for the possession of the female; and in both cases the characters thus acquired have been transmitted to both sexes and all ages.
But these characters if acquired by the males when adult, may have been transmitted at first to the adults alone, and at some subsequent period transferred to the young.
For it is known that, when the law of inheritance at corresponding ages fails, the offspring often inherit characters at an earlier age than that at which they first appeared in their parents.
(30.
'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
p.
79.
) Cases apparently of this kind have been observed with birds in a state of nature.
For instance Mr. Blyth has seen specimens of Lanius rufus and of Colymbus glacialis which had assumed whilst young, in a quite anomalous manner, the adult plumage of their parents.
(31.
'Charlesworth's Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
i.
1837, pp.
305, 306.
) Again, the young of the common swan (Cygnus olor) do not cast off their dark feathers and become white until eighteen months or two years old; but Dr. F. Forel has described the case of three vigorous young birds, out of a brood of four, which were born
These young birds were not albinos, as shewn by the colour of their beaks and legs, which nearly resembled the same parts in the adults.
(32.
'Bulletin de la Soc.
Vaudoise des Sc.
Nat.
' vol.
x.
1869, p.
132.
The young of the Polish swan, Cygnus immutabilis of Yarrell, are always white; but this species, as Mr. Sclater informs me, is believed to be nothing more than a variety of the domestic swan (Cygnus olor).
) It may be worth while to illustrate the above three modes by which, in the present class, the two sexes and the young may have come to resemble each other, by the curious case of the genus Passer.
(33.
I am indebted to Mr. Blyth for information in regard to this genus.
The sparrow of Palestine belongs to the sub-genus Petronia.
) In the house-sparrow (P.
domesticus) the male differs much from the female and from the young.
The young and the females are alike, and resemble to a large extent both sexes and the young of the sparrow of Palestine (P.
brachydactylus), as well as of some allied species.
We may therefore assume that the female and young of the house-sparrow approximately shew us the plumage of the progenitor of the genus.
Now with the tree-sparrow (P.
montanus) both sexes and the young closely resemble the male of the house-sparrow; so that they have all been modified in the same manner, and all depart from the typical colouring of their early progenitor.
This may have been effected by a male ancestor of the tree-sparrow having varied, firstly, when nearly mature; or, secondly, whilst quite young, and by having in either case transmitted his modified plumage to the females and the young; or, thirdly, he may
It is impossible to decide which of these three modes has generally prevailed throughout the present class of cases.
That the males varied whilst young, and transmitted their variations to their offspring of both sexes, is the most probable.
I may here add that I have, with little success, endeavoured, by consulting various works, to decide how far the period of variation in birds has generally determined the transmission of characters to one sex or to both.
The two rules, often referred to (namely, that variations occurring late in life are transmitted to one and the same sex, whilst those which occur early in life are transmitted to both sexes), apparently hold good in the first (34.
For instance, the males of Tanagra aestiva and Fringilla cyanea require three years, the male of Fringilla ciris four years, to complete their beautiful plumage.
(See Audubon, 'Ornith.
Biography,' vol.
i.
pp.
233, 280, 378).
The Harlequin duck takes three years (ibid.
vol.
iii.
p.
614).
The male of the Gold pheasant, as I hear from Mr. Jenner Weir, can be distinguished from the female when about three months old, but he does not acquire his full splendour until the end of the September in the following year.
), second, and fourth classes of cases; but they fail in the third, often in the fifth (35.
Thus the Ibis tantalus and Grus americanus take four years, the Flamingo several years, and the Ardea ludovicana two years, before they acquire their perfect plumage.
See Audubon, ibid.
vol.
i.
p.
221; vol.
iii.
pp.
133, 139, 211.
), and in the sixth small class.
They apply, however, as far as I can judge, to a considerable majority of the species; and we must not forget the striking generalisation by Dr. W. Marshall with respect to the protuberances on the heads of birds.
Whether or not the two rules generally hold good, we may conclude from the facts given in the eighth chapter, that the period of variation is one important element in determining the form of transmission.
With birds it is difficult to decide by what standard we ought to judge of the earliness or lateness of the period of variation, whether by the age in reference to the duration of life, or to the power of reproduction, or to the number of moults through
The moulting of birds, even within the same family, sometimes differs much without any assignable cause.
Some birds moult so early, that nearly all the body feathers are cast off before the first wing-feathers are fully grown; and we cannot believe that this was the primordial state of things.
When the period of moulting has been accelerated, the age at which the colours of the adult plumage are first developed will falsely appear to us to be earlier than it really is.
This may be illustrated by the practice followed by some bird-fanciers, who pull out a few feathers from the breast of nestling bullfinches, and from the head or neck of young gold-pheasants, in order to ascertain their sex; for in the males, these
(36.
Mr. Blyth, in Charlesworth's 'Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
i.
1837, p.
300.
Mr. Bartlett has informed me in regard to gold pheasants.
) The actual duration of life is known in but few birds, so that we can hardly judge by this standard.
And, with reference to the period at which the power of reproduction is gained, it is a remarkable fact that various birds occasionally breed whilst retaining their immature plumage.
(37.
I have noticed the following cases in Audubon's 'Ornith.
Biography.
' The redstart of America (Muscapica ruticilla, vol.
i.
p.
203).
The Ibis tantalus takes four years to come to full maturity, but sometimes breeds in the second year (vol.
iii.
p.
133).
The Grus americanus takes the same time, but breeds before acquiring its full plumage (vol.
iii.
p.
211).
The adults of Ardea caerulea are blue, and the young white; and white, mottled, and mature blue birds may all be seen breeding together (vol.
iv.
p.
58): but Mr. Blyth informs me that certain herons apparently are dimorphic, for white and coloured individuals of the same age may be observed.
The Harlequin duck (Anas histrionica, Linn.
) takes three years to acquire its full plumage, though many birds breed in the second year (vol.
iii.
p.
614).
The White-headed Eagle (Falco leucocephalus, vol.
iii.
p.
210) is likewise known to breed in its immature state.
Some species of Oriolus (according to Mr. Blyth and Mr. Swinhoe, in 'Ibis,' July 1863, p.
68) likewise breed before they attain their full plumage.
) The fact of birds breeding in their immature plumage seems opposed to the belief that sexual selection has played as important a part, as I believe it has, in giving ornamental colours, plumes, etc.
, to the males, and, by means of equal transmission, to the females of many species.
The objection would be a valid one, if the younger and less ornamented males were as successful in winning females and propagating their kind, as the older and more beautiful males.
But we have no reason to suppose that this is the case.
Audubon speaks of the breeding of the immature males of Ibis tantalus as a rare event, as does Mr. Swinhoe, in regard to the immature males of Oriolus.
(38.
See footnote 37 above.
) If the young of any species in their immature plumage were more successful in winning partners than the adults, the adult plumage would probably soon be lost, as the males would prevail, which retained their immature dress for the longest period, and
(39.
Other animals, belonging to quite distinct classes, are either habitually or occasionally capable of breeding before they have fully acquired their adult characters.
This is the case with the young males of the salmon.
Several amphibians have been known to breed whilst retaining their larval structure.
Fritz Mller has shewn ('Facts and arguments for Darwin,' Eng.
trans.
1869, p.
79) that the males of several amphipod crustaceans become sexually mature whilst young; and I infer that this is a case of premature breeding, because they have not as yet acquired their fully-developed claspers.
All such facts are highly interesting, as bearing on one means by which species may undergo great modifications of character.
) If, on the other hand, the young never succeeded in obtaining a female, the habit of early reproduction would perhaps be sooner or later eliminated, from being superfluous and entailing waste of power.
The plumage of certain birds goes on increasing in beauty during many years after they are fully mature; this is the case with the train of the peacock, with some of the birds of paradise, and with the crest and plumes of certain herons, for instance, the
(40.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
507, on the peacock.
Dr. Marshall thinks that the older and more brilliant males of birds of paradise, have an advantage over the younger males; see 'Archives Neerlandaises,' tom.
vi.
1871.
--On Ardea, Audubon, ibid.
vol.
iii.
p.
139.
) But it is doubtful whether the continued development of such feathers is the result of the selection of successive beneficial variations (though this is the most probable view with birds of paradise) or merely of continuous growth.
Most fishes continue increasing in size, as long as they are in good health and have plenty of food; and a somewhat similar law may prevail with the plumes of birds.
CLASS V. WHEN THE ADULTS OF BOTH SEXES HAVE A DISTINCT WINTER AND SUMMER PLUMAGE, WHETHER OR NOT THE MALE DIFFERS FROM THE FEMALE, THE YOUNG RESEMBLE THE ADULTS OF BOTH SEXES IN THEIR WINTER DRESS, OR MUCH MORE RARELY IN THEIR SUMMER DRESS, OR THEY
OR THE YOUNG MAY HAVE AN INTERMEDIATE CHARACTER; OR, AGAIN, THEY MAY DIFFER GREATLY FROM THE ADULTS IN BOTH THEIR SEASONAL PLUMAGES.
The cases in this class are singularly complex; nor is this surprising, as they depend on inheritance, limited in a greater or less degree in three different ways, namely, by sex, age, and the season of the year.
In some cases the individuals of the same species pass through at least five distinct states of plumage.
With the species, in which the male differs from the female during the summer season alone, or, which is rarer, during both seasons (41.
For illustrative cases, see vol.
iv.
of Macgillivray's 'History of British Birds;' on Tringa, etc.
, pp.
229, 271; on the Machetes, p.
172; on the Charadrius hiaticula, p.
118; on the Charadrius pluvialis, p.
94.
), the young generally resemble the females,--as with the so-called goldfinch of North America, and apparently with the splendid Maluri of Australia.
(42.
For the goldfinch of N. America, Fringilla tristis, Linn.
, see Audubon, 'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
i.
p.
172.
For the Maluri, Gould's 'Handbook of the Birds of Australia,' vol.
i.
p.
318.
) With those species, the sexes of which are alike during both the summer and winter, the young may resemble the adults, firstly, in their winter dress; secondly, and this is of much rarer occurrence, in their summer dress; thirdly, they may be
We have an instance of the first of these four cases in one of the egrets of India (Buphus coromandus), in which the young and the adults of both sexes are white during the winter, the adults becoming golden-buff during the summer.
With the gaper (Anastomus oscitans) of India we have a similar case, but the colours are reversed: for the young and the adults of both sexes are grey and black during the winter, the adults becoming white during the summer.
(43.
I am indebted to Mr. Blyth for information as to the Buphus; see also Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
iii.
p.
749.
On the Anastomus, see Blyth, in 'Ibis,' 1867, p.
173.
) As an instance of the second case, the young of the razor-bill (Alca torda, Linn.
), in an early state of plumage, are coloured like the adults during the summer; and the young of the white- crowned sparrow of North America (Fringilla leucophrys), as soon as fledged, have elegant white stripes on their heads, which are lost by the young
(44.
On the Alca, see Macgillivray, 'Hist.
Brit.
Birds,' vol.
v.
p.
347.
On the Fringilla leucophrys, Audubon, ibid.
vol.
ii.
p.
89.
I shall have hereafter to refer to the young of certain herons and egrets being white.
) With respect to the third case, namely, that of the young having an intermediate character between the summer and winter adult plumages, Yarrell (45.
'History of British Birds,' vol.
i.
1839, p.
159.
) insists that this occurs with many waders.
Lastly, in regard to the young differing greatly from both sexes in their adult summer and winter plumages, this occurs with some herons and egrets of North America and India,--the young alone being white.
I will make only a few remarks on these complicated cases.
When the young resemble the females in their summer dress, or the adults of both sexes in their winter dress, the cases differ from those given under Classes I. and III.
only in the characters originally acquired by the males during the breeding-season, having been limited in their transmission to the corresponding season.
When the adults have a distinct summer and winter plumage, and the young differ from both, the case is more difficult to understand.
We may admit as probable that the young have retained an ancient state of plumage; we can account by sexual selection for the summer or nuptial plumage of the adults, but how are we to account for their distinct winter plumage?
If we could admit that this plumage serves in all cases as a protection, its acquirement would be a simple affair; but there seems no good reason for this admission.
It may be suggested that the widely different conditions of life during the winter and summer have acted in a direct manner on the plumage; this may have had some effect, but I have not much confidence in so great a difference as we sometimes see between
A more probable explanation is, that an ancient style of plumage, partially modified through the transference of some characters from the summer plumage, has been retained by the adults during the winter.
Finally, all the cases in our present class apparently depend on characters acquired by the adult males, having been variously limited in their transmission according to age, season, and sex; but it would not be worth while to attempt to follow out these
CLASS VI.
THE YOUNG IN THEIR FIRST PLUMAGE DIFFER FROM EACH OTHER ACCORDING TO SEX; THE YOUNG MALES RESEMBLING MORE OR LESS CLOSELY THE ADULT MALES, AND THE YOUNG FEMALES MORE OR LESS CLOSELY THE ADULT FEMALES.
The cases in the present class, though occurring in various groups, are not numerous; yet it seems the most natural thing that the young should at first somewhat resemble the adults of the same sex, and gradually become more and more like them.
The adult male blackcap (Sylvia atricapilla) has a black head, that of the female being reddish-brown; and I am informed by Mr. Blyth, that the young of both sexes can be distinguished by this character even as nestlings.
In the family of thrushes an unusual number of similar cases have been noticed; thus, the male blackbird (Turdus merula) can be distinguished in the nest from the female.
The two sexes of the mocking bird (Turdus polyglottus, Linn.
) differ very little from each other, yet the males can easily be distinguished at a very early age from the females by showing more pure white.
(46.
Audubon, 'Ornith.
Biography,' vol.
i.
p.
113.
) The males of a forest-thrush and of a rock- thrush (Orocetes erythrogastra and Petrocincla cyanea) have much of their plumage of a fine blue, whilst the females are brown; and the nestling males of both species have their main wing and tail-feathers
(47.
Mr. C.A. Wright, in 'Ibis,' vol.
vi.
1864, p.
65.
Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
i.
p.
515.
See also on the blackbird, Blyth in Charlesworth's 'Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
i.
1837, p.
113.
) In the young blackbird the wing- feathers assume their mature character and become black after the others; on the other hand, in the two species just named the wing-feathers become blue before the others.
The most probable view with reference to the cases in the present class is that the males, differently from what occurs in Class I., have transmitted their colours to their male offspring at an earlier age than that at which they were first acquired; for,
(48.
The following additional cases may be mentioned; the young males of Tanagra rubra can be distinguished from the young females (Audubon, 'Ornith.
Biography,' vol.
iv.
p.
392), and so it is within the nestlings of a blue nuthatch, Dendrophila frontalis of India (Jerdon, 'Birds of India,' vol.
i.
p.
389).
Mr. Blyth also informs me that the sexes of the stonechat, Saxicola rubicola, are distinguishable at a very early age.
Mr. Salvin gives ('Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1870, p.
206) the case of a humming-bird, like the following one of Eustephanus.
) In Aithurus polytmus, a humming-bird, the male is splendidly coloured black and green, and two of the tail-feathers are immensely lengthened; the female has an ordinary tail and inconspicuous colours; now the young males, instead of resembling the adult
I owe this information to Mr. Gould, who has given me the following more striking and as yet unpublished case.
Two humming-birds belonging to the genus Eustephanus, both beautifully coloured, inhabit the small island of Juan Fernandez, and have always been ranked as specifically distinct.
But it has lately been ascertained that the one which is of a rich chestnut-brown colour with a golden-red head, is the male, whilst the other which is elegantly variegated with green and white with a metallic green head is the female.
Now the young from the first somewhat resemble the adults of the corresponding sex, the resemblance gradually becoming more and more complete.
In considering this last case, if as before we take the plumage of the young as our guide, it would appear that both sexes have been rendered beautiful independently; and not that one sex has partially transferred its beauty to the other.
The male apparently has acquired his bright colours through sexual selection in the same manner as, for instance, the peacock or pheasant in our first class of cases; and the female in the same manner as the female Rhynchaea or Turnix in our second class
But there is much difficulty in understanding how this could have been effected at the same time with the two sexes of the same species.
Mr. Salvin states, as we have seen in the eighth chapter, that with certain humming-birds the males greatly exceed the females in number, whilst with other species inhabiting the same country the females greatly exceed the males.
If, then, we might assume that during some former lengthened period the males of the Juan Fernandez species had greatly exceeded the females in number, but that during another lengthened period the females had far exceeded the males, we could understand
Whether this is the true explanation I will not pretend to say; but the case is too remarkable to be passed over without notice.
We have now seen in all six classes, that an intimate relation exists between the plumage of the young and the adults, either of one sex or both.
These relations are fairly well explained on the principle that one sex-- this being in the great majority of cases the male--first acquired through variation and sexual selection bright colours or other ornaments, and transmitted them in various ways, in
Why variations have occurred at different periods of life, even sometimes with species of the same group, we do not know, but with respect to the form of transmission, one important determining cause seems to be the age at which the variations first
From the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages, and from any variations in colour which occurred in the males at an early age not being then selected--on the contrary being often eliminated as dangerous--whilst similar variations occurring at or
We thus get some insight into the colouring of the progenitors of our existing species.
In a vast number of species in five out of our six classes of cases, the adults of one sex or of both are bright coloured, at least during the breeding- season, whilst the young are invariably less brightly coloured than the adults, or are quite dull
In the fourth class, however, in which the young and the old resemble each other, there are many species (though by no means all), of which the young are bright-coloured, and as these form old groups, we may infer that their early progenitors were likewise
With this exception, if we look to the birds of the world, it appears that their beauty has been much increased since that period, of which their immature plumage gives us a partial record.
ON THE COLOUR OF THE PLUMAGE IN RELATION TO PROTECTION.
It will have been seen that I cannot follow Mr. Wallace in the belief that dull colours, when confined to the females, have been in most cases specially gained for the sake of protection.
There can, however, be no doubt, as formerly remarked, that both sexes of many birds have had their colours modified, so as to escape the notice of their enemies; or in some instances, so as to approach their prey unobserved, just as owls have had their
Mr. Wallace remarks (49.
'Westminster Review,' July 1867, p.
5.
) that "it is only in the tropics, among forests which never lose their foliage, that we find whole groups of birds, whose chief colour is green".
It will be admitted by every one, who has ever tried, how difficult it is to distinguish parrots in a leaf-covered tree.
Nevertheless, we must remember that many parrots are ornamented with crimson, blue, and orange tints, which can hardly be protective.
Woodpeckers are eminently arboreal, but besides green species, there are many black, and black-and-white kinds--all the species being apparently exposed to nearly the same dangers.
It is therefore probable that with tree-haunting birds, strongly-pronounced colours have been acquired through sexual selection, but that a green tint has been acquired oftener than any other, from the additional advantage of protection.
In regard to birds which live on the ground, every one admits that they are coloured so as to imitate the surrounding surface.
How difficult it is to see a partridge, snipe, woodcock, certain plovers, larks, and night-jars when crouched on ground.
Animals inhabiting deserts offer the most striking cases, for the bare surface affords no concealment, and nearly all the smaller quadrupeds, reptiles, and birds depend for safety on their colours.
Mr. Tristram has remarked in regard to the inhabitants of the Sahara, that all are protected by their "isabelline or sand-colour".
(50.
'Ibis,' 1859, vol.
i.
p.
429, et seq.
Dr. Rohlfs, however, remarks to me in a letter that according to his experience of the Sahara, this statement is too strong.
) Calling to my recollection the desert-birds of South America, as well as most of the ground-birds of Great Britain, it appeared to me that both sexes in such cases are generally coloured nearly alike.
Accordingly, I applied to Mr. Tristram with respect to the birds of the Sahara, and he has kindly given me the following information.
There are twenty-six species belonging to fifteen genera, which manifestly have their plumage coloured in a protective manner; and this colouring is all the more striking, as with most of these birds it differs from that of their congeners.
Both sexes of thirteen out of the twenty-six species are coloured in the same manner; but these belong to genera in which this rule commonly prevails, so that they tell us nothing about the protective colours being the same in both sexes of desert-birds.
Of the other thirteen species, three belong to genera in which the sexes usually differ from each other, yet here they have the sexes alike.
In the remaining ten species, the male differs from the female; but the difference is confined chiefly to the under surface of the plumage, which is concealed when the bird crouches on the ground; the head and back being of the same sand- coloured hue in
So that in these ten species the upper surfaces of both sexes have been acted on and rendered alike, through natural selection, for the sake of protection; whilst the lower surfaces of the males alone have been diversified, through sexual selection, for
Here, as both sexes are equally well protected, we clearly see that the females have not been prevented by natural selection from inheriting the colours of their male parents; so that we must look to the law of sexually-limited transmission.
In all parts of the world both sexes of many soft-billed birds, especially those which frequent reeds or sedges, are obscurely coloured.
No doubt if their colours had been brilliant, they would have been much more conspicuous to their enemies; but whether their dull tints have been specially gained for the sake of protection seems, as far as I can judge, rather doubtful.
It is still more doubtful whether such dull tints can have been gained for the sake of ornament.
We must, however, bear in mind that male birds, though dull-coloured, often differ much from their females (as with the common sparrow), and this leads to the belief that such colours have been gained through sexual selection, from being attractive.
Many of the soft-billed birds are songsters; and a discussion in a former chapter should not be forgotten, in which it was shewn that the best songsters are rarely ornamented with bright tints.
It would appear that female birds, as a general rule, have selected their mates either for their sweet voices or gay colours, but not for both charms combined.
Some species, which are manifestly coloured for the sake of protection, such as the jack-snipe, woodcock, and night-jar, are likewise marked and shaded, according to our standard of taste, with extreme elegance.
In such cases we may conclude that both natural and sexual selection have acted conjointly for protection and ornament.
Whether any bird exists which does not possess some special attraction, by which to charm the opposite sex, may be doubted.
When both sexes are so obscurely coloured that it would be rash to assume the agency of sexual selection, and when no direct evidence can be advanced shewing that such colours serve as a protection, it is best to own complete ignorance of the cause, or,
Both sexes of many birds are conspicuously, though not brilliantly coloured, such as the numerous black, white, or piebald species; and these colours are probably the result of sexual selection.
With the common blackbird, capercailzie, blackcock, black scoter-duck (Oidemia), and even with one of the birds of paradise (Lophorina atra), the males alone are black, whilst the females are brown or mottled; and there can hardly be a doubt that blackness
Therefore it is in some degree probable that the complete or partial blackness of both sexes in such birds as crows, certain cockatoos, storks, and swans, and many marine birds, is likewise the result of sexual selection, accompanied by equal transmission
With several birds, in which the male alone is black, and in others in which both sexes are black, the beak or skin about the head is brightly coloured, and the contrast thus afforded adds much to their beauty; we see this in the bright yellow beak of the
), of the black swan, and the black stork.
This leads me to remark that it is not incredible that toucans may owe the enormous size of their beaks to sexual selection, for the sake of displaying the diversified and vivid stripes of colour, with which these organs are ornamented.
(51.
No satisfactory explanation has ever been offered of the immense size, and still less of the bright colours, of the toucan's beak.
Mr. Bates ('The Naturalist on the Amazons,' vol.
ii.
1863, p.
341) states that they use their beaks for reaching fruit at the extreme tips of the branches; and likewise, as stated by other authors, for extracting eggs and young birds from the nests of other birds.
But, as Mr. Bates admits, the beak "can scarcely be considered a very perfectly-formed instrument for the end to which it is applied".
The great bulk of the beak, as shewn by its breadth, depth, as well as length, is not intelligible on the view, that it serves merely as an organ of prehension.
Mr. Belt believes ('The Naturalist in Nicaragua,' p.
197) that the principal use of the beak is as a defence against enemies, especially to the female whilst nesting in a hole in a tree.
) The naked skin, also, at the base of the beak and round the eyes is likewise often brilliantly coloured; and Mr. Gould, in speaking of one species (52.
Rhamphastos carinatus, Gould's 'Monograph of Ramphastidae.
'), says that the colours of the beak "are doubtless in the finest and most brilliant state during the time of pairing".
There is no greater improbability that toucans should be encumbered with immense beaks, though rendered as light as possible by their cancellated structure, for the display of fine colours (an object falsely appearing to us unimportant), than that the male
In the same manner, as the males alone of various species are black, the females being dull-coloured; so in a few cases the males alone are either wholly or partially white, as with the several bell-birds of South America (Chasmorhynchus), the Antarctic
, whilst the females are brown or obscurely mottled.
Therefore, on the same principle as before, it is probable that both sexes of many birds, such as white cockatoos, several egrets with their beautiful plumes, certain ibises, gulls, terns, etc.
, have acquired their more or less completely white plumage through sexual selection.
In some of these cases the plumage becomes white only at maturity.
This is the case with certain gannets, tropic-birds, etc.
, and with the snow-goose (Anser hyperboreus).
As the latter breeds on the "barren grounds," when not covered with snow, and as it migrates southward during the winter, there is no reason to suppose that its snow-white adult plumage serves as a protection.
In the Anastomus oscitans, we have still better evidence that the white plumage is a nuptial character, for it is developed only during the summer; the young in their immature state, and the adults in their winter dress, being grey and black.
With many kinds of gulls (Larus), the head and neck become pure white during the summer, being grey or mottled during the winter and in the young state.
On the other hand, with the smaller gulls, or sea-mews (Gavia), and with some terns (Sterna), exactly the reverse occurs; for the heads of the young birds during the first year, and of the adults during the winter, are either pure white, or much paler
These latter cases offer another instance of the capricious manner in which sexual selection appears often to have acted.
(53.
On Larus, Gavia, and Sterna, see Macgillivray, 'History of British Birds,' vol.
v.
pp.
515, 584, 626.
On the Anser hyperboreus, Audubon, 'Ornithological Biography,' vol.
iv.
p.
562.
On the Anastomus, Mr. Blyth, in 'Ibis,' 1867, p.
173.
) That aquatic birds have acquired a white plumage so much oftener than terrestrial birds, probably depends on their large size and strong powers of flight, so that they can easily defend themselves or escape from birds of prey, to which moreover they are
Consequently, sexual selection has not here been interfered with or guided for the sake of protection.
No doubt with birds which roam over the open ocean, the males and females could find each other much more easily, when made conspicuous either by being perfectly white or intensely black; so that these colours may possibly serve the same end as the
(54.
It may be noticed that with vultures, which roam far and wide high in the air, like marine birds over the ocean, three or four species are almost wholly or largely white, and that many others are black.
So that here again conspicuous colours may possibly aid the sexes in finding each other during the breeding-season.
) A white or black bird when it discovers and flies down to a carcase floating on the sea or cast up on the beach, will be seen from a great distance, and will guide other birds of the same and other species, to the prey; but as this would be a
Hence conspicuous colours cannot have been gradually acquired for this purpose through natural selection.
As sexual selection depends on so fluctuating an element as taste, we can understand how it is that, within the same group of birds having nearly the same habits, there should exist white or nearly white, as well as black, or nearly black species,--for
Piebald birds likewise sometimes occur in the same groups together with black and white species; for instance, the black-necked swan, certain terns, and the common magpie.
That a strong contrast in colour is agreeable to birds, we may conclude by looking through any large collection, for the sexes often differ from each other in the male having the pale parts of a purer white, and the variously coloured dark parts of still
It would even appear that mere novelty, or slight changes for the sake of change, have sometimes acted on female birds as a charm, like changes of fashion with us.
Thus the males of some parrots can hardly be said to be more beautiful than the females, at least according to our taste, but they differ in such points, as in having a rose-coloured collar instead of "a bright emeraldine narrow green collar"; or in the
(55.
See Jerdon on the genus Palaeornis, 'Birds of India,' vol.
i.
pp.
258-260.
) As so many male birds have elongated tail-feathers or elongated crests for their chief ornament, the shortened tail, formerly described in the male of a humming-bird, and the shortened crest of the male goosander, seem like one of the many changes of
Some members of the heron family offer a still more curious case of novelty in colouring having, as it appears, been appreciated for the sake of novelty.
The young of the Ardea asha are white, the adults being dark slate-coloured; and not only the young, but the adults in their winter plumage, of the allied Buphus coromandus are white, this colour changing into a rich golden-buff during the breeding-season.
It is incredible that the young of these two species, as well as of some other members of the same family (56.
The young of Ardea rufescens and A. caerulea of the United States are likewise white, the adults being coloured in accordance with their specific names.
Audubon ('Ornithological Biography,' vol.
iii.
p.
416; vol.
iv.
p.
58) seems rather pleased at the thought that this remarkable change of plumage will greatly "disconcert the systematists".
), should for any special purpose have been rendered pure white and thus made conspicuous to their enemies; or that the adults of one of these two species should have been specially rendered white during the winter in a country which is never covered with
On the other hand we have good reason to believe that whiteness has been gained by many birds as a sexual ornament.
We may therefore conclude that some early progenitor of the Ardea asha and the Buphus acquired a white plumage for nuptial purposes, and transmitted this colour to their young; so that the young and the old became white like certain existing egrets; and
But if we could look still further back to the still earlier progenitors of these two species, we should probably see the adults dark-coloured.
I infer that this would be the case, from the analogy of many other birds, which are dark whilst young, and when adult are white; and more especially from the case of the Ardea gularis, the colours of which are the reverse of those of A. asha, for the
It appears therefore that, during a long line of descent, the adult progenitors of the Ardea asha, the Buphus, and of some allies, have undergone the following changes of colour: first, a dark shade; secondly, pure white; and thirdly, owing to another
These successive changes are intelligible only on the principle of novelty having been admired by birds for its own sake.
Several writers have objected to the whole theory of sexual selection, by assuming that with animals and savages the taste of the female for certain colours or other ornaments would not remain constant for many generations; that first one colour and then
We may admit that taste is fluctuating, but it is not quite arbitrary.
It depends much on habit, as we see in mankind; and we may infer that this would hold good with birds and other animals.
Even in our own dress, the general character lasts long, and the changes are to a certain extent graduated.
Abundant evidence will be given in two places in a future chapter, that savages of many races have admired for many generations the same cicatrices on the skin, the same hideously perforated lips, nostrils, or ears, distorted heads, etc.
; and these deformities present some analogy to the natural ornaments of various animals.
Nevertheless, with savages such fashions do not endure for ever, as we may infer from the differences in this respect between allied tribes on the same continent.
So again the raisers of fancy animals certainly have admired for many generations and still admire the same breeds; they earnestly desire slight changes, which are considered as improvements, but any great or sudden change is looked at as the greatest
With birds in a state of nature we have no reason to suppose that they would admire an entirely new style of coloration, even if great and sudden variations often occurred, which is far from being the case.
We know that dovecot pigeons do not willingly associate with the variously coloured fancy breeds; that albino birds do not commonly get partners in marriage; and that the black ravens of the Feroe Islands chase away their piebald brethren.
But this dislike of a sudden change would not preclude their appreciating slight changes, any more than it does in the case of man.
Hence with respect to taste, which depends on many elements, but partly on habit and partly on a love of novelty, there seems no improbability in animals admiring for a very long period the same general style of ornamentation or other attractions, and yet
SUMMARY OF THE FOUR CHAPTERS ON BIRDS.
Most male birds are highly pugnacious during the breeding-season, and some possess weapons adapted for fighting with their rivals.
But the most pugnacious and the best armed males rarely or never depend for success solely on their power to drive away or kill their rivals, but have special means for charming the female.
With some it is the power of song, or of giving forth strange cries, or instrumental music, and the males in consequence differ from the females in their vocal organs, or in the structure of certain feathers.
From the curiously diversified means for producing various sounds, we gain a high idea of the importance of this means of courtship.
Many birds endeavour to charm the females by love- dances or antics, performed on the ground or in the air, and sometimes at prepared places.
But ornaments of many kinds, the most brilliant tints, combs and wattles, beautiful plumes, elongated feathers, top-knots, and so forth, are by far the commonest means.
In some cases mere novelty appears to have acted as a charm.
The ornaments of the males must be highly important to them, for they have been acquired in not a few cases at the cost of increased danger from enemies, and even at some loss of power in fighting with their rivals.
The males of very many species do not assume their ornamental dress until they arrive at maturity, or they assume it only during the breeding-season, or the tints then become more vivid.
Certain ornamental appendages become enlarged, turgid, and brightly coloured during the act of courtship.
The males display their charms with elaborate care and to the best effect; and this is done in the presence of the females.
The courtship is sometimes a prolonged affair, and many males and females congregate at an appointed place.
To suppose that the females do not appreciate the beauty of the males, is to admit that their splendid decorations, all their pomp and display, are useless; and this is incredible.
Birds have fine powers of discrimination, and in some few instances it can be shewn that they have a taste for the beautiful.
The females, moreover, are known occasionally to exhibit a marked preference or antipathy for certain individual males.
If it be admitted that the females prefer, or are unconsciously excited by the more beautiful males, then the males would slowly but surely be rendered more and more attractive through sexual selection.
That it is this sex which has been chiefly modified, we may infer from the fact that, in almost every genus where the sexes differ, the males differ much more from one another than do the females; this is well shewn in certain closely-allied representative
Birds in a state of nature offer individual differences which would amply suffice for the work of sexual selection; but we have seen that they occasionally present more strongly marked variations which recur so frequently that they would immediately be
The laws of variation must determine the nature of the initial changes, and will have largely influenced the final result.
The gradations, which may be observed between the males of allied species, indicate the nature of the steps through which they have passed.
They explain also in the most interesting manner how certain characters have originated, such as the indented ocelli on the tail-feathers of the peacock, and the ball-and-socket ocelli on the wing-feathers of the Argus pheasant.
It is evident that the brilliant colours, top-knots, fine plumes, etc.
, of many male birds cannot have been acquired as a protection; indeed, they sometimes lead to danger.
That they are not due to the direct and definite action of the conditions of life, we may feel assured, because the females have been exposed to the same conditions, and yet often differ from the males to an extreme degree.
Although it is probable that changed conditions acting during a lengthened period have in some cases produced a definite effect on both sexes, or sometimes on one sex alone, the more important result will have been an increased tendency to vary or to
The laws of inheritance, irrespectively of selection, appear to have determined whether the characters acquired by the males for the sake of ornament, for producing various sounds, and for fighting together, have been transmitted to the males alone or to
Why various characters should have been transmitted sometimes in one way and sometimes in another, is not in most cases known; but the period of variability seems often to have been the determining cause.
When the two sexes have inherited all characters in common they necessarily resemble each other; but as the successive variations may be differently transmitted, every possible gradation may be found, even within the same genus, from the closest similarity
With many closely-allied species, following nearly the same habits of life, the males have come to differ from each other chiefly through the action of sexual selection; whilst the females have come to differ chiefly from partaking more or less of the
The effects, moreover, of the definite action of the conditions of life, will not have been masked in the females, as in the males, by the accumulation through sexual selection of strongly-pronounced colours and other ornaments.
The individuals of both sexes, however affected, will have been kept at each successive period nearly uniform by the free intercrossing of many individuals.
With species, in which the sexes differ in colour, it is possible or probable that some of the successive variations often tended to be transmitted equally to both sexes; but that when this occurred the females were prevented from acquiring the bright
There is no evidence that it is possible by natural selection to convert one form of transmission into another.
But there would not be the least difficulty in rendering a female dull-coloured, the male being still kept bright- coloured, by the selection of successive variations, which were from the first limited in their transmission to the same sex.
Whether the females of many species have actually been thus modified, must at present remain doubtful.
When, through the law of the equal transmission of characters to both sexes, the females were rendered as conspicuously coloured as the males, their instincts appear often to have been modified so that they were led to build domed or concealed nests.
In one small and curious class of cases the characters and habits of the two sexes have been completely transposed, for the females are larger, stronger, more vociferous and brighter coloured than the males.
They have, also, become so quarrelsome that they often fight together for the possession of the males, like the males of other pugnacious species for the possession of the females.
If, as seems probable, such females habitually drive away their rivals, and by the display of their bright colours or other charms endeavour to attract the males, we can understand how it is that they have gradually been rendered, by sexual selection and
Whenever the law of inheritance at corresponding ages prevails but not that of sexually-limited transmission, then if the parents vary late in life-- and we know that this constantly occurs with our poultry, and occasionally with other birds--the young
If both these laws of inheritance prevail and either sex varies late in life, that sex alone will be modified, the other sex and the young being unaffected.
When variations in brightness or in other conspicuous characters occur early in life, as no doubt often happens, they will not be acted on through sexual selection until the period of reproduction arrives; consequently if dangerous to the young, they will
Thus we can understand how it is that variations arising late in life have so often been preserved for the ornamentation of the males; the females and the young being left almost unaffected, and therefore like each other.
With species having a distinct summer and winter plumage, the males of which either resemble or differ from the females during both seasons or during the summer alone, the degrees and kinds of resemblance between the young and the old are exceedingly
As the young of so many species have been but little modified in colour and in other ornaments, we are enabled to form some judgment with respect to the plumage of their early progenitors; and we may infer that the beauty of our existing species, if we
Many birds, especially those which live much on the ground, have undoubtedly been obscurely coloured for the sake of protection.
In some instances the upper exposed surface of the plumage has been thus coloured in both sexes, whilst the lower surface in the males alone has been variously ornamented through sexual selection.
Finally, from the facts given in these four chapters, we may conclude that weapons for battle, organs for producing sound, ornaments of many kinds, bright and conspicuous colours, have generally been acquired by the males through variation and sexual
(57.
I am greatly indebted to the kindness of Mr. Sclater for having looked over these four chapters on birds, and the two following ones on mammals.
In this way I have been saved from making mistakes about the names of the species, and from stating anything as a fact which is known to this distinguished naturalist to be erroneous.
But, of course, he is not at all answerable for the accuracy of the statements quoted by me from various authorities.
) CHAPTER XVII.
SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS OF MAMMALS.
The law of battle--Special weapons, confined to the males--Cause of absence of weapons in the female--Weapons common to both sexes, yet primarily acquired by the male--Other uses of such weapons--Their high importance-- Greater size of the male--Means of
With mammals the male appears to win the female much more through the law of battle than through the display of his charms.
The most timid animals, not provided with any special weapons for fighting, engage in desperate conflicts during the season of love.
Two male hares have been seen to fight together until one was killed; male moles often fight, and sometimes with fatal results; male squirrels engage in frequent contests, "and often wound each other severely"; as do male beavers, so that "hardly a skin is
(1.
See Waterton's account of two hares fighting, 'Zoologist,' vol.
i.
1843, p.
211.
On moles, Bell, 'Hist.
of British Quadrupeds,' 1st ed.
, p.
100.
On squirrels, Audubon and Bachman, Viviparous Quadrupeds of N. America, 1846, p.
269.
On beavers, Mr. A.H. Green, in 'Journal of Linnean Society, Zoology,' vol.
x.
1869, p.
362.
) I observed the same fact with the hides of the guanacoes in Patagonia; and on one occasion several were so absorbed in fighting that they fearlessly rushed close by me.
Livingstone speaks of the males of the many animals in Southern Africa as almost invariably shewing the scars received in former contests.
The law of battle prevails with aquatic as with terrestrial mammals.
It is notorious how desperately male seals fight, both with their teeth and claws, during the breeding-season; and their hides are likewise often covered with scars.
Male sperm-whales are very jealous at this season; and in their battles "they often lock their jaws together, and turn on their sides and twist about"; so that their lower jaws often become distorted.
(2.
On the battles of seals, see Capt.
C. Abbott in 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1868, p.
191; Mr. R. Brown, ibid.
1868, p.
436; also L. Lloyd, 'Game Birds of Sweden,' 1867, p.
412; also Pennant.
On the sperm-whale see Mr. J.H. Thompson, in 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1867, p.
246.
) All male animals which are furnished with special weapons for fighting, are well known to engage in fierce battles.
The courage and the desperate conflicts of stags have often been described; their skeletons have been found in various parts of the world, with the horns inextricably locked together, shewing how miserably the victor and vanquished had perished.
(3.
See Scrope ('Art of Deer-stalking,' p.
17) on the locking of the horns with the Cervus elaphus.
Richardson, in 'Fauna Bor.
Americana,' 1829, p.
252, says that the wapiti, moose, and reindeer have been found thus locked together.
Sir A. Smith found at the Cape of Good Hope the skeletons of two gnus in the same condition.
) No animal in the world is so dangerous as an elephant in must.
Lord Tankerville has given me a graphic description of the battles between the wild bulls in Chillingham Park, the descendants, degenerated in size but not in courage, of the gigantic Bos primigenius.
In 1861 several contended for mastery; and it was observed that two of the younger bulls attacked in concert the old leader of the herd, overthrew and disabled him, so that he was believed by the keepers to be lying mortally wounded in a neighbouring wood.
But a few days afterwards one of the young bulls approached the wood alone; and then the "monarch of the chase," who had been lashing himself up for vengeance, came out and, in a short time, killed his antagonist.
He then quietly joined the herd, and long held undisputed sway.
Admiral Sir B.J. Sulivan informs me that, when he lived in the Falkland Islands, he imported a young English stallion, which frequented the hills near Port William with eight mares.
On these hills there were two wild stallions, each with a small troop of mares; "and it is certain that these stallions would never have approached each other without fighting.
Both had tried singly to fight the English horse and drive away his mares, but had failed.
One day they came in TOGETHER and attacked him.
This was seen by the capitan who had charge of the horses, and who, on riding to the spot, found one of the two stallions engaged with the English horse, whilst the other was driving away the mares, and had already separated four from the rest.
The capitan settled the matter by driving the whole party into the corral, for the wild stallions would not leave the mares".
Male animals which are provided with efficient cutting or tearing teeth for the ordinary purposes of life, such as the carnivora, insectivora, and rodents, are seldom furnished with weapons especially adapted for fighting with their rivals.
The case is very different with the males of many other animals.
We see this in the horns of stags and of certain kinds of antelopes in which the females are hornless.
With many animals the canine teeth in the upper or lower jaw, or in both, are much larger in the males than in the females, or are absent in the latter, with the exception sometimes of a hidden rudiment.
Certain antelopes, the musk-deer, camel, horse, boar, various apes, seals, and the walrus, offer instances.
In the females of the walrus the tusks are sometimes quite absent.
(4.
Mr. Lamont ('Seasons with the Sea-Horses,' 1861, p.
143) says that a good tusk of the male walrus weighs 4 pounds, and is longer than that of the female, which weighs about 3 pounds.
The males are described as fighting ferociously.
On the occasional absence of the tusks in the female, see Mr. R. Brown, 'Proceedings, Zoological Society,' 1868, p.
429.
) In the male elephant of India and in the male dugong (5.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
283.
) the upper incisors form offensive weapons.
In the male narwhal the left canine alone is developed into the well-known, spirally-twisted, so-called horn, which is sometimes from nine to ten feet in length.
It is believed that the males use these horns for fighting together; for "an unbroken one can rarely be got, and occasionally one may be found with the point of another jammed into the broken place".
(6.
Mr. R. Brown, in 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1869, p.
553.
See Prof.
Turner, in 'Journal of Anat.
and Phys.
' 1872, p.
76, on the homological nature of these tusks.
Also Mr. J.W. Clarke on two tusks being developed in the males, in 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' 1871, p.
42.
) The tooth on the opposite side of the head in the male consists of a rudiment about ten inches in length, which is embedded in the jaw; but sometimes, though rarely, both are equally developed on the two sides.
In the female both are always rudimentary.
The male cachalot has a larger head than that of the female, and it no doubt aids him in his aquatic battles.
Lastly, the adult male ornithorhynchus is provided with a remarkable apparatus, namely a spur on the foreleg, closely resembling the poison-fang of a venomous snake; but according to Harting, the secretion from the gland is not poisonous; and on the leg of
(7.
Owen on the cachalot and Ornithorhynchus, ibid.
vol.
iii.
pp.
638, 641.
Harting is quoted by Dr. Zouteveen in the Dutch translation of this work, vol.
ii.
p.
292.
) When the males are provided with weapons which in the females are absent, there can be hardly a doubt that these serve for fighting with other males; and that they were acquired through sexual selection, and were transmitted to the male sex alone.
It is not probable, at least in most cases, that the females have been prevented from acquiring such weapons, on account of their being useless, superfluous, or in some way injurious.
On the contrary, as they are often used by the males for various purposes, more especially as a defence against their enemies, it is a surprising fact that they are so poorly developed, or quite absent, in the females of so many animals.
With female deer the development during each recurrent season of great branching horns, and with female elephants the development of immense tusks, would be a great waste of vital power, supposing that they were of no use to the females.
Consequently, they would have tended to be eliminated in the female through natural selection; that is, if the successive variations were limited in their transmission to the female sex, for otherwise the weapons of the males would have been injuriously
On the whole, and from the consideration of the following facts, it seems probable that when the various weapons differ in the two sexes, this has generally depended on the kind of transmission which has prevailed.
As the reindeer is the one species in the whole family of Deer, in which the female is furnished with horns, though they are somewhat smaller, thinner, and less branched than in the male, it might naturally be thought that, at least in this case, they must
The female retains her horns from the time when they are fully developed, namely, in September, throughout the winter until April or May, when she brings forth her young.
Mr. Crotch made particular enquiries for me in Norway, and it appears that the females at this season conceal themselves for about a fortnight in order to bring forth their young, and then reappear, generally hornless.
In Nova Scotia, however, as I hear from Mr. H. Reeks, the female sometimes retains her horns longer.
The male on the other hand casts his horns much earlier, towards the end of November.
As both sexes have the same requirements and follow the same habits of life, and as the male is destitute of horns during the winter, it is improbable that they can be of any special service to the female during this season, which includes the larger part
Nor is it probable that she can have inherited horns from some ancient progenitor of the family of deer, for, from the fact of the females of so many species in all quarters of the globe not having horns, we may conclude that this was the primordial
(8.
On the structure and shedding of the horns of the reindeer, Hoffberg, 'Amoenitates Acad.
' vol.
iv.
1788, p.
149.
See Richardson, 'Fauna Bor.
Americana,' p.
241, in regard to the American variety or species: also Major W. Ross King, 'The Sportsman in Canada,' 1866, p.
80.
The horns of the reindeer are developed at a most unusually early age; but what the cause of this may be is not known.
The effect has apparently been the transference of the horns to both sexes.
We should bear in mind that horns are always transmitted through the female, and that she has a latent capacity for their development, as we see in old or diseased females.
(9.
Isidore Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, 'Essais de Zoolog.
Gnrale,' 1841, p.
513.
Other masculine characters, besides the horns, are sometimes similarly transferred to the female; thus Mr. Boner, in speaking of an old female chamois ('Chamois Hunting in the Mountains of Bavaria,' 1860, 2nd ed.
, p.
363), says, "not only was the head very male-looking, but along the back there was a ridge of long hair, usually to be found only in bucks".
) Moreover the females of some other species of deer exhibit, either normally or occasionally, rudiments of horns; thus the female of Cervulus moschatus has "bristly tufts, ending in a knob, instead of a horn"; and "in most specimens of the female wapiti
(10.
On the Cervulus, Dr. Gray, 'Catalogue of Mammalia in the British Museum,' part iii.
p.
220.
On the Cervus canadensis or wapiti, see Hon.
J.D. Caton, 'Ottawa Academy of Nat.
Sciences,' May 1868, p.
9.
) From these several considerations we may conclude that the possession of fairly well-developed horns by the female reindeer, is due to the males having first acquired them as weapons for fighting with other males; and secondarily to their development
Turning to the sheath-horned ruminants: with antelopes a graduated series can be formed, beginning with species, the females of which are completely destitute of horns--passing on to those which have horns so small as to be almost rudimentary (as with the
I am indebted to Dr. Canfield for this information; see also his paper in the 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' 1866, p.
105.
))--to those which have fairly developed horns, but manifestly smaller and thinner than in the male and sometimes of a different shape (12.
For instance the horns of the female Ant.
euchore resemble those of a distinct species, viz.
the Ant.
dorcas var.
Corine, see Desmarest, 'Mammalogie,' p.
455.
),--and ending with those in which both sexes have horns of equal size.
As with the reindeer, so with antelopes, there exists, as previously shewn, a relation between the period of the development of the horns and their transmission to one or both sexes; it is therefore probable that their presence or absence in the females of
It accords with this view that even in the same restricted genus both sexes of some species, and the males alone of others, are thus provided.
It is also a remarkable fact that, although the females of Antilope bezoartica are normally destitute of horns, Mr. Blyth has seen no less than three females thus furnished; and there was no reason to suppose that they were old or diseased.
In all the wild species of goats and sheep the horns are larger in the male than in the female, and are sometimes quite absent in the latter.
(13.
Gray, 'Catalogue of Mammalia, the British Museum,' part iii.
1852, p.
160.
) In several domestic breeds of these two animals, the males alone are furnished with horns; and in some breeds, for instance, in the sheep of North Wales, though both sexes are properly horned, the ewes are very liable to be hornless.
I have been informed by a trustworthy witness, who purposely inspected a flock of these same sheep during the lambing season, that the horns at birth are generally more fully developed in the male than in the female.
Mr. J. Peel crossed his Lonk sheep, both sexes of which always bear horns, with hornless Leicesters and hornless Shropshire Downs; and the result was that the male offspring had their horns considerably reduced, whilst the females were wholly destitute of
These several facts indicate that, with sheep, the horns are a much less firmly fixed character in the females than in the males; and this leads us to look at the horns as properly of masculine origin.
With the adult musk-ox (Ovibos moschatus) the horns of the male are larger than those of the female, and in the latter the bases do not touch.
(14.
Richardson, 'Fauna Bor.
Americana,' p.
278.
) In regard to ordinary cattle Mr. Blyth remarks: "In most of the wild bovine animals the horns are both longer and thicker in the bull than in the cow, and in the cow-banteng (Bos sondaicus) the horns are remarkably small, and inclined much backwards.
In the domestic races of cattle, both of the humped and humpless types, the horns are short and thick in the bull, longer and more slender in the cow and ox; and in the Indian buffalo, they are shorter and thicker in the bull, longer and more slender in
In the wild gaour (B.
gaurus) the horns are mostly both longer and thicker in the bull than in the cow".
(15.
'Land and Water,' 1867, p.
346.
) Dr. Forsyth Major also informs me that a fossil skull, believed to be that of the female Bos etruscus, has been found in Val d'Arno, which is wholly without horns.
In the Rhinoceros simus, as I may add, the horns of the female are generally longer but less powerful than in the male; and in some other species of rhinoceros they are said to be shorter in the female.
(16.
Sir Andrew Smith, 'Zoology of S. Africa,' pl.
xix.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
624.
) From these various facts we may infer as probable that horns of all kinds, even when they are equally developed in the two sexes, were primarily acquired by the male in order to conquer other males, and have been transferred more or less completely to
The effects of castration deserve notice, as throwing light on this same point.
Stags after the operation never renew their horns.
The male reindeer, however, must be excepted, as after castration he does renew them.
This fact, as well as the possession of horns by both sexes, seems at first to prove that the horns in this species do not constitute a sexual character (17.
This is the conclusion of Seidlitz, 'Die Darwinsche Theorie,' 1871, p.
47.
); but as they are developed at a very early age, before the sexes differ in constitution, it is not surprising that they should be unaffected by castration, even if they were aboriginally acquired by the male.
With sheep both sexes properly bear horns; and I am informed that with Welch sheep the horns of the males are considerably reduced by castration; but the degree depends much on the age at which the operation is performed, as is likewise the case with other
Merino rams have large horns, whilst the ewes "generally speaking are without horns"; and in this breed castration seems to produce a somewhat greater effect, so that if performed at an early age the horns "remain almost undeveloped".
(18.
I am much obliged to Prof.
Victor Carus, for having made enquiries for me in Saxony on this subject.
H. von Nathusius ('Viehzucht,' 1872, p.
64) says that the horns of sheep castrated at an early period, either altogether disappear or remain as mere rudiments; but I do not know whether he refers to merinos or to ordinary breeds.
) On the Guinea coast there is a breed in which the females never bear horns, and, as Mr. Winwood Reade informs me, the rams after castration are quite destitute of them.
With cattle, the horns of the males are much altered by castration; for instead of being short and thick, they become longer than those of the cow, but otherwise resemble them.
The Antilope bezoartica offers a somewhat analogous case: the males have long straight spiral horns, nearly parallel to each other, and directed backwards; the females occasionally bear horns, but these when present are of a very different shape, for they
Now it is a remarkable fact that, in the castrated male, as Mr. Blyth informs me, the horns are of the same peculiar shape as in the female, but longer and thicker.
If we may judge from analogy, the female probably shews us, in these two cases of cattle and the antelope, the former condition of the horns in some early progenitor of each species.
But why castration should lead to the reappearance of an early condition of the horns cannot be explained with any certainty.
Nevertheless, it seems probable, that in nearly the same manner as the constitutional disturbance in the offspring, caused by a cross between two distinct species or races, often leads to the reappearance of long-lost characters (19.
I have given various experiments and other evidence proving that this is the case, in my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
1868, pp.
39-47.
); so here, the disturbance in the constitution of the individual, resulting from castration, produces the same effect.
The tusks of the elephant, in the different species or races, differ according to sex, nearly as do the horns of ruminants.
In India and Malacca the males alone are provided with well-developed tusks.
The elephant of Ceylon is considered by most naturalists as a distinct race, but by some as a distinct species, and here "not one in a hundred is found with tusks, the few that possess them being exclusively males".
(20.
Sir J. Emerson Tennent, 'Ceylon,' 1859, vol.
ii.
p.
274.
For Malacca, 'Journal of Indian Archipelago,' vol.
iv.
p.
357.
) The African elephant is undoubtedly distinct, and the female has large well-developed tusks, though not so large as those of the male.
These differences in the tusks of the several races and species of elephants--the great variability of the horns of deer, as notably in the wild reindeer--the occasional presence of horns in the female Antilope Bezoartica, and their frequent absence in the
Although tusks and horns appear in all cases to have been primarily developed as sexual weapons, they often serve other purposes.
The elephant uses his tusks in attacking the tiger; according to Bruce, he scores the trunks of trees until they can be thrown down easily, and he likewise thus extracts the farinaceous cores of palms; in Africa he often uses one tusk, always the same, to
The common bull defends the herd with his horns; and the elk in Sweden has been known, according to Lloyd, to strike a wolf dead with a single blow of his great horns.
Many similar facts could be given.
One of the most curious secondary uses to which the horns of an animal may be occasionally put is that observed by Captain Hutton (21.
'Calcutta Journal of Natural History,' vol.
ii, 1843, p.
526.
) with the wild goat (Capra aegagrus) of the Himalayas and, as it is also said with the ibex, namely that when the male accidentally falls from a height he bends inwards his head, and by alighting on his massive horns, breaks the shock.
The female cannot thus use her horns, which are smaller, but from her more quiet disposition she does not need this strange kind of shield so much.
Each male animal uses his weapons in his own peculiar fashion.
The common ram makes a charge and butts with such force with the bases of his horns, that I have seen a powerful man knocked over like a child.
Goats and certain species of sheep, for instance the Ovis cycloceros of Afghanistan (22.
Mr. Blyth, in 'Land and Water,' March, 1867, p.
134, on the authority of Capt.
Hutton and others.
For the wild Pembrokeshire goats, see the 'Field,' 1869, p.
150.
), rear on their hind legs, and then not only butt, but "make a cut down and a jerk up, with the ribbed front of their scimitar-shaped horn, as with a sabre.
When the O. cycloceros attacked a large domestic ram, who was a noted bruiser, he conquered him by the sheer novelty of his mode of fighting, always closing at once with his adversary, and catching him across the face and nose with a sharp drawing jerk of
In Pembrokeshire a male goat, the master of a flock which during several generations had run wild, was known to have killed several males in single combat; this goat possessed enormous horns, measuring thirty-nine inches in a straight line from tip to tip.
The common bull, as every one knows, gores and tosses his opponent; but the Italian buffalo is said never to use his horns: he gives a tremendous blow with his convex forehead, and then tramples on his fallen enemy with his knees--an instinct which the
(23.
M. E.M. Bailly, "Sur l'usage des cornes," etc.
, .
Annal des Sciences Nat.
' tom.
ii.
1824, p.
369.
) Hence a dog who pins a buffalo by the nose is immediately crushed.
We must, however, remember that the Italian buffalo has been long domesticated, and it is by no means certain that the wild parent-form had similar horns.
Mr. Bartlett informs me that when a female Cape buffalo (Bubalus caffer) was turned into an enclosure with a bull of the same species, she attacked him, and he in return pushed her about with great violence.
But it was manifest to Mr. Bartlett that, had not the bull shewn dignified forbearance, he could easily have killed her by a single lateral thrust with his immense horns.
The giraffe uses his short, hair-covered horns, which are rather longer in the male than in the female, in a curious manner; for, with his long neck, he swings his head to either side, almost upside down, with such force that I have seen a hard plank
[Fig.
63.
Oryx leucoryx, male (from the Knowsley Menagerie).
] With antelopes it is sometimes difficult to imagine how they can possibly use their curiously-shaped horns; thus the springboc (Ant.
euchore) has rather short upright horns, with the sharp points bent inwards almost at right angles, so as to face each other; Mr. Bartlett does not know how they are used, but suggests that they would inflict a fearful wound down each side of the face of
The slightly-curved horns of the Oryx leucoryx (Fig.
63) are directed backwards, and are of such length that their points reach beyond the middle of the back, over which they extend in almost parallel lines.
Thus they seem singularly ill-fitted for fighting; but Mr. Bartlett informs me that when two of these animals prepare for battle, they kneel down, with their heads between their fore legs, and in this attitude the horns stand nearly parallel and close to
The combatants then gradually approach each other, and each endeavours to get the upturned points under the body of the other; if one succeeds in doing this, he suddenly springs up, throwing up his head at the same time, and can thus wound or perhaps even
Both animals always kneel down, so as to guard as far as possible against this manoeuvre.
It has been recorded that one of these antelopes has used his horn with effect even against a lion; yet from being forced to place his head between the forelegs in order to bring the points of the horns forward, he would generally be under a great
It is, therefore, not probable that the horns have been modified into their present great length and peculiar position, as a protection against beasts of prey.
We can however see that, as soon as some ancient male progenitor of the Oryx acquired moderately long horns, directed a little backwards, he would be compelled, in his battles with rival males, to bend his head somewhat inwards or downwards, as is now done
In this case it is almost certain that the males which possessed the longest horns would have had a great advantage over others with shorter horns; and then the horns would gradually have been rendered longer and longer, through sexual selection, until
With stags of many kinds the branches of the horns offer a curious case of difficulty; for certainly a single straight point would inflict a much more serious wound than several diverging ones.
In Sir Philip Egerton's museum there is a horn of the red-deer (Cervus elaphus), thirty inches in length, with "not fewer than fifteen snags or branches"; and at Moritzburg there is still preserved a pair of antlers of a red-deer, shot in 1699 by Frederick
Richardson figures a pair of antlers of the wild reindeer with twenty-nine points.
(24.
On the horns of red-deer, Owen, 'British Fossil Mammals,' 1846, p.
478; Richardson on the horns of the reindeer, 'Fauna Bor.
Americana,' 1829, p.
240.
I am indebted to Prof.
Victor Carus, for the Moritzburg case.
) From the manner in which the horns are branched, and more especially from deer being known occasionally to fight together by kicking with their fore- feet (25.
Hon.
J.D. Caton ('Ottawa Acad.
of Nat.
Science,' May 1868, p.
9) says that the American deer fight with their fore-feet, after "the question of superiority has been once settled and acknowledged in the herd".
Bailly, 'Sur l'Usage des cornes,' 'Annales des Sciences Nat.
' tom.
ii.
1824, p.
371.
), M. Bailly actually comes to the conclusion that their horns are more injurious than useful to them.
But this author overlooks the pitched battles between rival males.
As I felt much perplexed about the use or advantage of the branches, I applied to Mr. McNeill of Colonsay, who has long and carefully observed the habits of red-deer, and he informs me that he has never seen some of the branches brought into use, but that
Sir Philip Egerton also informs me both as to red-deer and fallow-deer that, in fighting, they suddenly dash together, and getting their horns fixed against each other's bodies, a desperate struggle ensues.
When one is at last forced to yield and turn round, the victor endeavours to plunge his brow antlers into his defeated foe.
It thus appears that the upper branches are used chiefly or exclusively for pushing and fencing.
Nevertheless in some species the upper branches are used as weapons of offence; when a man was attacked by a wapiti deer (Cervus canadensis) in Judge Caton's park in Ottawa, and several men tried to rescue him, the stag "never raised his head from the
In this position the ends of the horns were directed against his adversaries.
"In rolling his head he necessarily raised it somewhat, because his antlers were so long that he could not roll his head without raising them on one side, while, on the other side they touched the ground".
The stag by this procedure gradually drove the party of rescuers backwards to a distance of 150 or 200 feet; and the attacked man was killed.
(26.
See a most interesting account in the Appendix to Hon.
J.D. Caton's paper, as above quoted.
) [Fig.
64.
Strepsiceros Kudu (from Sir Andrew Smith's 'Zoology of South Africa.
'] Although the horns of stags are efficient weapons, there can, I think, be no doubt that a single point would have been much more dangerous than a branched antler; and Judge Caton, who has had large experience with deer, fully concurs in this conclusion.
Nor do the branching horns, though highly important as a means of defence against rival stags, appear perfectly well adapted for this purpose, as they are liable to become interlocked.
The suspicion has therefore crossed my mind that they may serve in part as ornaments.
That the branched antlers of stags as well as the elegant lyrated horns of certain antelopes, with their graceful double curvature (Fig.
64), are ornamental in our eyes, no one will dispute.
If, then, the horns, like the splendid accoutrements of the knights of old, add to the noble appearance of stags and antelopes, they may have been modified partly for this purpose, though mainly for actual service in battle; but I have no evidence in
An interesting case has lately been published, from which it appears that the horns of a deer in one district in the United States are now being modified through sexual and natural selection.
A writer in an excellent American Journal (27.
The 'American Naturalist,' Dec.
1869, p.
552.
) says, that he has hunted for the last twenty-one years in the Adirondacks, where the Cervus virginianus abounds.
About fourteen years ago he first heard of SPIKE-HORN BUCKS.
These became from year to year more common; about five years ago he shot one, and afterwards another, and now they are frequently killed.
"The spike-horn differs greatly from the common antler of the C. virginianus.
It consists of a single spike, more slender than the antler, and scarcely half so long, projecting forward from the brow, and terminating in a very sharp point.
It gives a considerable advantage to its possessor over the common buck.
Besides enabling him to run more swiftly through the thick woods and underbrush (every hunter knows that does and yearling bucks run much more rapidly than the large bucks when armed with their cumbrous antlers), the spike-horn is a more effective weapon
With this advantage the spike-horn bucks are gaining upon the common bucks, and may, in time, entirely supersede them in the Adirondacks.
Undoubtedly, the first spike-horn buck was merely an accidental freak of nature.
But his spike-horns gave him an advantage, and enabled him to propagate his peculiarity.
His descendants having a like advantage, have propagated the peculiarity in a constantly increasing ratio, till they are slowly crowding the antlered deer from the region they inhabit".
A critic has well objected to this account by asking, why, if the simple horns are now so advantageous, were the branched antlers of the parent-form ever developed?
To this I can only answer by remarking, that a new mode of attack with new weapons might be a great advantage, as shewn by the case of the Ovis cycloceros, who thus conquered a domestic ram famous for his fighting power.
Though the branched antlers of a stag are well adapted for fighting with his rivals, and though it might be an advantage to the prong-horned variety slowly to acquire long and branched horns, if he had to fight only with others of the same kind, yet it by
In the foregoing case of the Oryx leucoryx, it is almost certain that the victory would rest with an antelope having short horns, and who therefore did not need to kneel down, though an oryx might profit by having still longer horns, if he fought only with
Male quadrupeds, which are furnished with tusks, use them in various ways, as in the case of horns.
The boar strikes laterally and upwards; the musk- deer downwards with serious effect.
(28.
Pallas, 'Spicilegia Zoologica,' fasc.
xiii.
1779, p.
18.
) The walrus, though having so short a neck and so unwieldy a body, "can strike either upwards, or downwards, or sideways, with equal dexterity".
(29.
Lamont, 'Seasons with the Sea-Horses,' 1861, p.
141.
) I was informed by the late Dr. Falconer, that the Indian elephant fights in a different manner according to the position and curvature of his tusks.
When they are directed forwards and upwards he is able to fling a tiger to a great distance--it is said to even thirty feet; when they are short and turned downwards he endeavours suddenly to pin the tiger to the ground and, in consequence, is dangerous to
(30.
See also Corse ('Philosophical Transactions,' 1799, p.
212) on the manner in which the short-tusked Mooknah variety attacks other elephants.
) Very few male quadrupeds possess weapons of two distinct kinds specially adapted for fighting with rival males.
The male muntjac-deer (Cervulus), however, offers an exception, as he is provided with horns and exserted canine teeth.
But we may infer from what follows that one form of weapon has often been replaced in the course of ages by another.
With ruminants the development of horns generally stands in an inverse relation with that of even moderately developed canine teeth.
Thus camels, guanacoes, chevrotains, and musk-deer, are hornless, and they have efficient canines; these teeth being "always of smaller size in the females than in the males".
The Camelidae have, in addition to their true canines, a pair of canine-shaped incisors in their upper jaws.
(31.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
349.
) Male deer and antelopes, on the other hand, possess horns, and they rarely have canine teeth; and these, when present, are always of small size, so that it is doubtful whether they are of any service in their battles.
In Antilope montana they exist only as rudiments in the young male, disappearing as he grows old; and they are absent in the female at all ages; but the females of certain other antelopes and of certain deer have been known occasionally to exhibit
(32.
See Ruppell (in 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' Jan.
12, 1836, p.
3) on the canines in deer and antelopes, with a note by Mr. Martin on a female American deer.
See also Falconer ('Palaeont.
Memoirs and Notes,' vol.
i.
1868, p.
576) on canines in an adult female deer.
In old males of the musk-deer the canines (Pallas, 'Spic.
Zoolog.
' fasc.
xiii.
1779, p.
18) sometimes grow to the length of three inches, whilst in old females a rudiment projects scarcely half an inch above the gums.
) Stallions have small canine teeth, which are either quite absent or rudimentary in the mare; but they do not appear to be used in fighting, for stallions bite with their incisors, and do not open their mouths wide like camels and guanacoes.
Whenever the adult male possesses canines, now inefficient, whilst the female has either none or mere rudiments, we may conclude that the early male progenitor of the species was provided with efficient canines, which have been partially transferred to the
The reduction of these teeth in the males seems to have followed from some change in their manner of fighting, often (but not in the horse) caused by the development of new weapons.
Tusks and horns are manifestly of high importance to their possessors, for their development consumes much organised matter.
A single tusk of the Asiatic elephant--one of the extinct woolly species--and of the African elephant, have been known to weigh respectively 150, 160, and 180 pounds; and even greater weights have been given by some authors.
(33.
Emerson Tennent, 'Ceylon,' 1859, vol.
ii.
p.
275; Owen, 'British Fossil Mammals,' 1846, p.
245.
) With deer, in which the horns are periodically renewed, the drain on the constitution must be greater; the horns, for instance, of the moose weigh from fifty to sixty pounds, and those of the extinct Irish elk from sixty to seventy pounds--the skull of
Although the horns are not periodically renewed in sheep, yet their development, in the opinion of many agriculturists, entails a sensible loss to the breeder.
Stags, moreover, in escaping from beasts of prey are loaded with an additional weight for the race, and are greatly retarded in passing through a woody country.
The moose, for instance, with horns extending five and a half feet from tip to tip, although so skilful in their use that he will not touch or break a twig when walking quietly, cannot act so dexterously whilst rushing away from a pack of wolves.
"During his progress he holds his nose up, so as to lay the horns horizontally back; and in this attitude cannot see the ground distinctly".
(34.
Richardson, 'Fauna Bor.
Americana,' on the moose, Alces palmata, pp.
236, 237; on the expanse of the horns, 'Land and Water,' 1869, p.
143.
See also Owen, 'British Fossil Mammals,' on the Irish elk, pp.
447, 455.
) The tips of the horns of the great Irish elk were actually eight feet apart!
Whilst the horns are covered with velvet, which lasts with red-deer for about twelve weeks, they are extremely sensitive to a blow; so that in Germany the stags at this time somewhat change their habits, and avoiding dense forests, frequent young woods and
(35.
'Forest Creatures,' by C. Boner, 1861, p.
60.
) These facts remind us that male birds have acquired ornamental plumes at the cost of retarded flight, and other ornaments at the cost of some loss of power in their battles with rival males.
With mammals, when, as is often the case, the sexes differ in size, the males are almost always larger and stronger.
I am informed by Mr. Gould that this holds good in a marked manner with the marsupials of Australia, the males of which appear to continue growing until an unusually late age.
But the most extraordinary case is that of one of the seals (Callorhinus ursinus), a full-grown female weighing less than one-sixth of a full-grown male.
(36.
See the very interesting paper by Mr. J.A. Allen in 'Bull.
Mus.
Comp.
Zoology of Cambridge, United States,' vol.
ii.
No.
1, p.
82.
The weights were ascertained by a careful observer, Capt.
Bryant.
Dr. Gill in 'The American Naturalist,' January, 1871, Prof.
Shaler on the relative size of the sexes of whales, 'American Naturalist,' January, 1873.
) Dr. Gill remarks that it is with the polygamous seals, the males of which are well known to fight savagely together, that the sexes differ much in size; the monogamous species differing but little.
Whales also afford evidence of the relation existing between the pugnacity of the males and their large size compared with that of the female; the males of the right-whales do not fight together, and they are not larger, but rather smaller, than their
The greater strength of the male, as Hunter long ago remarked (37.
'Animal Economy,' p.
45.
), is invariably displayed in those parts of the body which are brought into action in fighting with rival males--for instance, in the massive neck of the bull.
Male quadrupeds are also more courageous and pugnacious than the females.
There can be little doubt that these characters have been gained, partly through sexual selection, owing to a long series of victories, by the stronger and more courageous males over the weaker, and partly through the inherited effects of use.
It is probable that the successive variations in strength, size, and courage, whether due to mere variability or to the effects of use, by the accumulation of which male quadrupeds have acquired these characteristic qualities, occurred rather late in life,
From these considerations I was anxious to obtain information as to the Scotch deer-hound, the sexes of which differ more in size than those of any other breed (though blood-hounds differ considerably), or than in any wild canine species known to me.
Accordingly, I applied to Mr. Cupples, well known for his success with this breed, who has weighed and measured many of his own dogs, and who has with great kindness collected for me the following facts from various sources.
Fine male dogs, measured at the shoulder, range from 28 inches, which is low, to 33 or even 34 inches in height; and in weight from 80 pounds, which is light, to 120 pounds, or even more.
The females range in height from 23 to 27, or even to 28 inches; and in weight from 50 to 70, or even 80 pounds.
(38.
See also Richardson's 'Manual on the Dog,' p.
59.
Much valuable information on the Scottish deer-hound is given by Mr. McNeill, who first called attention to the inequality in size between the sexes, in Scrope's 'Art of Deer- Stalking.
' I hope that Mr. Cupples will keep to his intention of publishing a full account and history of this famous breed.
) Mr. Cupples concludes that from 95 to 100 pounds for the male, and 70 for the female, would be a safe average; but there is reason to believe that formerly both sexes attained a greater weight.
Mr. Cupples has weighed puppies when a fortnight old; in one litter the average weight of four males exceeded that of two females by six and a half ounces; in another litter the average weight of four males exceeded that of one female by less than one
Mr. Wright of Yeldersley House, in a letter to Mr. Cupples, says: "I have taken notes on the sizes and weights of puppies of many litters, and as far as my experience goes, dog-puppies as a rule differ very little from bitches till they arrive at about
At birth, and for several weeks afterwards, a bitch-puppy will occasionally be larger than any of the dogs, but they are invariably beaten by them later".
Mr. McNeill, of Colonsay, concludes that "the males do not attain their full growth till over two years old, though the females attain it sooner".
According to Mr. Cupples' experience, male dogs go on growing in stature till they are from twelve to eighteen months old, and in weight till from eighteen to twenty-four months old; whilst the females cease increasing in stature at the age of from nine to
From these various statements it is clear that the full difference in size between the male and female Scotch deer-hound is not acquired until rather late in life.
The males almost exclusively are used for coursing, for, as Mr. McNeill informs me, the females have not sufficient strength and weight to pull down a full-grown deer.
From the names used in old legends, it appears, as I hear from Mr. Cupples, that, at a very ancient period, the males were the most celebrated, the females being mentioned only as the mothers of famous dogs.
Hence, during many generations, it is the male which has been chiefly tested for strength, size, speed, and courage, and the best will have been bred from.
As, however, the males do not attain their full dimensions until rather late in life, they will have tended, in accordance with the law often indicated, to transmit their characters to their male offspring alone; and thus the great inequality in size
[Fig.
65.
Head of Common wild boar, in prime of life (from Brehm).
] The males of some few quadrupeds possess organs or parts developed solely as a means of defence against the attacks of other males.
Some kinds of deer use, as we have seen, the upper branches of their horns chiefly or exclusively for defending themselves; and the Oryx antelope, as I am informed by Mr. Bartlett, fences most skilfully with his long, gently curved horns; but these are
The same observer remarks that rhinoceroses in fighting, parry each other's sidelong blows with their horns, which clatter loudly together, as do the tusks of boars.
Although wild boars fight desperately, they seldom, according to Brehm, receive fatal wounds, as the blows fall on each other's tusks, or on the layer of gristly skin covering the shoulder, called by the German hunters, the shield; and here we have a part
With boars in the prime of life (Fig.
65) the tusks in the lower jaw are used for fighting, but they become in old age, as Brehm states, so much curved inwards and upwards over the snout that they can no longer be used in this way.
They may, however, still serve, and even more effectively, as a means of defence.
In compensation for the loss of the lower tusks as weapons of offence, those in the upper jaw, which always project a little laterally, increase in old age so much in length and curve so much upwards that they can be used for attack.
Nevertheless, an old boar is not so dangerous to man as one at the age of six or seven years.
(39.
Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. ii.
ss.
729-732.
) [Fig.
66.
Skull of the Babirusa Pig (from Wallace's 'Malay Archipelago').
] In the full-grown male Babirusa pig of Celebes (Fig.
66), the lower tusks are formidable weapons, like those of the European boar in the prime of life, whilst the upper tusks are so long and have their points so much curled inwards, sometimes even touching the forehead, that they are utterly useless as
They more nearly resemble horns than teeth, and are so manifestly useless as teeth that the animal was formerly supposed to rest his head by hooking them on to a branch!
Their convex surfaces, however, if the head were held a little laterally, would serve as an excellent guard; and hence, perhaps, it is that in old animals they "are generally broken off, as if by fighting".
(40.
See Mr. Wallace's interesting account of this animal, 'The Malay Archipelago,' 1869, vol.
i.
p.
435.
) Here, then, we have the curious case of the upper tusks of the Babirusa regularly assuming during the prime of life a structure which apparently renders them fitted only for defence; whilst in the European boar the lower tusks assume in a less degree and
[Fig.
67.
Head of female Aethiopian wart-hog, from 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1869, shewing the same characters as the male, though on a reduced scale.
N.B. When the engraving was first made, I was under the impression that it represented the male.
] In the wart-hog (see Phacochoerus aethiopicus, Fig.
67) the tusks in the upper jaw of the male curve upwards during the prime of life, and from being pointed serve as formidable weapons.
The tusks in the lower jaw are sharper than those in the upper, but from their shortness it seems hardly possible that they can be used as weapons of attack.
They must, however, greatly strengthen those in the upper jaw, from being ground so as to fit closely against their bases.
Neither the upper nor the lower tusks appear to have been specially modified to act as guards, though no doubt they are to a certain extent used for this purpose.
But the wart-hog is not destitute of other special means of protection, for it has, on each side of the face, beneath the eyes, a rather stiff, yet flexible, cartilaginous, oblong pad (Fig.
67), which projects two or three inches outwards; and it appeared to Mr. Bartlett and myself, when viewing the living animal, that these pads, when struck from beneath by the tusks of an opponent, would be turned upwards, and would thus admirably protect
I may add, on the authority of Mr. Bartlett, that these boars when fighting stand directly face to face.
Lastly, the African river-hog (Potomochoerus penicillatus) has a hard cartilaginous knob on each side of the face beneath the eyes, which answers to the flexible pad of the wart-hog; it has also two bony prominences on the upper jaw above the nostrils.
A boar of this species in the Zoological Gardens recently broke into the cage of the wart-hog.
They fought all night long, and were found in the morning much exhausted, but not seriously wounded.
It is a significant fact, as shewing the purposes of the above- described projections and excrescences, that these were covered with blood, and were scored and abraded in an extraordinary manner.
Although the males of so many members of the pig family are provided with weapons, and as we have just seen with means of defence, these weapons seem to have been acquired within a rather late geological period.
Dr. Forsyth Major specifies (41.
'Atti della Soc.
Italiana di Sc.
Nat.
' 1873, vol.
xv.
fasc.
iv.
) several miocene species, in none of which do the tusks appear to have been largely developed in the males; and Professor Rutimeyer was formerly struck with this same fact.
The mane of the lion forms a good defence against the attacks of rival lions, the one danger to which he is liable; for the males, as Sir A. Smith informs me, engage in terrible battles, and a young lion dares not approach an old one.
In 1857 a tiger at Bromwich broke into the cage of a lion and a fearful scene ensued: "the lion's mane saved his neck and head from being much injured, but the tiger at last succeeded in ripping up his belly, and in a few minutes he was dead".
(42.
'The Times,' Nov.
10, 1857.
In regard to the Canada lynx, see Audubon and Bachman, 'Quadrupeds of North America,' 1846, p.
139.
) The broad ruff round the throat and chin of the Canadian lynx (Felis canadensis) is much longer in the male than in the female; but whether it serves as a defence I do not know.
Male seals are well known to fight desperately together, and the males of certain kinds (Otaria jubata) (43.
Dr. Murie, on Otaria, 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1869, p.
109.
Mr. J.A. Allen, in the paper above quoted (p.
75), doubts whether the hair, which is longer on the neck in the male than in the female, deserves to be called a mane.
) have great manes, whilst the females have small ones or none.
The male baboon of the Cape of Good Hope (Cynocephalus porcarius) has a much longer mane and larger canine teeth than the female; and the mane probably serves as a protection, for, on asking the keepers in the Zoological Gardens, without giving them any
In the Hamadryas baboon, Ehrenberg compares the mane of the adult male to that of a young lion, whilst in the young of both sexes and in the female the mane is almost absent.
It appeared to me probable that the immense woolly mane of the male American bison, which reaches almost to the ground, and is much more developed in the males than in the females, served as a protection to them in their terrible battles; but an
The stallion has a thicker and fuller mane than the mare; and I have made particular inquiries of two great trainers and breeders, who have had charge of many entire horses, and am assured that they "invariably endeavour to seize one another by the neck".
It does not, however, follow from the foregoing statements, that when the hair on the neck serves as a defence, that it was originally developed for this purpose, though this is probable in some cases, as in that of the lion.
I am informed by Mr. McNeill that the long hairs on the throat of the stag (Cervus elaphus) serve as a great protection to him when hunted, for the dogs generally endeavour to seize him by the throat; but it is not probable that these hairs were specially
CHOICE IN PAIRING BY EITHER SEX OF QUADRUPEDS.
Before describing in the next chapter, the differences between the sexes in voice, odours emitted, and ornaments, it will be convenient here to consider whether the sexes exert any choice in their unions.
Does the female prefer any particular male, either before or after the males may have fought together for supremacy; or does the male, when not a polygamist, select any particular female?
The general impression amongst breeders seems to be that the male accepts any female; and this owing to his eagerness, is, in most cases, probably the truth.
Whether the female as a general rule indifferently accepts any male is much more doubtful.
In the fourteenth chapter, on Birds, a considerable body of direct and indirect evidence was advanced, shewing that the female selects her partner; and it would be a strange anomaly if female quadrupeds, which stand higher in the scale and have higher
The female could in most cases escape, if wooed by a male that did not please or excite her; and when pursued by several males, as commonly occurs, she would often have the opportunity, whilst they were fighting together, of escaping with some one male, or
This latter contingency has often been observed in Scotland with female red-deer, as I am informed by Sir Philip Egerton and others.
(44.
Mr. Boner, in his excellent description of the habits of the red-deer in Germany ('Forest Creatures,' 1861, p.
81) says, "while the stag is defending his rights against one intruder, another invades the sanctuary of his harem, and carries off trophy after trophy".
Exactly the same thing occurs with seals; see Mr. J.A. Allen, ibid.
p.
100.
) It is scarcely possible that much should be known about female quadrupeds in a state of nature making any choice in their marriage unions.
The following curious details on the courtship of one of the eared seals (Callorhinus ursinus) are given (45.
Mr. J.A. Allen in 'Bull.
Mus.
Comp.
Zoolog.
of Cambridge, United States,' vol.
ii.
No.
1, p.
99.
) on the authority of Capt.
Bryant, who had ample opportunities for observation.
He says, "Many of the females on their arrival at the island where they breed appear desirous of returning to some particular male, and frequently climb the outlying rocks to overlook the rookeries, calling out and listening as if for a familiar voice.
Then changing to another place they do the same again...
As soon as a female reaches the shore, the nearest male goes down to meet her, making meanwhile a noise like the clucking of a hen to her chickens.
He bows to her and coaxes her until he gets between her and the water so that she cannot escape him.
Then his manner changes, and with a harsh growl he drives her to a place in his harem.
This continues until the lower row of harems is nearly full.
Then the males higher up select the time when their more fortunate neighbours are off their guard to steal their wives.
This they do by taking them in their mouths and lifting them over the heads of the other females, and carefully placing them in their own harem, carrying them as cats do their kittens.
Those still higher up pursue the same method until the whole space is occupied.
Frequently a struggle ensues between two males for the possession of the same female, and both seizing her at once pull her in two or terribly lacerate her with their teeth.
When the space is all filled, the old male walks around complacently reviewing his family, scolding those who crowd or disturb the others, and fiercely driving off all intruders.
This surveillance always keeps him actively occupied".
As so little is known about the courtship of animals in a state of nature, I have endeavoured to discover how far our domesticated quadrupeds evince any choice in their unions.
Dogs offer the best opportunity for observation, as they are carefully attended to and well understood.
Many breeders have expressed a strong opinion on this head.
Thus, Mr. Mayhew remarks, "The females are able to bestow their affections; and tender recollections are as potent over them as they are known to be in other cases, where higher animals are concerned.
Bitches are not always prudent in their loves, but are apt to fling themselves away on curs of low degree.
If reared with a companion of vulgar appearance, there often springs up between the pair a devotion which no time can afterwards subdue.
The passion, for such it really is, becomes of a more than romantic endurance".
Mr. Mayhew, who attended chiefly to the smaller breeds, is convinced that the females are strongly attracted by males of a large size.
(46.
'Dogs: their Management,' by E. Mayhew, M.R.C.V.S., 2nd ed.
, 1864, pp.
187-192.
) The well-known veterinary Blaine states (47.
Quoted by Alex.
Walker, 'On Intermarriage,' 1838, p.
276; see also p.
244.
) that his own female pug dog became so attached to a spaniel, and a female setter to a cur, that in neither case would they pair with a dog of their own breed until several weeks had elapsed.
Two similar and trustworthy accounts have been given me in regard to a female retriever and a spaniel, both of which became enamoured with terrier-dogs.
Mr. Cupples informs me that he can personally vouch for the accuracy of the following more remarkable case, in which a valuable and wonderfully- intelligent female terrier loved a retriever belonging to a neighbour to such a degree, that she had often to
After their permanent separation, although repeatedly shewing milk in her teats, she would never acknowledge the courtship of any other dog, and to the regret of her owner never bore puppies.
Mr. Cupples also states, that in 1868, a female deerhound in his kennel thrice produced puppies, and on each occasion shewed a marked preference for one of the largest and handsomest, but not the most eager, of four deerhounds living with her, all in the
Mr. Cupples has observed that the female generally favours a dog whom she has associated with and knows; her shyness and timidity at first incline her against a strange dog.
The male, on the contrary, seems rather inclined towards strange females.
It appears to be rare when the male refuses any particular female, but Mr. Wright, of Yeldersley House, a great breeder of dogs, informs me that he has known some instances; he cites the case of one of his own deerhounds, who would not take any notice of a
It would be superfluous to give, as I could, other instances, and I will only add that Mr. Barr, who has carefully bred many bloodhounds, states that in almost every instance particular individuals of opposite sexes shew a decided preference for each
Finally, Mr. Cupples, after attending to this subject for another year, has written to me, "I have had full confirmation of my former statement, that dogs in breeding form decided preferences for each other, being often influenced by size, bright colour,
In regard to horses, Mr. Blenkiron, the greatest breeder of race-horses in the world, informs me that stallions are so frequently capricious in their choice, rejecting one mare and without any apparent cause taking to another, that various artifices have
The famous Monarque, for instance, would never consciously look at the dam of Gladiateur, and a trick had to be practised.
We can partly see the reason why valuable race-horse stallions, which are in such demand as to be exhausted, should be so particular in their choice.
Mr. Blenkiron has never known a mare reject a horse; but this has occurred in Mr. Wright's stable, so that the mare had to be cheated.
Prosper Lucas (48.
'Trait de l'Hrd.
Nat.
' tom.
ii.
1850, p.
296.
) quotes various statements from French authorities, and remarks, "On voit des talons qui s'eprennent d'une jument, et negligent toutes les autres".
He gives, on the authority of Baelen, similar facts in regard to bulls; and Mr. H. Reeks assures me that a famous short-horn bull belonging to his father "invariably refused to be matched with a black cow".
Hoffberg, in describing the domesticated reindeer of Lapland says, "Foeminae majores et fortiores mares prae caeteris admittunt, ad eos confugiunt, a junioribus agitatae, qui hos in fugam conjiciunt".
(49.
'Amoenitates Acad.
' vol.
iv.
1788, p.
160.
) A clergyman, who has bred many pigs, asserts that sows often reject one boar and immediately accept another.
From these facts there can be no doubt that, with most of our domesticated quadrupeds, strong individual antipathies and preferences are frequently exhibited, and much more commonly by the female than by the male.
This being the case, it is improbable that the unions of quadrupeds in a state of nature should be left to mere chance.
It is much more probable that the females are allured or excited by particular males, who possess certain characters in a higher degree than other males; but what these characters are, we can seldom or never discover with certainty.
CHAPTER XVIII.
SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS OF MAMMALS--continued.
Voice--Remarkable sexual peculiarities in seals--Odour--Development of the hair--Colour of the hair and skin--Anomalous case of the female being more ornamented than the male--Colour and ornaments due to sexual selection-- Colour acquired for the sake of
Quadrupeds use their voices for various purposes, as a signal of danger, as a call from one member of a troop to another, or from the mother to her lost offspring, or from the latter for protection to their mother; but such uses need not here be
We are concerned only with the difference between the voices of the sexes, for instance between that of the lion and lioness, or of the bull and cow.
Almost all male animals use their voices much more during the rutting-season than at any other time; and some, as the giraffe and porcupine (1.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
585.
), are said to be completely mute excepting at this season.
As the throats (i.
e.
the larynx and thyroid bodies (2.
Ibid.
p.
595.
)) of stags periodically become enlarged at the beginning of the breeding-season, it might be thought that their powerful voices must be somehow of high importance to them; but this is very doubtful.
From information given to me by two experienced observers, Mr. McNeill and Sir P. Egerton, it seems that young stags under three years old do not roar or bellow; and that the old ones begin bellowing at the commencement of the breeding-season, at first
Their battles are prefaced by loud and prolonged bellowing, but during the actual conflict they are silent.
Animals of all kinds which habitually use their voices utter various noises under any strong emotion, as when enraged and preparing to fight; but this may merely be the result of nervous excitement, which leads to the spasmodic contraction of almost all
No doubt stags challenge each other to mortal combat by bellowing; but those with the more powerful voices, unless at the same time the stronger, better-armed, and more courageous, would not gain any advantage over their rivals.
It is possible that the roaring of the lion may be of some service to him by striking terror into his adversary; for when enraged he likewise erects his mane and thus instinctively tries to make himself appear as terrible as possible.
But it can hardly be supposed that the bellowing of the stag, even if it be of service to him in this way, can have been important enough to have led to the periodical enlargement of the throat.
Some writers suggest that the bellowing serves as a call to the female; but the experienced observers above quoted inform me that female deer do not search for the male, though the males search eagerly for the females, as indeed might be expected from what
The voice of the female, on the other hand, quickly brings to her one or more stags (3.
See, for instance, Major W. Ross King ('The Sportsman in Canada,' 1866, pp.
53, 131) on the habits of the moose and wild reindeer.
), as is well known to the hunters who in wild countries imitate her cry.
If we could believe that the male had the power to excite or allure the female by his voice, the periodical enlargement of his vocal organs would be intelligible on the principle of sexual selection, together with inheritance limited to the same sex and
As the case stands, the loud voice of the stag during the breeding-season does not seem to be of any special service to him, either during his courtship or battles, or in any other way.
But may we not believe that the frequent use of the voice, under the strong excitement of love, jealousy, and rage, continued during many generations, may at last have produced an inherited effect on the vocal organs of the stag, as well as of other male
This appears to me, in our present state of knowledge, the most probable view.
The voice of the adult male gorilla is tremendous, and he is furnished with a laryngeal sack, as is the adult male orang.
(4.
Owen 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
600.
) The gibbons rank among the noisiest of monkeys, and the Sumatra species (Hylobates syndactylus) is also furnished with an air sack; but Mr. Blyth, who has had opportunities for observation, does not believe that the male is noisier than the female.
Hence, these latter monkeys probably use their voices as a mutual call; and this is certainly the case with some quadrupeds, for instance the beaver.
(5.
Mr. Green, in 'Journal of Linnean Society,' vol.
x.
'Zoology,' 1869, note 362.
) Another gibbon, the H. agilis, is remarkable, from having the power of giving a complete and correct octave of musical notes (6.
C.L. Martin, 'General Introduction to the Natural History of Mamm.
Animals,' 1841, p.
431.
), which we may reasonably suspect serves as a sexual charm; but I shall have to recur to this subject in the next chapter.
The vocal organs of the American Mycetes caraya are one-third larger in the male than in the female, and are wonderfully powerful.
These monkeys in warm weather make the forests resound at morning and evening with their overwhelming voices.
The males begin the dreadful concert, and often continue it during many hours, the females sometimes joining in with their less powerful voices.
An excellent observer, Rengger (7.
'Naturgeschichte der Sugethiere von Paraguay,' 1830, ss.
15, 21.
), could not perceive that they were excited to begin by any special cause; he thinks that, like many birds, they delight in their own music, and try to excel each other.
Whether most of the foregoing monkeys have acquired their powerful voices in order to beat their rivals and charm the females--or whether the vocal organs have been strengthened and enlarged through the inherited effects of long-continued use without any
I may here mention two very curious sexual peculiarities occurring in seals, because they have been supposed by some writers to affect the voice.
The nose of the male sea-elephant (Macrorhinus proboscideus) becomes greatly elongated during the breeding-season, and can then be erected.
In this state it is sometimes a foot in length.
The female is not thus provided at any period of life.
The male makes a wild, hoarse, gurgling noise, which is audible at a great distance and is believed to be strengthened by the proboscis; the voice of the female being different.
Lesson compares the erection of the proboscis, with the swelling of the wattles of male gallinaceous birds whilst courting the females.
In another allied kind of seal, the bladder-nose (Cystophora cristata), the head is covered by a great hood or bladder.
This is supported by the septum of the nose, which is produced far backwards and rises into an internal crest seven inches in height.
The hood is clothed with short hair, and is muscular; can be inflated until it more than equals the whole head in size!
The males when rutting, fight furiously on the ice, and their roaring "is said to be sometimes so loud as to be heard four miles off".
When attacked they likewise roar or bellow; and whenever irritated the bladder is inflated and quivers.
Some naturalists believe that the voice is thus strengthened, but various other uses have been assigned to this extraordinary structure.
Mr. R. Brown thinks that it serves as a protection against accidents of all kinds; but this is not probable, for, as I am assured by Mr. Lamont who killed 600 of these animals, the hood is rudimentary in the females, and it is not developed in the males
(8.
On the sea-elephant, see an article by Lesson, in 'Dict.
Class.
Hist.
Nat.
' tom.
xiii.
p.
418.
For the Cystophora, or Stemmatopus, see Dr. Dekay, 'Annals of Lyceum of Nat.
Hist.
' New York, vol.
i.
1824, p.
94.
Pennant has also collected information from the sealers on this animal.
The fullest account is given by Mr. Brown, in 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1868, p.
435.
) ODOUR.
With some animals, as with the notorious skunk of America, the overwhelming odour which they emit appears to serve exclusively as a defence.
With shrew-mice (Sorex) both sexes possess abdominal scent-glands, and there can be little doubt, from the rejection of their bodies by birds and beasts of prey, that the odour is protective; nevertheless, the glands become enlarged in the males during the
In many other quadrupeds the glands are of the same size in both sexes (9.
As with the castoreum of the beaver, see Mr. L.H. Morgan's most interesting work, 'The American Beaver,' 1868, p.
300.
Pallas ('Spic.
Zoolog.
' fasc.
viii.
1779, p.
23) has well discussed the odoriferous glands of mammals.
Owen ('Anat.
of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
634) also gives an account of these glands, including those of the elephant, and (p.
763) those of shrew-mice.
On bats, Mr. Dobson in 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society' 1873, p.
241.
), but their uses are not known.
In other species the glands are confined to the males, or are more developed than in the females; and they almost always become more active during the rutting-season.
At this period the glands on the sides of the face of the male elephant enlarge, and emit a secretion having a strong musky odour.
The males, and rarely the females, of many kinds of bats have glands and protrudable sacks situated in various parts; and it is believed that these are odoriferous.
The rank effluvium of the male goat is well known, and that of certain male deer is wonderfully strong and persistent.
On the banks of the Plata I perceived the air tainted with the odour of the male Cervus campestris, at half a mile to leeward of a herd; and a silk handkerchief, in which I carried home a skin, though often used and washed, retained, when first unfolded,
This animal does not emit its strong odour until more than a year old, and if castrated whilst young never emits it.
(10.
Rengger, 'Naturgeschichte der Sugethiere von Paraguay,' 1830, s.
355.
This observer also gives some curious particulars in regard to the odour.
) Besides the general odour, permeating the whole body of certain ruminants (for instance, Bos moschatus) in the breeding-season, many deer, antelopes, sheep, and goats possess odoriferous glands in various situations, more especially on their faces.
The so-called tear-sacks, or suborbital pits, come under this head.
These glands secrete a semi-fluid fetid matter which is sometimes so copious as to stain the whole face, as I have myself seen in an antelope.
They are "usually larger in the male than in the female, and their development is checked by castration".
(11.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
632.
See also Dr. Murie's observations on those glands in the 'Proc.
Zoolog.
Soc.
' 1870, p.
340.
Desmarest, 'On the Antilope subgutturosa, 'Mammalogie,' 1820, p.
455.
) According to Desmarest they are altogether absent in the female of Antilope subgutturosa.
Hence, there can be no doubt that they stand in close relation with the reproductive functions.
They are also sometimes present, and sometimes absent, in nearly allied forms.
In the adult male musk-deer (Moschus moschiferus), a naked space round the tail is bedewed with an odoriferous fluid, whilst in the adult female, and in the male until two years old, this space is covered with hair and is not odoriferous.
The proper musk- sack of this deer is from its position necessarily confined to the male, and forms an additional scent-organ.
It is a singular fact that the matter secreted by this latter gland, does not, according to Pallas, change in consistence, or increase in quantity, during the rutting-season; nevertheless this naturalist admits that its presence is in some way connected
He gives, however, only a conjectural and unsatisfactory explanation of its use.
(12.
Pallas, 'Spicilegia Zoolog.
' fasc.
xiii.
1799, p.
24; Desmoulins, 'Dict.
Class.
d'Hist.
Nat.
' tom.
iii.
p.
586.
) In most cases, when only the male emits a strong odour during the breeding- season, it probably serves to excite or allure the female.
We must not judge on this head by our own taste, for it is well known that rats are enticed by certain essential oils, and cats by valerian, substances far from agreeable to us; and that dogs, though they will not eat carrion, sniff and roll on it.
From the reasons given when discussing the voice of the stag, we may reject the idea that the odour serves to bring the females from a distance to the males.
Active and long-continued use cannot here have come into play, as in the case of the vocal organs.
The odour emitted must be of considerable importance to the male, inasmuch as large and complex glands, furnished with muscles for everting the sack, and for closing or opening the orifice, have in some cases been developed.
The development of these organs is intelligible through sexual selection, if the most odoriferous males are the most successful in winning the females, and in leaving offspring to inherit their gradually perfected glands and odours.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE HAIR.
We have seen that male quadrupeds often have the hair on their necks and shoulders much more developed than the females; and many additional instances could be given.
This sometimes serves as a defence to the male during his battles; but whether the hair in most cases has been specially developed for this purpose, is very doubtful.
We may feel almost certain that this is not the case, when only a thin and narrow crest runs along the back; for a crest of this kind would afford scarcely any protection, and the ridge of the back is not a place likely to be injured; nevertheless such
Two antelopes, the Tragelaphus scriptus (13.
Dr. Gray, 'Gleanings from the Menagerie at Knowsley,' pl.
28.
) (Fig.
70) and Portax picta may be given as instances.
When stags, and the males of the wild goat, are enraged or terrified, these crests stand erect (14.
Judge Caton on the Wapiti, 'Transact.
Ottawa Acad.
Nat.
Sciences,' 1868, pp.
36, 40; Blyth, 'Land and Water,' on Capra aegagrus 1867, p.
37.
); but it cannot be supposed that they have been developed merely for the sake of exciting fear in their enemies.
One of the above-named antelopes, the Portax picta, has a large well-defined brush of black hair on the throat, and this is much larger in the male than in the female.
In the Ammotragus tragelaphus of North Africa, a member of the sheep-family, the fore-legs are almost concealed by an extraordinary growth of hair, which depends from the neck and upper halves of the legs; but Mr. Bartlett does not believe that this mantle
[Fig.
68.
Pithecia satanas, male (from Brehm).
] Male quadrupeds of many kinds differ from the females in having more hair, or hair of a different character, on certain parts of their faces.
Thus the bull alone has curled hair on the forehead.
(15.
Hunter's 'Essays and Observations,' edited by Owen, 1861.
vol.
i.
p.
236.
) In three closely- allied sub-genera of the goat family, only the males possess beards, sometimes of large size; in two other sub-genera both sexes have a beard, but it disappears in some of the domestic breeds of the common goat; and neither sex of the
In the ibex the beard is not developed during the summer, and is so small at other times that it may be called rudimentary.
(16.
See Dr. Gray's 'Catalogue of Mammalia in the British Museum,' part iii.
1852, p.
144.
) With some monkeys the beard is confined to the male, as in the orang; or is much larger in the male than in the female, as in the Mycetes caraya and Pithecia satanas (Fig.
68).
So it is with the whiskers of some species of Macacus (17.
Rengger, 'Sugethiere,' etc.
, s.
14; Desmarest, 'Mammalogie,' p.
86.
), and, as we have seen, with the manes of some species of baboons.
But with most kinds of monkeys the various tufts of hair about the face and head are alike in both sexes.
The males of various members of the ox family (Bovidae), and of certain antelopes, are furnished with a dewlap, or great fold of skin on the neck, which is much less developed in the female.
Now, what must we conclude with respect to such sexual differences as these?
No one will pretend that the beards of certain male goats, or the dewlaps of the bull, or the crests of hair along the backs of certain male antelopes, are of any use to them in their ordinary habits.
It is possible that the immense beard of the male Pithecia, and the large beard of the male orang, may protect their throats when fighting; for the keepers in the Zoological Gardens inform me that many monkeys attack each other by the throat; but it is not
Must we attribute all these appendages of hair or skin to mere purposeless variability in the male?
It cannot be denied that this is possible; for in many domesticated quadrupeds, certain characters, apparently not derived through reversion from any wild parent form, are confined to the males, or are more developed in them than in the females-- for
(18.
See the chapters on these several animals in vol.
i.
of my 'Variation of Animals under Domestication;' also vol.
ii.
p.
73; also chap.
xx.
on the practice of selection by semi-civilised people.
For the Berbura goat, see Dr. Gray, 'Catalogue,' ibid.
p.
157.
) The mane, which occurs only in the rams of an African breed of sheep, is a true secondary sexual character, for, as I hear from Mr. Winwood Reade, it is not developed if the animal be castrated.
Although we ought to be extremely cautious, as shewn in my work on 'Variation under Domestication,' in concluding that any character, even with animals kept by semi-civilised people, has not been subjected to selection by man, and thus augmented, yet in
If it were positively known that the above African ram is a descendant of the same primitive stock as the other breeds of sheep, and if the Berbura male-goat with his mane, dewlap, etc.
, is descended from the same stock as other goats, then, assuming that selection has not been applied to these characters, they must be due to simple variability, together with sexually- limited inheritance.
Hence it appears reasonable to extend this same view to all analogous cases with animals in a state of nature.
Nevertheless I cannot persuade myself that it generally holds good, as in the case of the extraordinary development of hair on the throat and fore-legs of the male Ammotragus, or in that of the immense beard of the male Pithecia.
Such study as I have been able to give to nature makes me believe that parts or organs which are highly developed, were acquired at some period for a special purpose.
With those antelopes in which the adult male is more strongly-coloured than the female, and with those monkeys in which the hair on the face is elegantly arranged and coloured in a diversified manner, it seems probable that the crests and tufts of hair
If this be correct, there can be little doubt that they were gained or at least modified through sexual selection; but how far the same view may be extended to other mammals is doubtful.
COLOUR OF THE HAIR AND OF THE NAKED SKIN.
I will first give briefly all the cases known to me of male quadrupeds differing in colour from the females.
With Marsupials, as I am informed by Mr. Gould, the sexes rarely differ in this respect; but the great red kangaroo offers a striking exception, "delicate blue being the prevailing tint in those parts of the female which in the male are red".
(19.
Osphranter rufus, Gould, 'Mammals of Australia,' 1863, vol.
ii.
On the Didelphis, Desmarest, 'Mammalogie,' p.
256.
) In the Didelphis opossum of Cayenne the female is said to be a little more red than the male.
Of the Rodents, Dr. Gray remarks: "African squirrels, especially those found in the tropical regions, have the fur much brighter and more vivid at some seasons of the year than at others, and the fur of the male is generally brighter than that of the
(20.
'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' Nov.
1867, p.
325.
On the Mus minutus, Desmarest, 'Mammalogie,' p.
304.
) Dr. Gray informs me that he specified the African squirrels, because, from their unusually bright colours, they best exhibit this difference.
The female of the Mus minutus of Russia is of a paler and dirtier tint than the male.
In a large number of bats the fur of the male is lighter than in the female.
(21.
J.A. Allen, in 'Bulletin of Mus.
Comp.
Zoolog.
of Cambridge, United States,' 1869, p.
207.
Mr. Dobson on sexual characters in the Chiroptera, 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' 1873, p.
241.
Dr. Gray on Sloths, ibid.
1871, p.
436.
) Mr. Dobson also remarks, with respect to these animals: "Differences, depending partly or entirely on the possession by the male of fur of a much more brilliant hue, or distinguished by different markings or by the greater length of certain portions, are
This last remark deserves attention, as bearing on the question whether bright colours are serviceable to male animals from being ornamental.
In one genus of sloths, it is now established, as Dr. Gray states, "that the males are ornamented differently from the females--that is to say, that they have a patch of soft short hair between the shoulders, which is generally of a more or less orange
The females, on the contrary, are destitute of this mark".
The terrestrial Carnivora and Insectivora rarely exhibit sexual differences of any kind, including colour.
The ocelot (Felis pardalis), however, is exceptional, for the colours of the female, compared with those of the male, are "moins apparentes, le fauve, tant plus terne, le blanc moins pur, les raies ayant moins de largeur et les taches moins de
(22.
Desmarest, 'Mammalogie,' 1820, p.
220.
On Felis mitis, Rengger, ibid.
s.
194.
) The sexes of the allied Felis mitis also differ, but in a less degree; the general hues of the female being rather paler than in the male, with the spots less black.
The marine Carnivora or seals, on the other hand, sometimes differ considerably in colour, and they present, as we have already seen, other remarkable sexual differences.
Thus the male of the Otaria nigrescens of the southern hemisphere is of a rich brown shade above; whilst the female, who acquires her adult tints earlier in life than the male, is dark-grey above, the young of both sexes being of a deep chocolate colour.
The male of the northern Phoca groenlandica is tawny grey, with a curious saddle-shaped dark mark on the back; the female is much smaller, and has a very different appearance, being "dull white or yellowish straw-colour, with a tawny hue on the back"; the
(23.
Dr. Murie on the Otaria, 'Proceedings Zoological Society,' 1869, p.
108.
Mr. R. Brown on the P. groenlandica, ibid.
1868, p.
417.
See also on the colours of seals, Desmarest, ibid.
pp.
243, 249.
) With Ruminants sexual differences of colour occur more commonly than in any other order.
A difference of this kind is general in the Strepsicerene antelopes; thus the male nilghau (Portax picta) is bluish-grey and much darker than the female, with the square white patch on the throat, the white marks on the fetlocks, and the black spots on the
We have seen that in this species the crests and tufts of hair are likewise more developed in the male than in the hornless female.
I am informed by Mr. Blyth that the male, without shedding his hair, periodically becomes darker during the breeding-season.
Young males cannot be distinguished from young females until about twelve months old; and if the male is emasculated before this period, he never, according to the same authority, changes colour.
The importance of this latter fact, as evidence that the colouring of the Portax is of sexual origin, becomes obvious, when we hear (24.
Judge Caton, in 'Transactions of the Ottawa Academy of Natural Sciences,' 1868, p.
4.
) that neither the red summer-coat nor the blue winter-coat of the Virginian deer is at all affected by emasculation.
With most or all of the highly-ornamented species of Tragelaphus the males are darker than the hornless females, and their crests of hair are more fully developed.
In the male of that magnificent antelope, the Derbyan eland, the body is redder, the whole neck much blacker, and the white band which separates these colours broader than in the female.
In the Cape eland, also, the male is slightly darker than the female.
(25.
Dr. Gray, 'Cat.
of Mamm.
in Brit.
Mus.
' part iii.
1852, pp.
134-142; also Dr. Gray, 'Gleanings from the Menagerie of Knowsley,' in which there is a splendid drawing of the Oreas derbianus: see the text on Tragelaphus.
For the Cape eland (Oreas canna), see Andrew Smith, 'Zoology of S. Africa,' pl.
41 and 42.
There are also many of these Antelopes in the Zoological Gardens.
) In the Indian black-buck (A.
bezoartica), which belongs to another tribe of antelopes, the male is very dark, almost black; whilst the hornless female is fawn-coloured.
We meet in this species, as Mr. Blyth informs me, with an exactly similar series of facts, as in the Portax picta, namely, in the male periodically changing colour during the breeding-season, in the effects of emasculation on this change, and in the young
In the Antilope niger the male is black, the female, as well as the young of both sexes, being brown; in A. sing-sing the male is much brighter coloured than the hornless female, and his chest and belly are blacker; in the male A. caama, the marks and
gorgon) "the colours of the male are nearly the same as those of the female, only deeper and of a brighter hue".
(26.
On the Ant.
niger, see 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1850, p.
133.
With respect to an allied species, in which there is an equal sexual difference in colour, see Sir S. Baker, 'The Albert Nyanza,' 1866, vol.
ii.
p.
627.
For the A. sing-sing, Gray, 'Cat.
B. Mus.
' p.
100.
Desmarest, 'Mammalogie,' p.
468, on the A. caama.
Andrew Smith, 'Zoology of S. Africa,' on the Gnu.
) Other analogous cases could be added.
The Banteng bull (Bos sondaicus) of the Malayan Archipelago is almost black, with white legs and buttocks; the cow is of a bright dun, as are the young males until about the age of three years, when they rapidly change colour.
The emasculated bull reverts to the colour of the female.
The female Kemas goat is paler, and both it and the female Capra aegagrus are said to be more uniformly tinted than their males.
Deer rarely present any sexual differences in colour.
Judge Caton, however, informs me that in the males of the wapiti deer (Cervus canadensis) the neck, belly, and legs are much darker than in the female; but during the winter the darker tints gradually fade away and disappear.
I may here mention that Judge Caton has in his park three races of the Virginian deer, which differ slightly in colour, but the differences are almost exclusively confined to the blue winter or breeding-coat; so that this case may be compared with those
(27.
'Ottawa Academy of Sciences,' May 21, 1868, pp.
3, 5.
) The females of Cervus paludosus of S. America, as well as the young of both sexes, do not possess the black stripes on the nose and the blackish-brown line on the breast, which are characteristic of the adult males.
(28.
S. Muller, on the Banteng, 'Zoog.
Indischen Archipel.
' 1839-1844, tab.
35; see also Raffles, as quoted by Mr. Blyth, in 'Land and Water,' 1867, p.
476.
On goats, Dr. Gray, 'Catalogue of the British Museum,' p.
146; Desmarest, 'Mammalogie,' p.
482.
On the Cervus paludosus, Rengger, ibid.
s.
345.
) Lastly, as I am informed by Mr. Blyth, the mature male of the beautifully coloured and spotted axis deer is considerably darker than the female: and this hue the castrated male never acquires.
The last Order which we need consider is that of the Primates.
The male of the Lemur macaco is generally coal-black, whilst the female is brown.
(29.
Sclater, 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1866, p.
i.
The same fact has also been fully ascertained by MM.
Pollen and van Dam.
See, also, Dr. Gray in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' May 1871, p.
340.
) Of the Quadrumana of the New World, the females and young of Mycetes caraya are greyish-yellow and like each other; in the second year the young male becomes reddish-brown; in the third, black, excepting the stomach, which, however, becomes quite black
There is also a strongly-marked difference in colour between the sexes of Mycetes seniculus and Cebus capucinus; the young of the former, and I believe of the latter species, resembling the females.
With Pithecia leucocephala the young likewise resemble the females, which are brownish-black above and light rusty-red beneath, the adult males being black.
The ruff of hair round the face of Ateles marginatus is tinted yellow in the male and white in the female.
Turning to the Old World, the males of Hylobates hoolock are always black, with the exception of a white band over the brows; the females vary from whity-brown to a dark tint mixed with black, but are never wholly black.
(30.
On Mycetes, Rengger, ibid.
s.
14; and Brehm, 'Thierleben,' B. i.
s.
96, 107.
On Ateles Desmarest, 'Mammalogie,' p.
75.
On Hylobates, Blyth, 'Land and Water,' 1867, p.
135.
On the Semnopithecus, S. Muller, 'Zoog.
Indischen Archipel.
' tab.
x.
) In the beautiful Cercopithecus diana, the head of the adult male is of an intense black, whilst that of the female is dark grey; in the former the fur between the thighs is of an elegant fawn- colour, in the latter it is paler.
In the beautiful and curious moustache monkey (Cercopithecus cephus) the only difference between the sexes is that the tail of the male is chestnut and that of the female grey; but Mr. Bartlett informs me that all the hues become more pronounced in the
According to the coloured figures given by Solomon Muller, the male of Semnopithecus chrysomelas is nearly black, the female being pale brown.
In the Cercopithecus cynosurus and griseo-viridis one part of the body, which is confined to the male sex, is of the most brilliant blue or green, and contrasts strikingly with the naked skin on the hinder part of the body, which is vivid red.
[Fig.
69.
Head of male Mandrill (from Gervais, 'Hist.
Nat.
des Mammifres').
] Lastly, in the baboon family, the adult male of Cynocephalus hamadryas differs from the female not only by his immense mane, but slightly in the colour of the hair and of the naked callosities.
In the drill (C.
leucophaeus) the females and young are much paler-coloured, with less green, than the adult males.
No other member in the whole class of mammals is coloured in so extraordinary a manner as the adult male mandrill (C.
mormon).
The face at this age becomes of a fine blue, with the ridge and tip of the nose of the most brilliant red.
According to some authors, the face is also marked with whitish stripes, and is shaded in parts with black, but the colours appear to be variable.
On the forehead there is a crest of hair, and on the chin a yellow beard.
"Toutes les parties suprieures de leurs cuisses et le grand espace nu de leurs fesses sont galement colors du rouge le plus vif, avec un mlange de bleu qui ne manque reellement pas d'lgance".
(31.
Gervais, 'Hist.
Nat.
des Mammifres,' 1854, p.
103.
Figures are given of the skull of the male.
Also Desmarest, 'Mammalogie,' p.
70.
Geoffroy St.-Hilaire and F. Cuvier, 'Hist.
Nat.
des Mammifres,' 1824, tom.
i.
) When the animal is excited all the naked parts become much more vividly tinted.
Several authors have used the strongest expressions in describing these resplendent colours, which they compare with those of the most brilliant birds.
Another remarkable peculiarity is that when the great canine teeth are fully developed, immense protuberances of bone are formed on each cheek, which are deeply furrowed longitudinally, and the naked skin over them is brilliantly- coloured, as
(Fig.
69.
) In the adult females and in the young of both sexes these protuberances are scarcely perceptible; and the naked parts are much less bright coloured, the face being almost black, tinged with blue.
In the adult female, however, the nose at certain regular intervals of time becomes tinted with red.
In all the cases hitherto given the male is more strongly or brighter coloured than the female, and differs from the young of both sexes.
But as with some few birds it is the female which is brighter coloured than the male, so with the Rhesus monkey (Macacus rhesus), the female has a large surface of naked skin round the tail, of a brilliant carmine red, which, as I was assured by the
On the other hand, in the adult male and in the young of both sexes (as I saw in the Gardens), neither the naked skin at the posterior end of the body, nor the face, shew a trace of red.
It appears, however, from some published accounts, that the male does occasionally, or during certain seasons, exhibit some traces of the red.
Although he is thus less ornamented than the female, yet in the larger size of his body, larger canine teeth, more developed whiskers, more prominent superciliary ridges, he follows the common rule of the male excelling the female.
I have now given all the cases known to me of a difference in colour between the sexes of mammals.
Some of these may be the result of variations confined to one sex and transmitted to the same sex, without any good being gained, and therefore without the aid of selection.
We have instances of this with our domesticated animals, as in the males of certain cats being rusty-red, whilst the females are tortoise-shell coloured.
Analogous cases occur in nature: Mr. Bartlett has seen many black varieties of the jaguar, leopard, vulpine phalanger, and wombat; and he is certain that all, or nearly all these animals, were males.
On the other hand, with wolves, foxes, and apparently American squirrels, both sexes are occasionally born black.
Hence it is quite possible that with some mammals a difference in colour between the sexes, especially when this is congenital, may simply be the result, without the aid of selection, of the occurrence of one or more variations, which from the first were
Nevertheless it is improbable that the diversified, vivid, and contrasted colours of certain quadrupeds, for instance, of the above monkeys and antelopes, can thus be accounted for.
We should bear in mind that these colours do not appear in the male at birth, but only at or near maturity; and that unlike ordinary variations, they are lost if the male be emasculated.
It is on the whole probable that the strongly-marked colours and other ornamental characters of male quadrupeds are beneficial to them in their rivalry with other males, and have consequently been acquired through sexual selection.
This view is strengthened by the differences in colour between the sexes occurring almost exclusively, as may be collected from the previous details, in those groups and sub-groups of mammals which present other and strongly-marked secondary sexual
Quadrupeds manifestly take notice of colour.
Sir S. Baker repeatedly observed that the African elephant and rhinoceros attacked white or grey horses with special fury.
I have elsewhere shewn (32.
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' 1868, vol.
ii.
pp.
102, 103.
) that half-wild horses apparently prefer to pair with those of the same colour, and that herds of fallow-deer of different colours, though living together, have long kept distinct.
It is a more significant fact that a female zebra would not admit the addresses of a male ass until he was painted so as to resemble a zebra, and then, as John Hunter remarks, "she received him very readily.
In this curious fact, we have instinct excited by mere colour, which had so strong an effect as to get the better of everything else.
But the male did not require this, the female being an animal somewhat similar to himself, was sufficient to rouse him".
(33.
'Essays and Observations,' by J. Hunter, edited by Owen, 1861, vol.
i.
p.
194.
) In an earlier chapter we have seen that the mental powers of the higher animals do not differ in kind, though greatly in degree, from the corresponding powers of man, especially of the lower and barbarous races; and it would appear that even their taste
As the negro of Africa raises the flesh on his face into parallel ridges "or cicatrices, high above the natural surface, which unsightly deformities are considered great personal attractions" (34.
Sir S. Baker, 'The Nile Tributaries of Abyssinia,' 1867.
);--as negroes and savages in many parts of the world paint their faces with red, blue, white, or black bars,--so the male mandrill of Africa appears to have acquired his deeply-furrowed and gaudily-coloured face from having been thus rendered attractive
No doubt it is to us a most grotesque notion that the posterior end of the body should be coloured for the sake of ornament even more brilliantly than the face; but this is not more strange than that the tails of many birds should be especially decorated.
With mammals we do not at present possess any evidence that the males take pains to display their charms before the female; and the elaborate manner in which this is performed by male birds and other animals is the strongest argument in favour of the
There is, however, a striking parallelism between mammals and birds in all their secondary sexual characters, namely in their weapons for fighting with rival males, in their ornamental appendages, and in their colours.
In both classes, when the male differs from the female, the young of both sexes almost always resemble each other, and in a large majority of cases resemble the adult female.
In both classes the male assumes the characters proper to his sex shortly before the age of reproduction; and if emasculated at an early period, loses them.
In both classes the change of colour is sometimes seasonal, and the tints of the naked parts sometimes become more vivid during the act of courtship.
In both classes the male is almost always more vividly or strongly coloured than the female, and is ornamented with larger crests of hair or feathers, or other such appendages.
In a few exceptional cases the female in both classes is more highly ornamented than the male.
With many mammals, and at least in the case of one bird, the male is more odoriferous than the female.
In both classes the voice of the male is more powerful than that of the female.
Considering this parallelism, there can be little doubt that the same cause, whatever it may be, has acted on mammals and birds; and the result, as far as ornamental characters are concerned, may be attributed, as it appears to me, to the long-continued
EQUAL TRANSMISSION OF ORNAMENTAL CHARACTERS TO BOTH SEXES.
With many birds, ornaments, which analogy leads us to believe were primarily acquired by the males, have been transmitted equally, or almost equally, to both sexes; and we may now enquire how far this view applies to mammals.
With a considerable number of species, especially of the smaller kinds, both sexes have been coloured, independently of sexual selection, for the sake of protection; but not, as far as I can judge, in so many cases, nor in so striking a manner, as in most
Audubon remarks that he often mistook the musk-rat (35.
Fiber zibethicus, Audubon and Bachman, 'The Quadrupeds of North America,' 1846, p.
109.
), whilst sitting on the banks of a muddy stream, for a clod of earth, so complete was the resemblance.
The hare on her form is a familiar instance of concealment through colour; yet this principle partly fails in a closely-allied species, the rabbit, for when running to its burrow, it is made conspicuous to the sportsman, and no doubt to all beasts of prey,
No one doubts that the quadrupeds inhabiting snow-clad regions have been rendered white to protect them from their enemies, or to favour their stealing on their prey.
In regions where snow never lies for long, a white coat would be injurious; consequently, species of this colour are extremely rare in the hotter parts of the world.
It deserves notice that many quadrupeds inhabiting moderately cold regions, although they do not assume a white winter dress, become paler during this season; and this apparently is the direct result of the conditions to which they have long been exposed.
Pallas (36.
'Novae species Quadrupedum e Glirium ordine,' 1778, p.
7.
What I have called the roe is the Capreolus sibiricus subecaudatus of Pallas.
) states that in Siberia a change of this nature occurs with the wolf, two species of Mustela, the domestic horse, the Equus hemionus, the domestic cow, two species of antelopes, the musk- deer, the roe, elk, and reindeer.
The roe, for instance, has a red summer and a greyish-white winter coat; and the latter may perhaps serve as a protection to the animal whilst wandering through the leafless thickets, sprinkled with snow and hoar-frost.
If the above-named animals were gradually to extend their range into regions perpetually covered with snow, their pale winter-coats would probably be rendered through natural selection, whiter and whiter, until they became as white as snow.
Mr. Reeks has given me a curious instance of an animal profiting by being peculiarly coloured.
He raised from fifty to sixty white and brown piebald rabbits in a large walled orchard; and he had at the same time some similarly coloured cats in his house.
Such cats, as I have often noticed, are very conspicuous during day; but as they used to lie in watch during the dusk at the mouths of the burrows, the rabbits apparently did not distinguish them from their parti-coloured brethren.
The result was that, within eighteen months, every one of these parti-coloured rabbits was destroyed; and there was evidence that this was effected by the cats.
Colour seems to be advantageous to another animal, the skunk, in a manner of which we have had many instances in other classes.
No animal will voluntarily attack one of these creatures on account of the dreadful odour which it emits when irritated; but during the dusk it would not easily be recognised and might be attacked by a beast of prey.
Hence it is, as Mr. Belt believes (37.
'The Naturalist in Nicaragua,' p.
249.
), that the skunk is provided with a great white bushy tail, which serves as a conspicuous warning.
[Fig.
70.
Tragelaphus scriptus, male (from the Knowsley Menagerie).
Fig.
71.
Damalis pygarga, male (from the Knowsley Menagerie).
] Although we must admit that many quadrupeds have received their present tints either as a protection, or as an aid in procuring prey, yet with a host of species, the colours are far too conspicuous and too singularly arranged to allow us to suppose that
We may take as an illustration certain antelopes; when we see the square white patch on the throat, the white marks on the fetlocks, and the round black spots on the ears, all more distinct in the male of the Portax picta, than in the female;--when we see
70),--we cannot believe that differences of this kind are of any service to either sex in their daily habits of life.
It seems a much more probable conclusion that the various marks were first acquired by the males and their colours intensified through sexual selection, and then partially transferred to the females.
If this view be admitted, there can be little doubt that the equally singular colours and marks of many other antelopes, though common to both sexes, have been gained and transmitted in a like manner.
Both sexes, for instance, of the koodoo (Strepsiceros kudu) (Fig.
64) have narrow white vertical lines on their hind flanks, and an elegant angular white mark on their foreheads.
Both sexes in the genus Damalis are very oddly coloured; in D. pygarga the back and neck are purplish-red, shading on the flanks into black; and these colours are abruptly separated from the white belly and from a large white space on the buttocks; the
71); there are three white stripes on the forehead, and the ears are marked with white.
The fawns of this species are of a uniform pale yellowish-brown.
In Damalis albifrons the colouring of the head differs from that in the last species in a single white stripe replacing the three stripes, and in the ears being almost wholly white.
(38.
See the fine plates in A. Smith's 'Zoology of South Africa,' and Dr. Gray's 'Gleanings from the Menagerie of Knowsley.
') After having studied to the best of my ability the sexual differences of animals belonging to all classes, I cannot avoid the conclusion that the curiously-arranged colours of many antelopes, though common to both sexes, are the result of sexual
The same conclusion may perhaps be extended to the tiger, one of the most beautiful animals in the world, the sexes of which cannot be distinguished by colour, even by the dealers in wild beasts.
Mr. Wallace believes (39.
'Westminster Review,' July 1, 1867, p.
5.
) that the striped coat of the tiger "so assimilates with the vertical stems of the bamboo, as to assist greatly in concealing him from his approaching prey".
But this view does not appear to me satisfactory.
We have some slight evidence that his beauty may be due to sexual selection, for in two species of Felis the analogous marks and colours are rather brighter in the male than in the female.
The zebra is conspicuously striped, and stripes cannot afford any protection in the open plains of South Africa.
Burchell (40.
'Travels in South Africa,' 1824, vol.
ii.
p.
315.
) in describing a herd says, "their sleek ribs glistened in the sun, and the brightness and regularity of their striped coats presented a picture of extraordinary beauty, in which probably they are not surpassed by any other quadruped".
But as throughout the whole group of the Equidae the sexes are identical in colour, we have here no evidence of sexual selection.
Nevertheless he who attributes the white and dark vertical stripes on the flanks of various antelopes to this process, will probably extend the same view to the Royal Tiger and beautiful Zebra.
We have seen in a former chapter that when young animals belonging to any class follow nearly the same habits of life as their parents, and yet are coloured in a different manner, it may be inferred that they have retained the colouring of some ancient and
In the family of pigs, and in the tapirs, the young are marked with longitudinal stripes, and thus differ from all the existing adult species in these two groups.
With many kinds of deer the young are marked with elegant white spots, of which their parents exhibit not a trace.
A graduated series can be followed from the axis deer, both sexes of which at all ages and during all seasons are beautifully spotted (the male being rather more strongly coloured than the female), to species in which neither the old nor the young are
I will specify some of the steps in this series.
The Mantchurian deer (Cervus mantchuricus) is spotted during the whole year, but, as I have seen in the Zoological Gardens, the spots are much plainer during the summer, when the general colour of the coat is lighter, than during the winter, when the
In the hog-deer (Hyelaphus porcinus) the spots are extremely conspicuous during the summer when the coat is reddish-brown, but quite disappear during the winter when the coat is brown.
(41.
Dr. Gray, 'Gleanings from the Menagerie of Knowsley,' p.
64.
Mr. Blyth, in speaking ('Land and Water,' 1869, p.
42) of the hog-deer of Ceylon, says it is more brightly spotted with white than the common hog-deer, at the season when it renews its horns.
) In both these species the young are spotted.
In the Virginian deer the young are likewise spotted, and about five per cent.
of the adult animals living in Judge Caton's park, as I am informed by him, temporarily exhibit at the period when the red summer coat is being replaced by the bluish winter coat, a row of spots on each flank, which are always the same in number, though
From this condition there is but a very small step to the complete absence of spots in the adults at all seasons; and, lastly, to their absence at all ages and seasons, as occurs with certain species.
From the existence of this perfect series, and more especially from the fawns of so many species being spotted, we may conclude that the now living members of the deer family are the descendants of some ancient species which, like the axis deer, was
A still more ancient progenitor probably somewhat resembled the Hyomoschus aquaticus--for this animal is spotted, and the hornless males have large exserted canine teeth, of which some few true deer still retain rudiments.
Hyomoschus, also, offers one of those interesting cases of a form linking together two groups, for it is intermediate in certain osteological characters between the pachyderms and ruminants, which were formerly thought to be quite distinct.
(42.
Falconer and Cautley, 'Proc.
Geolog.
Soc.
' 1843; and Falconer's 'Pal.
Memoirs,' vol.
i.
p.
196.
) A curious difficulty here arises.
If we admit that coloured spots and stripes were first acquired as ornaments, how comes it that so many existing deer, the descendants of an aboriginally spotted animal, and all the species of pigs and tapirs, the descendants of an aboriginally striped
I cannot satisfactorily answer this question.
We may feel almost sure that the spots and stripes disappeared at or near maturity in the progenitors of our existing species, so that they were still retained by the young; and, owing to the law of inheritance at corresponding ages, were transmitted to
It may have been a great advantage to the lion and puma, from the open nature of their usual haunts, to have lost their stripes, and to have been thus rendered less conspicuous to their prey; and if the successive variations, by which this end was gained,
As to deer, pigs, and tapirs, Fritz Mller has suggested to me that these animals, by the removal of their spots or stripes through natural selection, would have been less easily seen by their enemies; and that they would have especially required this
This may be the true explanation, but it is rather strange that the young should not have been thus protected, and still more so that the adults of some species should have retained their spots, either partially or completely, during part of the year.
We know that, when the domestic ass varies and becomes reddish-brown, grey, or black, the stripes on the shoulders and even on the spine frequently disappear, though we cannot explain the cause.
Very few horses, except dun-coloured kinds, have stripes on any part of their bodies, yet we have good reason to believe that the aboriginal horse was striped on the legs and spine, and probably on the shoulders.
(43.
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' 1868, vol.
i.
pp.
61-64.
) Hence the disappearance of the spots and stripes in our adult existing deer, pigs, and tapirs, may be due to a change in the general colour of their coats; but whether this change was effected through sexual or natural selection, or was due to the direct
An observation made by Mr. Sclater well illustrates our ignorance of the laws which regulate the appearance and disappearance of stripes; the species of Asinus which inhabit the Asiatic continent are destitute of stripes, not having even the cross
(44.
'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1862, p.
164.
See, also, Dr. Hartmann, 'Ann.
d.
Landw.
' Bd.
xliii.
s.
222.
) QUADRUMANA.
[Fig.
72.
Head of Semnopithecus rubicundus.
This and the following figures (from Prof.
Gervais) are given to shew the odd arrangement and development of the hair on the head.
Fig.
73.
Head of Semnopithecus comatus.
Fig.
74.
Head of Cebus capucinus.
Fig.
75.
Head of Ateles marginatus.
Fig.
76.
Head of Cebus vellerosus.
] Before we conclude, it will be well to add a few remarks on the ornaments of monkeys.
In most of the species the sexes resemble each other in colour, but in some, as we have seen, the males differ from the females, especially in the colour of the naked parts of the skin, in the development of the beard, whiskers, and mane.
Many species are coloured either in so extraordinary or so beautiful a manner, and are furnished with such curious and elegant crests of hair, that we can hardly avoid looking at these characters as having been gained for the sake of ornament.
The accompanying figures (Figs.
72 to 76) serve to shew the arrangement of the hair on the face and head in several species.
It is scarcely conceivable that these crests of hair, and the strongly contrasted colours of the fur and skin, can be the result of mere variability without the aid of selection; and it is inconceivable that they can be of use in any ordinary way to these
If so, they have probably been gained through sexual selection, though transmitted equally, or almost equally, to both sexes.
With many of the Quadrumana, we have additional evidence of the action of sexual selection in the greater size and strength of the males, and in the greater development of their canine teeth, in comparison with the females.
[Fig.
77.
Cercopithecus petaurista (from Brehm).
] A few instances will suffice of the strange manner in which both sexes of some species are coloured, and of the beauty of others.
The face of the Cercopithecus petaurista (Fig.
77) is black, the whiskers and beard being white, with a defined, round, white spot on the nose, covered with short white hair, which gives to the animal an almost ludicrous aspect.
The Semnopithecus frontatus likewise has a blackish face with a long black beard, and a large naked spot on the forehead of a bluish-white colour.
The face of Macacus lasiotus is dirty flesh-coloured, with a defined red spot on each cheek.
The appearance of Cercocebus aethiops is grotesque, with its black face, white whiskers and collar, chestnut head, and a large naked white spot over each eyelid.
In very many species, the beard, whiskers, and crests of hair round the face are of a different colour from the rest of the head, and when different, are always of a lighter tint (45.
I observed this fact in the Zoological Gardens; and many cases may be seen in the coloured plates in Geoffroy St.-Hilaire and F. Cuvier, 'Histoire Nat.
des Mammifres,' tom.
i.
1824.
), being often pure white, sometimes bright yellow, or reddish.
The whole face of the South American Brachyurus calvus is of a "glowing scarlet hue"; but this colour does not appear until the animal is nearly mature.
(46.
Bates, 'The Naturalist on the Amazons,' 1863, vol.
ii.
p.
310.
) The naked skin of the face differs wonderfully in colour in the various species.
It is often brown or flesh-colour, with parts perfectly white, and often as black as that of the most sooty negro.
In the Brachyurus the scarlet tint is brighter than that of the most blushing Caucasian damsel.
It is sometimes more distinctly orange than in any Mongolian, and in several species it is blue, passing into violet or grey.
In all the species known to Mr. Bartlett, in which the adults of both sexes have strongly-coloured faces, the colours are dull or absent during early youth.
This likewise holds good with the mandrill and Rhesus, in which the face and the posterior parts of the body are brilliantly coloured in one sex alone.
In these latter cases we have reason to believe that the colours were acquired through sexual selection; and we are naturally led to extend the same view to the foregoing species, though both sexes when adult have their faces coloured in the same manner.
[Fig.
78.
Cercopithecus diana (from Brehm).
] Although many kinds of monkeys are far from beautiful according to our taste, other species are universally admired for their elegant appearance and bright colours.
The Semnopithecus nemaeus, though peculiarly coloured, is described as extremely pretty; the orange-tinted face is surrounded by long whiskers of glossy whiteness, with a line of chestnut-red over the eyebrows; the fur on the back is of a delicate grey,
I will mention only two other monkeys for their beauty; and I have selected these as presenting slight sexual differences in colour, which renders it in some degree probable that both sexes owe their elegant appearance to sexual selection.
In the moustache-monkey (Cercopithecus cephus) the general colour of the fur is mottled-greenish with the throat white; in the male the end of the tail is chestnut, but the face is the most ornamented part, the skin being chiefly bluish-grey, shading into
In the Zoological Society's Gardens I have often overheard visitors admiring the beauty of another monkey, deservedly called Cercopithecus diana (Fig.
78); the general colour of the fur is grey; the chest and inner surface of the forelegs are white; a large triangular defined space on the hinder part of the back is rich chestnut; in the male the inner sides of the thighs and the abdomen are delicate
(47.
I have seen most of the above monkeys in the Zoological Society's Gardens.
The description of the Semnopithecus nemaeus is taken from Mr. W.C. Martin's 'Natural History of Mammalia,' 1841, p.
460; see also pp.
475, 523.
) In these and many other monkeys, the beauty and singular arrangement of their colours, and still more the diversified and elegant arrangement of the crests and tufts of hair on their heads, force the conviction on my mind that these characters have been
SUMMARY.
The law of battle for the possession of the female appears to prevail throughout the whole great class of mammals.
Most naturalists will admit that the greater size, strength, courage, and pugnacity of the male, his special weapons of offence, as well as his special means of defence, have been acquired or modified through that form of selection which I have called
This does not depend on any superiority in the general struggle for life, but on certain individuals of one sex, generally the male, being successful in conquering other males, and leaving a larger number of offspring to inherit their superiority than do
There is another and more peaceful kind of contest, in which the males endeavour to excite or allure the females by various charms.
This is probably carried on in some cases by the powerful odours emitted by the males during the breeding-season; the odoriferous glands having been acquired through sexual selection.
Whether the same view can be extended to the voice is doubtful, for the vocal organs of the males must have been strengthened by use during maturity, under the powerful excitements of love, jealousy or rage, and will consequently have been transmitted to
Various crests, tufts, and mantles of hair, which are either confined to the male, or are more developed in this sex than in the female, seem in most cases to be merely ornamental, though they sometimes serve as a defence against rival males.
There is even reason to suspect that the branching horns of stags, and the elegant horns of certain antelopes, though properly serving as weapons of offence or defence, have been partly modified for ornament.
When the male differs in colour from the female, he generally exhibits darker and more strongly-contrasted tints.
We do not in this class meet with the splendid red, blue, yellow, and green tints, so common with male birds and many other animals.
The naked parts, however, of certain Quadrumana must be excepted; for such parts, often oddly situated, are brilliantly coloured in some species.
The colours of the male in other cases may be due to simple variation, without the aid of selection.
But when the colours are diversified and strongly pronounced, when they are not developed until near maturity, and when they are lost after emasculation, we can hardly avoid the conclusion that they have been acquired through sexual selection for the sake
When both sexes are coloured in the same manner, and the colours are conspicuous or curiously arranged, without being of the least apparent use as a protection, and especially when they are associated with various other ornamental appendages, we are led by
That conspicuous and diversified colours, whether confined to the males or common to both sexes, are as a general rule associated in the same groups and sub-groups with other secondary sexual characters serving for war or for ornament, will be found to
The law of the equal transmission of characters to both sexes, as far as colour and other ornaments are concerned, has prevailed far more extensively with mammals than with birds; but weapons, such as horns and tusks, have often been transmitted either
This is surprising, for, as the males generally use their weapons for defence against enemies of all kinds, their weapons would have been of service to the females.
As far as we can see, their absence in this sex can be accounted for only by the form of inheritance which has prevailed.
Finally, with quadrupeds the contest between the individuals of the same sex, whether peaceful or bloody, has, with the rarest exceptions, been confined to the males; so that the latter have been modified through sexual selection, far more commonly than
PART III.
SEXUAL SELECTION IN RELATION TO MAN, AND CONCLUSION.
CHAPTER XIX.
SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS OF MAN.
Differences between man and woman--Causes of such differences and of certain characters common to both sexes--Law of battle--Differences in mental powers, and voice--On the influence of beauty in determining the marriages of mankind--Attention paid by
With mankind the differences between the sexes are greater than in most of the Quadrumana, but not so great as in some, for instance, the mandrill.
Man on an average is considerably taller, heavier, and stronger than woman, with squarer shoulders and more plainly-pronounced muscles.
Owing to the relation which exists between muscular development and the projection of the brows (1.
Schaaffhausen, translation in 'Anthropological Review,' Oct.
1868, pp.
419, 420, 427.
), the superciliary ridge is generally more marked in man than in woman.
His body, and especially his face, is more hairy, and his voice has a different and more powerful tone.
In certain races the women are said to differ slightly in tint from the men.
For instance, Schweinfurth, in speaking of a negress belonging to the Monbuttoos, who inhabit the interior of Africa a few degrees north of the equator, says, "Like all her race, she had a skin several shades lighter than her husband's, being something of
(2.
'The Heart of Africa,' English transl.
1873, vol i.
p.
544.
) As the women labour in the fields and are quite unclothed, it is not likely that they differ in colour from the men owing to less exposure to the weather.
European women are perhaps the brighter coloured of the two sexes, as may be seen when both have been equally exposed.
Man is more courageous, pugnacious and energetic than woman, and has a more inventive genius.
His brain is absolutely larger, but whether or not proportionately to his larger body, has not, I believe, been fully ascertained.
In woman the face is rounder; the jaws and the base of the skull smaller; the outlines of the body rounder, in parts more prominent; and her pelvis is broader than in man (3.
Ecker, translation, in 'Anthropological Review,' Oct.
1868, pp.
351-356.
The comparison of the form of the skull in men and women has been followed out with much care by Welcker.
); but this latter character may perhaps be considered rather as a primary than a secondary sexual character.
She comes to maturity at an earlier age than man.
As with animals of all classes, so with man, the distinctive characters of the male sex are not fully developed until he is nearly mature; and if emasculated they never appear.
The beard, for instance, is a secondary sexual character, and male children are beardless, though at an early age they have abundant hair on the head.
It is probably due to the rather late appearance in life of the successive variations whereby man has acquired his masculine characters, that they are transmitted to the male sex alone.
Male and female children resemble each other closely, like the young of so many other animals in which the adult sexes differ widely; they likewise resemble the mature female much more closely than the mature male.
The female, however, ultimately assumes certain distinctive characters, and in the formation of her skull, is said to be intermediate between the child and the man.
(4.
Ecker and Welcker, ibid.
pp.
352, 355; Vogt, 'Lectures on Man,' Eng.
translat.
p.
81.
) Again, as the young of closely allied though distinct species do not differ nearly so much from each other as do the adults, so it is with the children of the different races of man.
Some have even maintained that race-differences cannot be detected in the infantile skull.
(5.
Schaaffhausen, 'Anthropolog.
Review,' ibid.
p.
429.
) In regard to colour, the new-born negro child is reddish nut-brown, which soon becomes slaty-grey; the black colour being fully developed within a year in the Soudan, but not until three years in Egypt.
The eyes of the negro are at first blue, and the hair chestnut-brown rather than black, being curled only at the ends.
The children of the Australians immediately after birth are yellowish-brown, and become dark at a later age.
Those of the Guaranys of Paraguay are whitish-yellow, but they acquire in the course of a few weeks the yellowish-brown tint of their parents.
Similar observations have been made in other parts of America.
(6.
Pruner-Bey, on negro infants as quoted by Vogt, 'Lectures on Man,' Eng.
translat.
1864, p.
189: for further facts on negro infants, as quoted from Winterbottom and Camper, see Lawrence, 'Lectures on Physiology,' etc.
1822, p.
451.
For the infants of the Guaranys, see Rengger, 'Sugethiere,' etc.
s.
3.
See also Godron, 'De l'Espce,' tom.
ii.
1859, p.
253.
For the Australians, Waitz, 'Introduction to Anthropology,' Eng.
translat.
1863, p.
99.
) I have specified the foregoing differences between the male and female sex in mankind, because they are curiously like those of the Quadrumana.
With these animals the female is mature at an earlier age than the male; at least this is certainly the case in Cebus azarae.
(7.
Rengger, 'Sugethiere,' etc.
, 1830, s.
49.
) The males of most species are larger and stronger than the females, of which fact the gorilla affords a well- known instance.
Even in so trifling a character as the greater prominence of the superciliary ridge, the males of certain monkeys differ from the females (8.
As in Macacus cynomolgus (Desmarest, 'Mammalogie,' p.
65), and in Hylobates agilis (Geoffroy St.-Hilaire and F. Cuvier, 'Histoire Nat.
des Mammifres,' 1824, tom.
i.
p.
2).
), and agree in this respect with mankind.
In the gorilla and certain other monkeys, the cranium of the adult male presents a strongly-marked sagittal crest, which is absent in the female; and Ecker found a trace of a similar difference between the two sexes in the Australians.
(9.
'Anthropological Review,' Oct.
1868, p.
353.
) With monkeys when there is any difference in the voice, that of the male is the more powerful.
We have seen that certain male monkeys have a well- developed beard, which is quite deficient, or much less developed in the female.
No instance is known of the beard, whiskers, or moustache being larger in the female than in the male monkey.
Even in the colour of the beard there is a curious parallelism between man and the Quadrumana, for with man when the beard differs in colour from the hair of the head, as is commonly the case, it is, I believe, almost always of a lighter tint, being often
I have repeatedly observed this fact in England; but two gentlemen have lately written to me, saying that they form an exception to the rule.
One of these gentlemen accounts for the fact by the wide difference in colour of the hair on the paternal and maternal sides of his family.
Both had been long aware of this peculiarity (one of them having often been accused of dyeing his beard), and had been thus led to observe other men, and were convinced that the exceptions were very rare.
Dr. Hooker attended to this little point for me in Russia, and found no exception to the rule.
In Calcutta, Mr. J. Scott, of the Botanic Gardens, was so kind as to observe the many races of men to be seen there, as well as in some other parts of India, namely, two races of Sikhim, the Bhoteas, Hindoos, Burmese, and Chinese, most of which races have
Now with monkeys, as has already been stated, the beard frequently differs strikingly in colour from the hair of the head, and in such cases it is always of a lighter hue, being often pure white, sometimes yellow or reddish.
(10.
Mr. Blyth informs me that he has only seen one instance of the beard, whiskers, etc.
, in a monkey becoming white with old age, as is so commonly the case with us.
This, however, occurred in an aged Macacus cynomolgus, kept in confinement whose moustaches were "remarkably long and human-like".
Altogether this old monkey presented a ludicrous resemblance to one of the reigning monarchs of Europe, after whom he was universally nick-named.
In certain races of man the hair on the head hardly ever becomes grey; thus Mr. D. Forbes has never, as he informs me, seen an instance with the Aymaras and Quichuas of South America.
) In regard to the general hairiness of the body, the women in all races are less hairy than the men; and in some few Quadrumana the under side of the body of the female is less hairy than that of the male.
(11.
This is the case with the females of several species of Hylobates; see Geoffroy St.- Hilaire and F. Cuvier, 'Hist.
Nat.
des Mamm.
' tom.
i.
See also, on H. lar, 'Penny Cyclopedia,' vol.
ii.
pp.
149, 150.
) Lastly, male monkeys, like men, are bolder and fiercer than the females.
They lead the troop, and when there is danger, come to the front.
We thus see how close is the parallelism between the sexual differences of man and the Quadrumana.
With some few species, however, as with certain baboons, the orang and the gorilla, there is a considerably greater difference between the sexes, as in the size of the canine teeth, in the development and colour of the hair, and especially in the colour of
All the secondary sexual characters of man are highly variable, even within the limits of the same race; and they differ much in the several races.
These two rules hold good generally throughout the animal kingdom.
In the excellent observations made on board the Novara (12.
The results were deduced by Dr. Weisbach from the measurements made by Drs.
K. Scherzer and Schwarz, see 'Reise der Novara: Anthropolog.
Theil,' 1867, ss.
216, 231, 234, 236, 239, 269.
), the male Australians were found to exceed the females by only 65 millim.
in height, whilst with the Javans the average excess was 218 millim.
; so that in this latter race the difference in height between the sexes is more than thrice as great as with the Australians.
Numerous measurements were carefully made of the stature, the circumference of the neck and chest, the length of the back-bone and of the arms, in various races; and nearly all these measurements shew that the males differ much more from one another than
This fact indicates that, as far as these characters are concerned, it is the male which has been chiefly modified, since the several races diverged from their common stock.
The development of the beard and the hairiness of the body differ remarkably in the men of distinct races, and even in different tribes or families of the same race.
We Europeans see this amongst ourselves.
In the Island of St. Kilda, according to Martin (13.
'Voyage to St. Kilda' (3rd ed.
1753), p.
37.
), the men do not acquire beards until the age of thirty or upwards, and even then the beards are very thin.
On the Europaeo-Asiatic continent, beards prevail until we pass beyond India; though with the natives of Ceylon they are often absent, as was noticed in ancient times by Diodorus.
(14.
Sir J.E. Tennent, 'Ceylon,' vol.
ii.
1859, p.
107.
) Eastward of India beards disappear, as with the Siamese, Malays, Kalmucks, Chinese, and Japanese; nevertheless, the Ainos (15.
Quatrefages, 'Revue des Cours Scientifiques,' Aug.
29, 1868, p.
630; Vogt, 'Lectures on Man,' Eng.
trans.
p.
127.
), who inhabit the northernmost islands of the Japan Archipelago, are the hairiest men in the world.
With negroes the beard is scanty or wanting, and they rarely have whiskers; in both sexes the body is frequently almost destitute of fine down.
(16.
On the beards of negroes, Vogt, 'Lectures,' etc.
p.
127; Waitz, 'Introduct.
to Anthropology,' Engl.
translat.
1863, vol.
i.
p.
96.
It is remarkable that in the United States ('Investigations in Military and Anthropological Statistics of American Soldiers,' 1869, p.
569) the pure negroes and their crossed offspring seem to have bodies almost as hairy as Europeans.
) On the other hand, the Papuans of the Malay Archipelago, who are nearly as black as negroes, possess well-developed beards.
(17.
Wallace, 'The Malay Arch.
' vol.
ii.
1869, p.
178.
) In the Pacific Ocean the inhabitants of the Fiji Archipelago have large bushy beards, whilst those of the not distant archipelagoes of Tonga and Samoa are beardless; but these men belong to distinct races.
In the Ellice group all the inhabitants belong to the same race; yet on one island alone, namely Nunemaya, "the men have splendid beards"; whilst on the other islands "they have, as a rule, a dozen straggling hairs for a beard".
(18.
Dr. J. Barnard Davis on Oceanic Races, in 'Anthropological Review,' April 1870, pp.
185, 191.
) Throughout the great American continent the men may be said to be beardless; but in almost all the tribes a few short hairs are apt to appear on the face, especially in old age.
With the tribes of North America, Catlin estimates that eighteen out of twenty men are completely destitute by nature of a beard; but occasionally there may be seen a man, who has neglected to pluck out the hairs at puberty, with a soft beard an inch or
The Guaranys of Paraguay differ from all the surrounding tribes in having a small beard, and even some hair on the body, but no whiskers.
(19.
Catlin, 'North American Indians,' 3rd.
ed.
1842, vol.
ii.
p.
227.
On the Guaranys, see Azara, 'Voyages dans l'Amrique Merid.
' tom.
ii.
1809, p.
85; also Rengger, 'Sugethiere von Paraguay,' s.
3.
) I am informed by Mr. D. Forbes, who particularly attended to this point, that the Aymaras and Quichuas of the Cordillera are remarkably hairless, yet in old age a few straggling hairs occasionally appear on the chin.
The men of these two tribes have very little hair on the various parts of the body where hair grows abundantly in Europeans, and the women have none on the corresponding parts.
The hair on the head, however, attains an extraordinary length in both sexes, often reaching almost to the ground; and this is likewise the case with some of the N. American tribes.
In the amount of hair, and in the general shape of the body, the sexes of the American aborigines do not differ so much from each other, as in most other races.
(20.
Prof.
and Mrs. Agassiz ('Journey in Brazil,' p.
530) remark that the sexes of the American Indians differ less than those of the negroes and of the higher races.
See also Rengger, ibid.
p.
3, on the Guaranys.
) This fact is analogous with what occurs with some closely allied monkeys; thus the sexes of the chimpanzee are not as different as those of the orang or gorilla.
(21.
Rutimeyer, 'Die Grenzen der Thierwelt; eine Betrachtung zu Darwin's Lehre,' 1868, s.
54.
) In the previous chapters we have seen that with mammals, birds, fishes, insects, etc.
, many characters, which there is every reason to believe were primarily gained through sexual selection by one sex, have been transferred to the other.
As this same form of transmission has apparently prevailed much with mankind, it will save useless repetition if we discuss the origin of characters peculiar to the male sex together with certain other characters common to both sexes.
LAW OF BATTLE.
With savages, for instance, the Australians, the women are the constant cause of war both between members of the same tribe and between distinct tribes.
So no doubt it was in ancient times; "nam fuit ante Helenam mulier teterrima belli causa".
With some of the North American Indians, the contest is reduced to a system.
That excellent observer, Hearne (22.
'A Journey from Prince of Wales Fort,' 8vo.
ed.
Dublin, 1796, p.
104.
Sir J. Lubbock ('Origin of Civilisation,' 1870, p.
69) gives other and similar cases in North America.
For the Guanas of South America see Azara, 'Voyages,' etc.
tom.
ii.
p.
94.
), says:--"It has ever been the custom among these people for the men to wrestle for any woman to whom they are attached; and, of course, the strongest party always carries off the prize.
A weak man, unless he be a good hunter, and well-beloved, is seldom permitted to keep a wife that a stronger man thinks worth his notice.
This custom prevails throughout all the tribes, and causes a great spirit of emulation among their youth, who are upon all occasions, from their childhood, trying their strength and skill in wrestling".
With the Guanas of South America, Azara states that the men rarely marry till twenty years old or more, as before that age they cannot conquer their rivals.
Other similar facts could be given; but even if we had no evidence on this head, we might feel almost sure, from the analogy of the higher Quadrumana (23.
On the fighting of the male gorillas, see Dr. Savage, in 'Boston Journal of Natural History,' vol.
v.
1847, p.
423.
On Presbytis entellus, see the 'Indian Field,' 1859, p.
146.
), that the law of battle had prevailed with man during the early stages of his development.
The occasional appearance at the present day of canine teeth which project above the others, with traces of a diastema or open space for the reception of the opposite canines, is in all probability a case of reversion to a former state, when the
It was remarked in a former chapter that as man gradually became erect, and continually used his hands and arms for fighting with sticks and stones, as well as for the other purposes of life, he would have used his jaws and teeth less and less.
The jaws, together with their muscles, would then have been reduced through disuse, as would the teeth through the not well understood principles of correlation and economy of growth; for we everywhere see that parts, which are no longer of service, are
By such steps the original inequality between the jaws and teeth in the two sexes of mankind would ultimately have been obliterated.
The case is almost parallel with that of many male Ruminants, in which the canine teeth have been reduced to mere rudiments, or have disappeared, apparently in consequence of the development of horns.
As the prodigious difference between the skulls of the two sexes in the orang and gorilla stands in close relation with the development of the immense canine teeth in the males, we may infer that the reduction of the jaws and teeth in the early male
There can be little doubt that the greater size and strength of man, in comparison with woman, together with his broader shoulders, more developed muscles, rugged outline of body, his greater courage and pugnacity, are all due in chief part to inheritance
These characters would, however, have been preserved or even augmented during the long ages of man's savagery, by the success of the strongest and boldest men, both in the general struggle for life and in their contests for wives; a success which would
It is not probable that the greater strength of man was primarily acquired through the inherited effects of his having worked harder than woman for his own subsistence and that of his family; for the women in all barbarous nations are compelled to work at
With civilised people the arbitrament of battle for the possession of the women has long ceased; on the other hand, the men, as a general rule, have to work harder than the women for their joint subsistence, and thus their greater strength will have been
DIFFERENCE IN THE MENTAL POWERS OF THE TWO SEXES.
With respect to differences of this nature between man and woman, it is probable that sexual selection has played a highly important part.
I am aware that some writers doubt whether there is any such inherent difference; but this is at least probable from the analogy of the lower animals which present other secondary sexual characters.
No one disputes that the bull differs in disposition from the cow, the wild-boar from the sow, the stallion from the mare, and, as is well known to the keepers of menageries, the males of the larger apes from the females.
Woman seems to differ from man in mental disposition, chiefly in her greater tenderness and less selfishness; and this holds good even with savages, as shewn by a well-known passage in Mungo Park's Travels, and by statements made by many other travellers.
Woman, owing to her maternal instincts, displays these qualities towards her infants in an eminent degree; therefore it is likely that she would often extend them towards her fellow-creatures.
Man is the rival of other men; he delights in competition, and this leads to ambition which passes too easily into selfishness.
These latter qualities seem to be his natural and unfortunate birthright.
It is generally admitted that with woman the powers of intuition, of rapid perception, and perhaps of imitation, are more strongly marked than in man; but some, at least, of these faculties are characteristic of the lower races, and therefore of a past and
The chief distinction in the intellectual powers of the two sexes is shewn by man's attaining to a higher eminence, in whatever he takes up, than can woman--whether requiring deep thought, reason, or imagination, or merely the use of the senses and hands.
If two lists were made of the most eminent men and women in poetry, painting, sculpture, music (inclusive both of composition and performance), history, science, and philosophy, with half-a-dozen names under each subject, the two lists would not bear
We may also infer, from the law of the deviation from averages, so well illustrated by Mr. Galton, in his work on 'Hereditary Genius,' that if men are capable of a decided pre-eminence over women in many subjects, the average of mental power in man must be
Amongst the half-human progenitors of man, and amongst savages, there have been struggles between the males during many generations for the possession of the females.
But mere bodily strength and size would do little for victory, unless associated with courage, perseverance, and determined energy.
With social animals, the young males have to pass through many a contest before they win a female, and the older males have to retain their females by renewed battles.
They have, also, in the case of mankind, to defend their females, as well as their young, from enemies of all kinds, and to hunt for their joint subsistence.
But to avoid enemies or to attack them with success, to capture wild animals, and to fashion weapons, requires the aid of the higher mental faculties, namely, observation, reason, invention, or imagination.
These various faculties will thus have been continually put to the test and selected during manhood; they will, moreover, have been strengthened by use during this same period of life.
Consequently in accordance with the principle often alluded to, we might expect that they would at least tend to be transmitted chiefly to the male offspring at the corresponding period of manhood.
Now, when two men are put into competition, or a man with a woman, both possessed of every mental quality in equal perfection, save that one has higher energy, perseverance, and courage, the latter will generally become more eminent in every pursuit, and
(24.
J. Stuart Mill remarks ('The Subjection of Women,' 1869, p.
122), "The things in which man most excels woman are those which require most plodding, and long hammering at single thoughts".
What is this but energy and perseverance?
) He may be said to possess genius--for genius has been declared by a great authority to be patience; and patience, in this sense, means unflinching, undaunted perseverance.
But this view of genius is perhaps deficient; for without the higher powers of the imagination and reason, no eminent success can be gained in many subjects.
These latter faculties, as well as the former, will have been developed in man, partly through sexual selection,--that is, through the contest of rival males, and partly through natural selection, that is, from success in the general struggle for life; and
It accords in a striking manner with this view of the modification and re-inforcement of many of our mental faculties by sexual selection, that, firstly, they notoriously undergo a considerable change at puberty (25.
Maudsley, 'Mind and Body,' p.
31.
), and, secondly, that eunuchs remain throughout life inferior in these same qualities.
Thus, man has ultimately become superior to woman.
It is, indeed, fortunate that the law of the equal transmission of characters to both sexes prevails with mammals; otherwise, it is probable that man would have become as superior in mental endowment to woman, as the peacock is in ornamental plumage to the
It must be borne in mind that the tendency in characters acquired by either sex late in life, to be transmitted to the same sex at the same age, and of early acquired characters to be transmitted to both sexes, are rules which, though general, do not
If they always held good, we might conclude (but I here exceed my proper bounds) that the inherited effects of the early education of boys and girls would be transmitted equally to both sexes; so that the present inequality in mental power between the
In order that woman should reach the same standard as man, she ought, when nearly adult, to be trained to energy and perseverance, and to have her reason and imagination exercised to the highest point; and then she would probably transmit these qualities
All women, however, could not be thus raised, unless during many generations those who excelled in the above robust virtues were married, and produced offspring in larger numbers than other women.
As before remarked of bodily strength, although men do not now fight for their wives, and this form of selection has passed away, yet during manhood, they generally undergo a severe struggle in order to maintain themselves and their families; and this will
(26.
An observation by Vogt bears on this subject: he says, "It is a remarkable circumstance, that the difference between the sexes, as regards the cranial cavity, increases with the development of the race, so that the male European excels much more the
Welcker confirms this statement of Huschke from his measurements of negro and German skulls".
But Vogt admits ('Lectures on Man,' Eng.
translat.
1864, p.
81) that more observations are requisite on this point.
VOICE AND MUSICAL POWERS.
In some species of Quadrumana there is a great difference between the adult sexes, in the power of their voices and in the development of the vocal organs; and man appears to have inherited this difference from his early progenitors.
His vocal cords are about one-third longer than in woman, or than in boys; and emasculation produces the same effect on him as on the lower animals, for it "arrests that prominent growth of the thyroid, etc.
, which accompanies the elongation of the cords".
(27.
Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
603.
) With respect to the cause of this difference between the sexes, I have nothing to add to the remarks in the last chapter on the probable effects of the long-continued use of the vocal organs by the male under the excitement of love, rage and jealousy.
According to Sir Duncan Gibb (28.
'Journal of the Anthropological Society,' April 1869, p.
lvii.
and lxvi.
), the voice and the form of the larynx differ in the different races of mankind; but with the Tartars, Chinese, etc.
, the voice of the male is said not to differ so much from that of the female, as in most other races.
The capacity and love for singing or music, though not a sexual character in man, must not here be passed over.
Although the sounds emitted by animals of all kinds serve many purposes, a strong case can be made out, that the vocal organs were primarily used and perfected in relation to the propagation of the species.
Insects and some few spiders are the lowest animals which voluntarily produce any sound; and this is generally effected by the aid of beautifully constructed stridulating organs, which are often confined to the males.
The sounds thus produced consist, I believe in all cases, of the same note, repeated rhythmically (29.
Dr. Scudder, 'Notes on Stridulation,' in 'Proc.
Boston Soc.
of Nat.
Hist.
' vol.
xi.
April 1868.
); and this is sometimes pleasing even to the ears of man.
The chief and, in some cases, exclusive purpose appears to be either to call or charm the opposite sex.
The sounds produced by fishes are said in some cases to be made only by the males during the breeding-season.
All the air-breathing Vertebrata necessarily possess an apparatus for inhaling and expelling air, with a pipe capable of being closed at one end.
Hence when the primeval members of this class were strongly excited and their muscles violently contracted, purposeless sounds would almost certainly have been produced; and these, if they proved in any way serviceable, might readily have been modified or
The lowest Vertebrates which breathe air are Amphibians; and of these, frogs and toads possess vocal organs, which are incessantly used during the breeding- season, and which are often more highly developed in the male than in the female.
The male alone of the tortoise utters a noise, and this only during the season of love.
Male alligators roar or bellow during the same season.
Every one knows how much birds use their vocal organs as a means of courtship; and some species likewise perform what may be called instrumental music.
In the class of Mammals, with which we are here more particularly concerned, the males of almost all the species use their voices during the breeding-season much more than at any other time; and some are absolutely mute excepting at this season.
With other species both sexes, or only the females, use their voices as a love-call.
Considering these facts, and that the vocal organs of some quadrupeds are much more largely developed in the male than in the female, either permanently or temporarily during the breeding-season; and considering that in most of the lower classes the sounds
The American Mycetes caraya perhaps forms an exception, as does the Hylobates agilis, an ape allied to man.
This gibbon has an extremely loud but musical voice.
Mr. Waterhouse states (30.
Given in W.C.L. Martin's 'General Introduction to Natural History of Mamm.
Animals,' 1841, p.
432; Owen, 'Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii, p.
600.
), "It appeared to me that in ascending and descending the scale, the intervals were always exactly half-tones; and I am sure that the highest note was the exact octave to the lowest.
The quality of the notes is very musical; and I do not doubt that a good violinist would be able to give a correct idea of the gibbon's composition, excepting as regards its loudness".
Mr. Waterhouse then gives the notes.
Professor Owen, who is a musician, confirms the foregoing statement, and remarks, though erroneously, that this gibbon "alone of brute mammals may be said to sing".
It appears to be much excited after its performance.
Unfortunately, its habits have never been closely observed in a state of nature; but from the analogy of other animals, it is probable that it uses its musical powers more especially during the season of courtship.
This gibbon is not the only species in the genus which sings, for my son, Francis Darwin, attentively listened in the Zoological Gardens to H. leuciscus whilst singing a cadence of three notes, in true musical intervals and with a clear musical tone.
It is a more surprising fact that certain rodents utter musical sounds.
Singing mice have often been mentioned and exhibited, but imposture has commonly been suspected.
We have, however, at last a clear account by a well-known observer, the Rev.
S. Lockwood (31.
The 'American Naturalist,' 1871, p.
761.
), of the musical powers of an American species, the Hesperomys cognatus, belonging to a genus distinct from that of the English mouse.
This little animal was kept in confinement, and the performance was repeatedly heard.
In one of the two chief songs, "the last bar would frequently be prolonged to two or three; and she would sometimes change from C sharp and D, to C natural and D, then warble on these two notes awhile, and wind up with a quick chirp on C sharp and D. The
Mr. Lockwood gives both songs in musical notation; and adds that though this little mouse "had no ear for time, yet she would keep to the key of B (two flats) and strictly in a major key".
..".
Her soft clear voice falls an octave with all the precision possible; then at the wind up, it rises again into a very quick trill on C sharp and D." A critic has asked how the ears of man, and he ought to have added of other animals, could have been
But this question shews some confusion on the subject; a noise is the sensation resulting from the co-existence of several aerial "simple vibrations" of various periods, each of which intermits so frequently that its separate existence cannot be perceived.
It is only in the want of continuity of such vibrations, and in their want of harmony inter se, that a noise differs from a musical note.
Thus an ear to be capable of discriminating noises--and the high importance of this power to all animals is admitted by every one--must be sensitive to musical notes.
We have evidence of this capacity even low down in the animal scale: thus Crustaceans are provided with auditory hairs of different lengths, which have been seen to vibrate when the proper musical notes are struck.
(32.
Helmholtz, 'Theorie Phys.
de la Musique,' 1868, p.
187.
) As stated in a previous chapter, similar observations have been made on the hairs of the antennae of gnats.
It has been positively asserted by good observers that spiders are attracted by music.
It is also well known that some dogs howl when hearing particular tones.
(33.
Several accounts have been published to this effect.
Mr. Peach writes to me that an old dog of his howls when B flat is sounded on the flute, and to no other note.
I may add another instance of a dog always whining, when one note on a concertina, which was out of tune, was played.
) Seals apparently appreciate music, and their fondness for it "was well known to the ancients, and is often taken advantage of by the hunters at the present day".
(34.
Mr. R. Brown, in 'Proc.
Zool.
Soc.
' 1868, p.
410.
) Therefore, as far as the mere perception of musical notes is concerned, there seems no special difficulty in the case of man or of any other animal.
Helmholtz has explained on physiological principles why concords are agreeable, and discords disagreeable to the human ear; but we are little concerned with these, as music in harmony is a late invention.
We are more concerned with melody, and here again, according to Helmholtz, it is intelligible why the notes of our musical scale are used.
The ear analyses all sounds into their component "simple vibrations," although we are not conscious of this analysis.
In a musical note the lowest in pitch of these is generally predominant, and the others which are less marked are the octave, the twelfth, the second octave, etc.
, all harmonies of the fundamental predominant note; any two notes of our scale have many of these harmonic over-tones in common.
It seems pretty clear then, that if an animal always wished to sing precisely the same song, he would guide himself by sounding those notes in succession, which possess many over- tones in common--that is, he would choose for his song, notes which belong
But if it be further asked why musical tones in a certain order and rhythm give man and other animals pleasure, we can no more give the reason than for the pleasantness of certain tastes and smells.
That they do give pleasure of some kind to animals, we may infer from their being produced during the season of courtship by many insects, spiders, fishes, amphibians, and birds; for unless the females were able to appreciate such sounds and were excited
Human song is generally admitted to be the basis or origin of instrumental music.
As neither the enjoyment nor the capacity of producing musical notes are faculties of the least use to man in reference to his daily habits of life, they must be ranked amongst the most mysterious with which he is endowed.
They are present, though in a very rude condition, in men of all races, even the most savage; but so different is the taste of the several races, that our music gives no pleasure to savages, and their music is to us in most cases hideous and unmeaning.
Dr. Seemann, in some interesting remarks on this subject (35.
'Journal of Anthropological Society,' Oct.
1870, p.
clv.
See also the several later chapters in Sir John Lubbock's 'Prehistoric Times,' 2nd ed.
1869, which contain an admirable account of the habits of savages.
), "doubts whether even amongst the nations of Western Europe, intimately connected as they are by close and frequent intercourse, the music of the one is interpreted in the same sense by the others.
By travelling eastwards we find that there is certainly a different language of music.
Songs of joy and dance- accompaniments are no longer, as with us, in the major keys, but always in the minor".
Whether or not the half-human progenitors of man possessed, like the singing gibbons, the capacity of producing, and therefore no doubt of appreciating, musical notes, we know that man possessed these faculties at a very remote period.
M. Lartet has described two flutes made out of the bones and horns of the reindeer, found in caves together with flint tools and the remains of extinct animals.
The arts of singing and of dancing are also very ancient, and are now practised by all or nearly all the lowest races of man.
Poetry, which may be considered as the offspring of song, is likewise so ancient, that many persons have felt astonished that it should have arisen during the earliest ages of which we have any record.
We see that the musical faculties, which are not wholly deficient in any race, are capable of prompt and high development, for Hottentots and Negroes have become excellent musicians, although in their native countries they rarely practise anything that we
Schweinfurth, however, was pleased with some of the simple melodies which he heard in the interior of Africa.
But there is nothing anomalous in the musical faculties lying dormant in man: some species of birds which never naturally sing, can without much difficulty be taught to do so; thus a house-sparrow has learnt the song of a linnet.
As these two species are closely allied, and belong to the order of Insessores, which includes nearly all the singing-birds in the world, it is possible that a progenitor of the sparrow may have been a songster.
It is more remarkable that parrots, belonging to a group distinct from the Insessores, and having differently constructed vocal organs, can be taught not only to speak, but to pipe or whistle tunes invented by man, so that they must have some musical
Nevertheless it would be very rash to assume that parrots are descended from some ancient form which was a songster.
Many cases could be advanced of organs and instincts originally adapted for one purpose, having been utilised for some distinct purpose.
(36.
Since this chapter was printed, I have seen a valuable article by Mr. Chauncey Wright ('North American Review,' Oct.
1870, page 293), who, in discussing the above subject, remarks, "There are many consequences of the ultimate laws or uniformities of nature, through which the acquisition of one useful power will bring with it many resulting advantages as well as limiting
As I have attempted to shew in an early chapter of this work, this principle has an important bearing on the acquisition by man of some of his mental characteristics.
) Hence the capacity for high musical development which the savage races of man possess, may be due either to the practice by our semi-human progenitors of some rude form of music, or simply to their having acquired the proper vocal organs for a different
But in this latter case we must assume, as in the above instance of parrots, and as seems to occur with many animals, that they already possessed some sense of melody.
Music arouses in us various emotions, but not the more terrible ones of horror, fear, rage, etc.
It awakens the gentler feelings of tenderness and love, which readily pass into devotion.
In the Chinese annals it is said, "Music hath the power of making heaven descend upon earth".
It likewise stirs up in us the sense of triumph and the glorious ardour for war.
These powerful and mingled feelings may well give rise to the sense of sublimity.
We can concentrate, as Dr. Seemann observes, greater intensity of feeling in a single musical note than in pages of writing.
It is probable that nearly the same emotions, but much weaker and far less complex, are felt by birds when the male pours forth his full volume of song, in rivalry with other males, to captivate the female.
Love is still the commonest theme of our songs.
As Herbert Spencer remarks, "music arouses dormant sentiments of which we had not conceived the possibility, and do not know the meaning; or, as Richter says, tells us of things we have not seen and shall not see".
Conversely, when vivid emotions are felt and expressed by the orator, or even in common speech, musical cadences and rhythm are instinctively used.
The negro in Africa when excited often bursts forth in song; "another will reply in song, whilst the company, as if touched by a musical wave, murmur a chorus in perfect unison".
(37.
Winwood Reade, 'The Martyrdom of Man,' 1872, p.
441, and 'African Sketch Book,' 1873, vol.
ii.
p.
313.
) Even monkeys express strong feelings in different tones-- anger and impatience by low,--fear and pain by high notes.
(38.
Rengger, 'Sugethiere von Paraguay,' s.
49.
) The sensations and ideas thus excited in us by music, or expressed by the cadences of oratory, appear from their vagueness, yet depth, like mental reversions to the emotions and thoughts of a long-past age.
All these facts with respect to music and impassioned speech become intelligible to a certain extent, if we may assume that musical tones and rhythm were used by our half-human ancestors, during the season of courtship, when animals of all kinds are
From the deeply- laid principle of inherited associations, musical tones in this case would be likely to call up vaguely and indefinitely the strong emotions of a long-past age.
As we have every reason to suppose that articulate speech is one of the latest, as it certainly is the highest, of the arts acquired by man, and as the instinctive power of producing musical notes and rhythms is developed low down in the animal series, it
We must suppose that the rhythms and cadences of oratory are derived from previously developed musical powers.
(39.
See the very interesting discussion on the 'Origin and Function of Music,' by Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his collected 'Essays,' 1858, p.
359.
Mr. Spencer comes to an exactly opposite conclusion to that at which I have arrived.
He concludes, as did Diderot formerly, that the cadences used in emotional speech afford the foundation from which music has been developed; whilst I conclude that musical notes and rhythm were first acquired by the male or female progenitors of mankind
Thus musical tones became firmly associated with some of the strongest passions an animal is capable of feeling, and are consequently used instinctively, or through association when strong emotions are expressed in speech.
Mr. Spencer does not offer any satisfactory explanation, nor can I, why high or deep notes should be expressive, both with man and the lower animals, of certain emotions.
Mr. Spencer gives also an interesting discussion on the relations between poetry, recitative and song.
) We can thus understand how it is that music, dancing, song, and poetry are such very ancient arts.
We may go even further than this, and, as remarked in a former chapter, believe that musical sounds afforded one of the bases for the development of language.
(40.
I find in Lord Monboddo's 'Origin of Language,' vol.
i.
1774, p.
469, that Dr. Blacklock likewise thought "that the first language among men was music, and that before our ideas were expressed by articulate sounds, they were communicated by tones varied according to different degrees of gravity and acuteness".
) As the males of several quadrumanous animals have their vocal organs much more developed than in the females, and as a gibbon, one of the anthropomorphous apes, pours forth a whole octave of musical notes and may be said to sing, it appears probable that
So little is known about the use of the voice by the Quadrumana during the season of love, that we have no means of judging whether the habit of singing was first acquired by our male or female ancestors.
Women are generally thought to possess sweeter voices than men, and as far as this serves as any guide, we may infer that they first acquired musical powers in order to attract the other sex.
(41.
See an interesting discussion on this subject by Haeckel, 'Generelle Morphologie,' B. ii.
1866, s.
246.
) But if so, this must have occurred long ago, before our ancestors had become sufficiently human to treat and value their women merely as useful slaves.
The impassioned orator, bard, or musician, when with his varied tones and cadences he excites the strongest emotions in his hearers, little suspects that he uses the same means by which his half-human ancestors long ago aroused each other's ardent
THE INFLUENCE OF BEAUTY IN DETERMINING THE MARRIAGES OF MANKIND.
In civilised life man is largely, but by no means exclusively, influenced in the choice of his wife by external appearance; but we are chiefly concerned with primeval times, and our only means of forming a judgment on this subject is to study the habits of
If it can be shewn that the men of different races prefer women having various characteristics, or conversely with the women, we have then to enquire whether such choice, continued during many generations, would produce any sensible effect on the race,
It will be well first to shew in some detail that savages pay the greatest attention to their personal appearance.
(42.
A full and excellent account of the manner in which savages in all parts of the world ornament themselves, is given by the Italian traveller, Professor Mantegazza, 'Rio de la Plata, Viaggi e Studi,' 1867, pp.
525-545; all the following statements, when other references are not given, are taken from this work.
See, also, Waitz, 'Introduction to Anthropology,' Eng.
translat.
vol.
i.
1863, p.
275, et passim.
Lawrence also gives very full details in his 'Lectures on Physiology,' 1822.
Since this chapter was written Sir J. Lubbock has published his 'Origin of Civilisation,' 1870, in which there is an interesting chapter on the present subject, and from which (pp.
42, 48) I have taken some facts about savages dyeing their teeth and hair, and piercing their teeth.
) That they have a passion for ornament is notorious; and an English philosopher goes so far as to maintain, that clothes were first made for ornament and not for warmth.
As Professor Waitz remarks, "however poor and miserable man is, he finds a pleasure in adorning himself".
The extravagance of the naked Indians of South America in decorating themselves is shewn "by a man of large stature gaining with difficulty enough by the labour of a fortnight to procure in exchange the chica necessary to paint himself red".
(43.
Humboldt, 'Personal Narrative,' Eng.
translat.
vol.
iv.
p.
515; on the imagination shewn in painting the body, p.
522; on modifying the form of the calf of the leg, p.
466.
) The ancient barbarians of Europe during the Reindeer period brought to their caves any brilliant or singular objects which they happened to find.
Savages at the present day everywhere deck themselves with plumes, necklaces, armlets, ear-rings, etc.
They paint themselves in the most diversified manner.
"If painted nations," as Humboldt observes, "had been examined with the same attention as clothed nations, it would have been perceived that the most fertile imagination and the most mutable caprice have created the fashions of painting, as well as those
In one part of Africa the eyelids are coloured black; in another the nails are coloured yellow or purple.
In many places the hair is dyed of various tints.
In different countries the teeth are stained black, red, blue, etc.
, and in the Malay Archipelago it is thought shameful to have white teeth "like those of a dog".
Not one great country can be named, from the polar regions in the north to New Zealand in the south, in which the aborigines do not tattoo themselves.
This practice was followed by the Jews of old, and by the ancient Britons.
In Africa some of the natives tattoo themselves, but it is a much more common practice to raise protuberances by rubbing salt into incisions made in various parts of the body; and these are considered by the inhabitants of Kordofan and Darfur "to be great
In the Arab countries no beauty can be perfect until the cheeks "or temples have been gashed".
(44.
'The Nile Tributaries,' 1867; 'The Albert N'yanza,' 1866, vol.
i.
p.
218.
) In South America, as Humboldt remarks, "a mother would be accused of culpable indifference towards her children, if she did not employ artificial means to shape the calf of the leg after the fashion of the country".
In the Old and New Worlds the shape of the skull was formerly modified during infancy in the most extraordinary manner, as is still the case in many places, and such deformities are considered ornamental.
For instance, the savages of Colombia (45.
Quoted by Prichard, 'Physical History of Mankind,' 4th ed.
vol.
i.
1851, p.
321.
) deem a much flattened head "an essential point of beauty".
The hair is treated with especial care in various countries; it is allowed to grow to full length, so as to reach to the ground, or is combed into "a compact frizzled mop, which is the Papuan's pride and glory".
(46.
On the Papuans, Wallace, 'The Malay Archipelago,' vol.
ii.
p.
445.
On the coiffure of the Africans, Sir S. Baker, 'The Albert N'yanza,' vol.
i.
p.
210.
) In northern Africa "a man requires a period of from eight to ten years to perfect his coiffure".
With other nations the head is shaved, and in parts of South America and Africa even the eyebrows and eyelashes are eradicated.
The natives of the Upper Nile knock out the four front teeth, saying that they do not wish to resemble brutes.
Further south, the Batokas knock out only the two upper incisors, which, as Livingstone (47.
'Travels,' p.
533.
) remarks, gives the face a hideous appearance, owing to the prominence of the lower jaw; but these people think the presence of the incisors most unsightly, and on beholding some Europeans, cried out, "Look at the great teeth"!
The chief Sebituani tried in vain to alter this fashion.
In various parts of Africa and in the Malay Archipelago the natives file the incisors into points like those of a saw, or pierce them with holes, into which they insert studs.
As the face with us is chiefly admired for its beauty, so with savages it is the chief seat of mutilation.
In all quarters of the world the septum, and more rarely the wings of the nose are pierced; rings, sticks, feathers, and other ornaments being inserted into the holes.
The ears are everywhere pierced and similarly ornamented, and with the Botocudos and Lenguas of South America the hole is gradually so much enlarged that the lower edge touches the shoulder.
In North and South America and in Africa either the upper or lower lip is pierced; and with the Botocudos the hole in the lower lip is so large that a disc of wood, four inches in diameter, is placed in it.
Mantegazza gives a curious account of the shame felt by a South American native, and of the ridicule which he excited, when he sold his tembeta,--the large coloured piece of wood which is passed through the hole.
In Central Africa the women perforate the lower lip and wear a crystal, which, from the movement of the tongue, has "a wriggling motion, indescribably ludicrous during conversation".
The wife of the chief of Latooka told Sir S. Baker (49.
'The Albert N'yanza,' 1866, vol.
i.
p.
217.
) that Lady Baker "would be much improved if she would extract her four front teeth from the lower jaw, and wear the long pointed polished crystal in her under lip".
Further south with the Makalolo, the upper lip is perforated, and a large metal and bamboo ring, called a pelele, is worn in the hole.
"This caused the lip in one case to project two inches beyond the tip of the nose; and when the lady smiled, the contraction of the muscles elevated it over the eyes.
'Why do the women wear these things?
' the venerable chief, Chinsurdi, was asked.
Evidently surprised at such a stupid question, he replied, 'For beauty!
They are the only beautiful things women have; men have beards, women have none.
What kind of a person would she be without the pelele?
She would not be a woman at all with a mouth like a man, but no beard.
'" (49.
Livingstone, 'British Association,' 1860; report given in the 'Athenaeum,' July 7, 1860, p.
29.
) Hardly any part of the body, which can be unnaturally modified, has escaped.
The amount of suffering thus caused must have been extreme, for many of the operations require several years for their completion, so that the idea of their necessity must be imperative.
The motives are various; the men paint their bodies to make themselves appear terrible in battle; certain mutilations are connected with religious rites, or they mark the age of puberty, or the rank of the man, or they serve to distinguish the tribes.
Amongst savages the same fashions prevail for long periods (50.
Sir S. Baker (ibid.
vol.
i.
p.
210) speaking of the natives of Central Africa says, "every tribe has a distinct and unchanging fashion for dressing the hair".
See Agassiz ('Journey in Brazil,' 1868, p.
318) on invariability of the tattooing of Amazonian Indians.
), and thus mutilations, from whatever cause first made, soon come to be valued as distinctive marks.
But self-adornment, vanity, and the admiration of others, seem to be the commonest motives.
In regard to tattooing, I was told by the missionaries in New Zealand that when they tried to persuade some girls to give up the practice, they answered, "We must just have a few lines on our lips; else when we grow old we shall be so very ugly".
With the men of New Zealand, a most capable judge (51.
Rev.
R. Taylor, 'New Zealand and its Inhabitants,' 1855, p.
152.
) says, "to have fine tattooed faces was the great ambition of the young, both to render themselves attractive to the ladies, and conspicuous in war".
A star tattooed on the forehead and a spot on the chin are thought by the women in one part of Africa to be irresistible attractions.
(52.
Mantegazza, 'Viaggi e Studi,' p.
542.
) In most, but not all parts of the world, the men are more ornamented than the women, and often in a different manner; sometimes, though rarely, the women are hardly at all ornamented.
As the women are made by savages to perform the greatest share of the work, and as they are not allowed to eat the best kinds of food, so it accords with the characteristic selfishness of man that they should not be allowed to obtain, or use the finest
Lastly, it is a remarkable fact, as proved by the foregoing quotations, that the same fashions in modifying the shape of the head, in ornamenting the hair, in painting, tattooing, in perforating the nose, lips, or ears, in removing or filing the teeth,
, now prevail, and have long prevailed, in the most distant quarters of the world.
It is extremely improbable that these practices, followed by so many distinct nations, should be due to tradition from any common source.
They indicate the close similarity of the mind of man, to whatever race he may belong, just as do the almost universal habits of dancing, masquerading, and making rude pictures.
Having made these preliminary remarks on the admiration felt by savages for various ornaments, and for deformities most unsightly in our eyes, let us see how far the men are attracted by the appearance of their women, and what are their ideas of beauty.
I have heard it maintained that savages are quite indifferent about the beauty of their women, valuing them solely as slaves; it may therefore be well to observe that this conclusion does not at all agree with the care which the women take in ornamenting
Burchell (53.
'Travels in South Africa,' 1824, vol.
i.
p.
414.
) gives an amusing account of a Bush-woman who used as much grease, red ochre, and shining powder "as would have ruined any but a very rich husband".
She displayed also "much vanity and too evident a consciousness of her superiority".
Mr. Winwood Reade informs me that the negroes of the West Coast often discuss the beauty of their women.
Some competent observers have attributed the fearfully common practice of infanticide partly to the desire felt by the women to retain their good looks.
(54.
See, for references, Gerland, 'Ueber das Aussterben der Naturvlker,' 1868, ss.
51, 53, 55; also Azara, 'Voyages,' etc.
, tom.
ii.
p.
116.
) In several regions the women wear charms and use love-philters to gain the affections of the men; and Mr. Brown enumerates four plants used for this purpose by the women of North-Western America.
(55.
On the vegetable productions used by the North-Western American Indians, see 'Pharmaceutical Journal,' vol.
x.
) Hearne (56.
'A Journey from Prince of Wales Fort,' 8vo.
ed.
1796, p.
89.
), an excellent observer, who lived many years with the American Indians, says, in speaking of the women, "Ask a Northern Indian what is beauty, and he will answer, a broad flat face, small eyes, high cheek-bones, three or four broad black lines across
Pallas, who visited the northern parts of the Chinese empire, says, "those women are preferred who have the Mandschu form; that is to say, a broad face, high cheek-bones, very broad noses, and enormous ears"(57.
Quoted by Prichard, 'Physical History of Mankind,' 3rd ed.
vol.
iv.
1844, p.
519; Vogt, 'Lectures on Man,' Eng.
translat.
p.
129.
On the opinion of the Chinese on the Cingalese, E. Tennent, 'Ceylon,' 1859, vol.
ii.
p.
107.
); and Vogt remarks that the obliquity of the eye, which is proper to the Chinese and Japanese, is exaggerated in their pictures for the purpose, as it "seems, of exhibiting its beauty, as contrasted with the eye of the red-haired barbarians".
It is well known, as Huc repeatedly remarks, that the Chinese of the interior think Europeans hideous, with their white skins and prominent noses.
The nose is far from being too prominent, according to our ideas, in the natives of Ceylon; yet "the Chinese in the seventh century, accustomed to the flat features of the Mongol races, were surprised at the prominent noses of the Cingalese; and Thsang
'" Finlayson, after minutely describing the people of Cochin China, says that their rounded heads and faces are their chief characteristics; and, he adds, "the roundness of the whole countenance is more striking in the women, who are reckoned beautiful in
The Siamese have small noses with divergent nostrils, a wide mouth, rather thick lips, a remarkably large face, with very high and broad cheek-bones.
It is, therefore, not wonderful that "beauty, according to our notion, is a stranger to them.
Yet they consider their own females to be much more beautiful than those of Europe".
(58.
Prichard, as taken from Crawfurd and Finlayson, 'Phys.
Hist.
of Mankind,' vol.
iv.
pp.
534, 535.
) It is well known that with many Hottentot women the posterior part of the body projects in a wonderful manner; they are steatopygous; and Sir Andrew Smith is certain that this peculiarity is greatly admired by the men.
(59.
Idem illustrissimus viator dixit mihi praecinctorium vel tabulam foeminae, quod nobis teterrimum est, quondam permagno aestimari ab hominibus in hac gente.
Nunc res mutata est, et censent talem conformationem minime optandam esse.
) He once saw a woman who was considered a beauty, and she was so immensely developed behind, that when seated on level ground she could not rise, and had to push herself along until she came to a slope.
Some of the women in various negro tribes have the same peculiarity; and, according to Burton, the Somal men are said to choose their wives by ranging them in a line, and by picking her out who projects farthest a tergo.
Nothing can be more hateful to a negro than the opposite form".
(60.
The 'Anthropological Review,' November 1864, p.
237.
For additional references, see Waitz, 'Introduction to Anthropology,' Eng.
translat.
, 1863, vol.
i.
p.
105.
) With respect to colour, the negroes rallied Mungo Park on the whiteness of his skin and the prominence of his nose, both of which they considered as "unsightly and unnatural conformations".
He in return praised the glossy jet of their skins and the lovely depression of their noses; this they said was "honeymouth," nevertheless they gave him food.
The African Moors, also, "knitted their brows and seemed to shudder" at the whiteness of his skin.
On the eastern coast, the negro boys when they saw Burton, cried out, "Look at the white man; does he not look like a white ape"?
On the western coast, as Mr. Winwood Reade informs me, the negroes admire a very black skin more than one of a lighter tint.
But their horror of whiteness may be attributed, according to this same traveller, partly to the belief held by most negroes that demons and spirits are white, and partly to their thinking it a sign of ill-health.
The Banyai of the more southern part of the continent are negroes, but "a great many of them are of a light coffee-and-milk colour, and, indeed, this colour is considered handsome throughout the whole country"; so that here we have a different standard of
With the Kaffirs, who differ much from negroes, "the skin, except among the tribes near Delagoa Bay, is not usually black, the prevailing colour being a mixture of black and red, the most common shade being chocolate.
Dark complexions, as being most common, are naturally held in the highest esteem.
To be told that he is light- coloured, or like a white man, would be deemed a very poor compliment by a Kaffir.
I have heard of one unfortunate man who was so very fair that no girl would marry him".
One of the titles of the Zulu king is, "You who are black".
(61.
Mungo Park's 'Travels in Africa,' 4to.
1816, pp.
53, 131.
Burton's statement is quoted by Schaaffhausen, 'Archiv.
fur Anthropologie,' 1866, s.
163.
On the Banyai, Livingstone, 'Travels,' p.
64.
On the Kaffirs, the Rev.
J. Shooter, 'The Kafirs of Natal and the Zulu Country,' 1857, p.
1.
) Mr. Galton, in speaking to me about the natives of S. Africa, remarked that their ideas of beauty seem very different from ours; for in one tribe two slim, slight, and pretty girls were not admired by the natives.
Turning to other quarters of the world; in Java, a yellow, not a white girl, is considered, according to Madame Pfeiffer, a beauty.
A man of Cochin China "spoke with contempt of the wife of the English Ambassador, that she had white teeth like a dog, and a rosy colour like that of potato- flowers".
We have seen that the Chinese dislike our white skin, and that the N. Americans admire "a tawny hide".
In S. America, the Yuracaras, who inhabit the wooded, damp slopes of the eastern Cordillera, are remarkably pale-coloured, as their name in their own language expresses; nevertheless they consider European women as very inferior to their own.
(62.
For the Javans and Cochin-Chinese, see Waitz, 'Introduct.
to Anthropology,' Eng.
translat.
vol.
i.
p.
305.
On the Yuracaras, A. d'Orbigny, as quoted in Prichard, 'Physical History of Mankind,' vol.
v.
3rd ed.
p.
476.
) In several of the tribes of North America the hair on the head grows to a wonderful length; and Catlin gives a curious proof how much this is esteemed, for the chief of the Crows was elected to this office from having the longest hair of any man in the
The Aymaras and Quichuas of S. America, likewise have very long hair; and this, as Mr. D. Forbes informs me, is so much valued as a beauty, that cutting it off was the severest punishment which he could inflict on them.
In both the Northern and Southern halves of the continent the natives sometimes increase the apparent length of their hair by weaving into it fibrous substances.
Although the hair on the head is thus cherished, that on the face is considered by the North American Indians "as very vulgar," and every hair is carefully eradicated.
This practice prevails throughout the American continent from Vancouver's Island in the north to Tierra del Fuego in the south.
When York Minster, a Fuegian on board the "Beagle," was taken back to his country, the natives told him be ought to pull out the few short hairs on his face.
They also threatened a young missionary, who was left for a time with them, to strip him naked, and pluck the hair from his face and body, yet he was far from being a hairy man.
This fashion is carried so far that the Indians of Paraguay eradicate their eyebrows and eyelashes, saying that they do not wish to be like horses.
(63.
'North American Indians,' by G. Catlin, 3rd ed.
, 1842, vol.
i.
p.
49; vol.
ii, p.
227.
On the natives of Vancouver's Island, see Sproat, 'Scenes and Studies of Savage Life,' 1868, p.
25.
On the Indians of Paraguay, Azara, 'Voyages,' tom.
ii.
p.
105.
) It is remarkable that throughout the world the races which are almost completely destitute of a beard dislike hairs on the face and body, and take pains to eradicate them.
The Kalmucks are beardless, and they are well known, like the Americans, to pluck out all straggling hairs; and so it is with the Polynesians, some of the Malays, and the Siamese.
Mr. Veitch states that the Japanese ladies "all objected to our whiskers, considering them very ugly, and told us to cut them off, and be like Japanese men".
The New Zealanders have short, curled beards; yet they formerly plucked out the hairs on the face.
They had a saying that "there is no woman for a hairy man;" but it would appear that the fashion has changed in New Zealand, perhaps owing to the presence of Europeans, and I am assured that beards are now admired by the Maories.
(64.
On the Siamese, Prichard, ibid.
vol.
iv.
p.
533.
On the Japanese, Veitch in 'Gardeners' Chronicle,' 1860, p.
1104.
On the New Zealanders, Mantegazza, 'Viaggi e Studi,' 1867, p.
526.
For the other nations mentioned, see references in Lawrence, 'Lectures on Physiology,' etc.
, 1822, p.
272.
) On the other hand, bearded races admire and greatly value their beards; among the Anglo-Saxons every part of the body had a recognised value; "the loss of the beard being estimated at twenty shillings, while the breaking of a thigh was fixed at only
(65.
Lubbock, 'Origin of Civilisation,' 1870, p.
321.
) In the East men swear solemnly by their beards.
We have seen that Chinsurdi, the chief of the Makalolo in Africa, thought that beards were a great ornament.
In the Pacific the Fijian's beard is "profuse and bushy, and is his greatest pride"; whilst the inhabitants of the adjacent archipelagoes of Tonga and Samoa are "beardless, and abhor a rough chin".
In one island alone of the Ellice group "the men are heavily bearded, and not a little proud thereof".
(66.
Dr. Barnard Davis quotes Mr. Prichard and others for these facts in regard to the Polynesians, in 'Anthropolog.
Review,' April 1870, pp.
185, 191.
) We thus see how widely the different races of man differ in their taste for the beautiful.
In every nation sufficiently advanced to have made effigies of their gods or of their deified rulers, the sculptors no doubt have endeavoured to express their highest ideal of beauty and grandeur.
(67.
Ch.
Comte has remarks to this effect in his 'Trait de Lgislation,' 3rd ed.
1837, p.
136.
) Under this point of view it is well to compare in our mind the Jupiter or Apollo of the Greeks with the Egyptian or Assyrian statues; and these with the hideous bas-reliefs on the ruined buildings of Central America.
I have met with very few statements opposed to this conclusion.
Mr. Winwood Reade, however, who has had ample opportunities for observation, not only with the negroes of the West Coast of Africa, but with those of the interior who have never associated with Europeans, is convinced that their ideas of beauty are ON THE
Mr. Reade found that he agreed with the negroes in their estimation of the beauty of the native girls; and that their appreciation of the beauty of European women corresponded with ours.
They admire long hair, and use artificial means to make it appear abundant; they admire also a beard, though themselves very scantily provided.
Mr. Reade feels doubtful what kind of nose is most appreciated; a girl has been heard to say, "I do not want to marry him, he has got no nose"; and this shews that a very flat nose is not admired.
We should, however, bear in mind that the depressed, broad noses and projecting jaws of the negroes of the West Coast are exceptional types with the inhabitants of Africa.
Notwithstanding the foregoing statements, Mr. Reade admits that negroes "do not like the colour of our skin; they look on blue eyes with aversion, and they think our noses too long and our lips too thin".
He does not think it probable that negroes would ever prefer the most beautiful European woman, on the mere grounds of physical admiration, to a good-looking negress.
(68.
The 'African Sketch Book,' vol.
ii.
1873, pp.
253, 394, 521.
The Fuegians, as I have been informed by a missionary who long resided with them, consider European women as extremely beautiful; but from what we have seen of the judgment of the other aborigines of America, I cannot but think that this must be a mistake,
I should add that a most experienced observer, Capt.
Burton, believes that a woman whom we consider beautiful is admired throughout the world.
'Anthropological Review,' March, 1864, p.
245.
) The general truth of the principle, long ago insisted on by Humboldt (69.
'Personal Narrative,' Eng.
translat.
vol.
iv.
p.
518, and elsewhere.
Mantegazza, in his 'Viaggi e Studi,' strongly insists on this same principle.
), that man admires and often tries to exaggerate whatever characters nature may have given him, is shewn in many ways.
The practice of beardless races extirpating every trace of a beard, and often all the hairs on the body affords one illustration.
The skull has been greatly modified during ancient and modern times by many nations; and there can be little doubt that this has been practised, especially in N. and S. America, in order to exaggerate some natural and admired peculiarity.
Many American Indians are known to admire a head so extremely flattened as to appear to us idiotic.
The natives on the north-western coast compress the head into a pointed cone; and it is their constant practice to gather the hair into a knot on the top of the head, for the sake, as Dr. Wilson remarks, "of increasing the apparent elevation of the
The inhabitants of Arakhan admire a broad, smooth forehead, and in order to produce it, they fasten a plate of lead on the heads of the new-born children.
On the other hand, "a broad, well-rounded occiput is considered a great beauty" by the natives of the Fiji Islands.
(70.
On the skulls of the American tribes, see Nott and Gliddon, 'Types of Mankind,' 1854, p.
440; Prichard, 'Physical History of Mankind,' vol.
i.
3rd ed.
p.
321; on the natives of Arakhan, ibid.
vol.
iv.
p.
537.
Wilson, 'Physical Ethnology,' Smithsonian Institution, 1863, p.
288; on the Fijians, p.
290.
Sir J. Lubbock ('Prehistoric Times,' 2nd ed.
1869, p.
506) gives an excellent resume on this subject.
) As with the skull, so with the nose; the ancient Huns during the age of Attila were accustomed to flatten the noses of their infants with bandages, "for the sake of exaggerating a natural conformation".
With the Tahitians, to be called LONG-NOSE is considered as an insult, and they compress the noses and foreheads of their children for the sake of beauty.
The same holds with the Malays of Sumatra, the Hottentots, certain Negroes, and the natives of Brazil.
(71.
On the Huns, Godron, 'De l'Espce,' tom.
ii.
1859, p.
300.
On the Tahitians, Waitz, 'Anthropology,' Eng.
translat.
vol.
i.
p.
305.
Marsden, quoted by Prichard, 'Phys.
Hist.
of Mankind,' 3rd edit.
vol.
v.
p.
67.
Lawrence, 'Lectures on Physiology,' p.
337.
) The Chinese have by nature unusually small feet (72.
This fact was ascertained in the 'Reise der Novara: Anthropolog.
Theil.
' Dr. Weisbach, 1867, s.
265.
); and it is well known that the women of the upper classes distort their feet to make them still smaller.
Lastly, Humboldt thinks that the American Indians prefer colouring their bodies with red paint in order to exaggerate their natural tint; and until recently European women added to their naturally bright colours by rouge and white cosmetics; but it may be
In the fashions of our own dress we see exactly the same principle and the same desire to carry every point to an extreme; we exhibit, also, the same spirit of emulation.
But the fashions of savages are far more permanent than ours; and whenever their bodies are artificially modified, this is necessarily the case.
The Arab women of the Upper Nile occupy about three days in dressing their hair; they never imitate other tribes, "but simply vie with each other in the superlativeness of their own style".
Dr. Wilson, in speaking of the compressed skulls of various American races, adds, "such usages are among the least eradicable, and long survive the shock of revolutions that change dynasties and efface more important national peculiarities".
(73.
'Smithsonian Institution,' 1863, p.
289.
On the fashions of Arab women, Sir S. Baker, 'The Nile Tributaries,' 1867, p.
121.
) The same principle comes into play in the art of breeding; and we can thus understand, as I have elsewhere explained (74.
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
214; vol.
ii.
p.
240.
), the wonderful development of the many races of animals and plants, which have been kept merely for ornament.
Fanciers always wish each character to be somewhat increased; they do not admire a medium standard; they certainly do not desire any great and abrupt change in the character of their breeds; they admire solely what they are accustomed to, but they ardently
The senses of man and of the lower animals seem to be so constituted that brilliant colours and certain forms, as well as harmonious and rhythmical sounds, give pleasure and are called beautiful; but why this should be so we know not.
It is certainly not true that there is in the mind of man any universal standard of beauty with respect to the human body.
It is, however, possible that certain tastes may in the course of time become inherited, though there is no evidence in favour of this belief: and if so, each race would possess its own innate ideal standard of beauty.
It has been argued (75.
Schaaffhausen, 'Archiv.
fr Anthropologie,' 1866, s.
164.
) that ugliness consists in an approach to the structure of the lower animals, and no doubt this is partly true with the more civilised nations, in which intellect is highly appreciated; but this explanation will hardly apply to all forms of ugliness.
The men of each race prefer what they are accustomed to; they cannot endure any great change; but they like variety, and admire each characteristic carried to a moderate extreme.
(76.
Mr. Bain has collected ('Mental and Moral Science,' 1868, pp.
304-314) about a dozen more or less different theories of the idea of beauty; but none is quite the same as that here given.
) Men accustomed to a nearly oval face, to straight and regular features, and to bright colours, admire, as we Europeans know, these points when strongly developed.
On the other hand, men accustomed to a broad face, with high cheek-bones, a depressed nose, and a black skin, admire these peculiarities when strongly marked.
No doubt characters of all kinds may be too much developed for beauty.
Hence a perfect beauty, which implies many characters modified in a particular manner, will be in every race a prodigy.
As the great anatomist Bichat long ago said, if every one were cast in the same mould, there would be no such thing as beauty.
If all our women were to become as beautiful as the Venus de' Medici, we should for a time be charmed; but we should soon wish for variety; and as soon as we had obtained variety, we should wish to see certain characters a little exaggerated beyond the
CHAPTER XX.
SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS OF MAN--continued.
On the effects of the continued selection of women according to a different standard of beauty in each race--On the causes which interfere with sexual selection in civilised and savage nations--Conditions favourable to sexual selection during primeval
We have seen in the last chapter that with all barbarous races ornaments, dress, and external appearance are highly valued; and that the men judge of the beauty of their women by widely different standards.
We must next inquire whether this preference and the consequent selection during many generations of those women, which appear to the men of each race the most attractive, has altered the character either of the females alone, or of both sexes.
With mammals the general rule appears to be that characters of all kinds are inherited equally by the males and females; we might therefore expect that with mankind any characters gained by the females or by the males through sexual selection would
If any change has thus been effected, it is almost certain that the different races would be differently modified, as each has its own standard of beauty.
With mankind, especially with savages, many causes interfere with the action of sexual selection as far as the bodily frame is concerned.
Civilised men are largely attracted by the mental charms of women, by their wealth, and especially by their social position; for men rarely marry into a much lower rank.
The men who succeed in obtaining the more beautiful women will not have a better chance of leaving a long line of descendants than other men with plainer wives, save the few who bequeath their fortunes according to primogeniture.
With respect to the opposite form of selection, namely, of the more attractive men by the women, although in civilised nations women have free or almost free choice, which is not the case with barbarous races, yet their choice is largely influenced by the
No excuse is needed for treating this subject in some detail; for, as the German philosopher Schopenhauer remarks, "the final aim of all love intrigues, be they comic or tragic, is really of more importance than all other ends in human life.
What it all turns upon is nothing less than the composition of the next generation...
It is not the weal or woe of any one individual, but that of the human race to come, which is here at stake".
(1.
'Schopenhauer and Darwinism,' in 'Journal of Anthropology,' Jan.
1871, p.
323.
There is, however, reason to believe that in certain civilised and semi- civilised nations sexual selection has effected something in modifying the bodily frame of some of the members.
Many persons are convinced, as it appears to me with justice, that our aristocracy, including under this term all wealthy families in which primogeniture has long prevailed, from having chosen during many generations from all classes the more beautiful
Cook remarks that the superiority in personal appearance "which is observable in the erees or nobles in all the other islands (of the Pacific) is found in the Sandwich Islands"; but this may be chiefly due to their better food and manner of life.
The old traveller Chardin, in describing the Persians, says their "blood is now highly refined by frequent intermixtures with the Georgians and Circassians, two nations which surpass all the world in personal beauty.
There is hardly a man of rank in Persia who is not born of a Georgian or Circassian mother".
He adds that they inherit their beauty, "not from their ancestors, for without the above mixture, the men of rank in Persia, who are descendants of the Tartars, would be extremely ugly".
(2.
These quotations are taken from Lawrence ('Lectures on Physiology,' etc.
, 1822, p.
393), who attributes the beauty of the upper classes in England to the men having long selected the more beautiful women.
) Here is a more curious case; the priestesses who attended the temple of Venus Erycina at San- Giuliano in Sicily, were selected for their beauty out of the whole of Greece; they were not vestal virgins, and Quatrefages (3.
'Anthropologie,' 'Revue des Cours Scientifiques,' Oct.
1868, p.
721.
), who states the foregoing fact, says that the women of San-Giuliano are now famous as the most beautiful in the island, and are sought by artists as models.
But it is obvious that the evidence in all the above cases is doubtful.
The following case, though relating to savages, is well worth giving for its curiosity.
Mr. Winwood Reade informs me that the Jollofs, a tribe of negroes on the west coast of Africa, "are remarkable for their uniformly fine appearance".
A friend of his asked one of these men, "How is it that every one whom I meet is so fine looking, not only your men but your women"?
The Jollof answered, "It is very easily explained: it has always been our custom to pick out our worst-looking slaves and to sell them".
It need hardly be added that with all savages, female slaves serve as concubines.
That this negro should have attributed, whether rightly or wrongly, the fine appearance of his tribe to the long-continued elimination of the ugly women is not so surprising as it may at first appear; for I have elsewhere shewn (4.
'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
i.
p.
207.
) that negroes fully appreciate the importance of selection in the breeding of their domestic animals, and I could give from Mr. Reade additional evidence on this head.
THE CAUSES WHICH PREVENT OR CHECK THE ACTION OF SEXUAL SELECTION WITH SAVAGES.
The chief causes are, first, so-called communal marriages or promiscuous intercourse; secondly, the consequences of female infanticide; thirdly, early betrothals; and lastly, the low estimation in which women are held, as mere slaves.
These four points must be considered in some detail.
It is obvious that as long as the pairing of man, or of any other animal, is left to mere chance, with no choice exerted by either sex, there can be no sexual selection; and no effect will be produced on the offspring by certain individuals having had an
Now it is asserted that there exist at the present day tribes which practise what Sir J. Lubbock by courtesy calls communal marriages; that is, all the men and women in the tribe are husbands and wives to one another.
The licentiousness of many savages is no doubt astonishing, but it seems to me that more evidence is requisite, before we fully admit that their intercourse is in any case promiscuous.
Nevertheless all those who have most closely studied the subject (5.
Sir J. Lubbock, 'The Origin of Civilisation,' 1870, chap.
iii.
especially pp.
60-67.
Mr. M'Lennan, in his extremely valuable work on 'Primitive Marriage,' 1865, p.
163, speaks of the union of the sexes "in the earliest times as loose, transitory, and in some degree promiscuous".
Mr. M'Lennan and Sir J. Lubbock have collected much evidence on the extreme licentiousness of savages at the present time.
Mr. L.H. Morgan, in his interesting memoir of the classificatory system of relationship.
('Proceedings of the American Academy of Sciences,' vol.
vii.
Feb.
1868, p.
475), concludes that polygamy and all forms of marriage during primeval times were essentially unknown.
It appears also, from Sir J. Lubbock's work, that Bachofen likewise believes that communal intercourse originally prevailed.
), and whose judgment is worth much more than mine, believe that communal marriage (this expression being variously guarded) was the original and universal form throughout the world, including therein the intermarriage of brothers and sisters.
The late Sir A. Smith, who had travelled widely in S. Africa, and knew much about the habits of savages there and elsewhere, expressed to me the strongest opinion that no race exists in which woman is considered as the property of the community.
I believe that his judgment was largely determined by what is implied by the term marriage.
Throughout the following discussion I use the term in the same sense as when naturalists speak of animals as monogamous, meaning thereby that the male is accepted by or chooses a single female, and lives with her either during the breeding-season or for
This kind of marriage is all that concerns us here, as it suffices for the work of sexual selection.
But I know that some of the writers above referred to imply by the term marriage a recognised right protected by the tribe.
The indirect evidence in favour of the belief of the former prevalence of communal marriages is strong, and rests chiefly on the terms of relationship which are employed between the members of the same tribe, implying a connection with the tribe, and not
But the subject is too large and complex for even an abstract to be here given, and I will confine myself to a few remarks.
It is evident in the case of such marriages, or where the marriage tie is very loose, that the relationship of the child to its father cannot be known.
But it seems almost incredible that the relationship of the child to its mother should ever be completely ignored, especially as the women in most savage tribes nurse their infants for a long time.
Accordingly, in many cases the lines of descent are traced through the mother alone, to the exclusion of the father.
But in other cases the terms employed express a connection with the tribe alone, to the exclusion even of the mother.
It seems possible that the connection between the related members of the same barbarous tribe, exposed to all sorts of danger, might be so much more important, owing to the need of mutual protection and aid, than that between the mother and her child, as
The terms of relationship used in different parts of the world may be divided, according to the author just quoted, into two great classes, the classificatory and descriptive, the latter being employed by us.
It is the classificatory system which so strongly leads to the belief that communal and other extremely loose forms of marriage were originally universal.
But as far as I can see, there is no necessity on this ground for believing in absolutely promiscuous intercourse; and I am glad to find that this is Sir J. Lubbock's view.
Men and women, like many of the lower animals, might formerly have entered into strict though temporary unions for each birth, and in this case nearly as much confusion would have arisen in the terms of relationship as in the case of promiscuous
As far as sexual selection is concerned, all that is required is that choice should be exerted before the parents unite, and it signifies little whether the unions last for life or only for a season.
Besides the evidence derived from the terms of relationship, other lines of reasoning indicate the former wide prevalence of communal marriage.
Sir J. Lubbock accounts for the strange and widely-extended habit of exogamy--that is, the men of one tribe taking wives from a distinct tribe,--by communism having been the original form of intercourse; so that a man never obtained a wife for himself
Thus the practice of capturing wives might have arisen; and from the honour so gained it might ultimately have become the universal habit.
According to Sir J. Lubbock (6.
'Address to British Association On the Social and Religious Condition of the Lower Races of Man,' 1870, p.
20.
), we can also thus understand "the necessity of expiation for marriage as an infringement of tribal rites, since according to old ideas, a man had no right to appropriate to himself that which belonged to the whole tribe".
Sir J. Lubbock further gives a curious body of facts shewing that in old times high honour was bestowed on women who were utterly licentious; and this, as he explains, is intelligible, if we admit that promiscuous intercourse was the aboriginal, and
(7.
'Origin of Civilisation,' 1870, p.
86.
In the several works above quoted, there will be found copious evidence on relationship through the females alone, or with the tribe alone.
) Although the manner of development of the marriage tie is an obscure subject, as we may infer from the divergent opinions on several points between the three authors who have studied it most closely, namely, Mr. Morgan, Mr. M'Lennan, and Sir J. Lubbock,
Mr. C. Staniland Wake argues strongly ('Anthropologia,' March, 1874, p.
197) against the views held by these three writers on the former prevalence of almost promiscuous intercourse; and he thinks that the classificatory system of relationship can be otherwise explained.
) that the habit of marriage, in any strict sense of the word, has been gradually developed; and that almost promiscuous or very loose intercourse was once extremely common throughout the world.
Nevertheless, from the strength of the feeling of jealousy all through the animal kingdom, as well as from the analogy of the lower animals, more particularly of those which come nearest to man, I cannot believe that absolutely promiscuous intercourse
Man, as I have attempted to shew, is certainly descended from some ape-like creature.
With the existing Quadrumana, as far as their habits are known, the males of some species are monogamous, but live during only a part of the year with the females: of this the orang seems to afford an instance.
Several kinds, for example some of the Indian and American monkeys, are strictly monogamous, and associate all the year round with their wives.
Others are polygamous, for example the gorilla and several American species, and each family lives separate.
Even when this occurs, the families inhabiting the same district are probably somewhat social; the chimpanzee, for instance, is occasionally met with in large bands.
Again, other species are polygamous, but several males, each with his own females, live associated in a body, as with several species of baboons.
(9.
Brehm ('Thierleben,' B. i.
p.
77) says Cynocephalus hamadryas lives in great troops containing twice as many adult females as adult males.
See Rengger on American polygamous species, and Owen ('Anatomy of Vertebrates,' vol.
iii.
p.
746) on American monogamous species.
Other references might be added.
) We may indeed conclude from what we know of the jealousy of all male quadrupeds, armed, as many of them are, with special weapons for battling with their rivals, that promiscuous intercourse in a state of nature is extremely improbable.
The pairing may not last for life, but only for each birth; yet if the males which are the strongest and best able to defend or otherwise assist their females and young, were to select the more attractive females, this would suffice for sexual selection.
Therefore, looking far enough back in the stream of time, and judging from the social habits of man as he now exists, the most probable view is that he aboriginally lived in small communities, each with a single wife, or if powerful with several, whom he
Or he may not have been a social animal, and yet have lived with several wives, like the gorilla; for all the natives "agree that but one adult male is seen in a band; when the young male grows up, a contest takes place for mastery, and the strongest, by
(10.
Dr. Savage, in 'Boston Journal of Natural History,' vol.
v.
1845-47, p.
423.
) The younger males, being thus expelled and wandering about, would, when at last successful in finding a partner, prevent too close interbreeding within the limits of the same family.
Although savages are now extremely licentious, and although communal marriages may formerly have largely prevailed, yet many tribes practise some form of marriage, but of a far more lax nature than that of civilised nations.
Polygamy, as just stated, is almost universally followed by the leading men in every tribe.
Nevertheless there are tribes, standing almost at the bottom of the scale, which are strictly monogamous.
This is the case with the Veddahs of Ceylon: they have a saying, according to Sir J. Lubbock (11.
'Prehistoric Times,' 1869, p.
424.
), "that death alone can separate husband and wife".
An intelligent Kandyan chief, of course a polygamist, "was perfectly scandalised at the utter barbarism of living with only one wife, and never parting until separated by death".
It was, he said, "just like the Wanderoo monkeys".
Whether savages who now enter into some form of marriage, either polygamous or monogamous, have retained this habit from primeval times, or whether they have returned to some form of marriage, after passing through a stage of promiscuous intercourse, I
INFANTICIDE.
This practice is now very common throughout the world, and there is reason to believe that it prevailed much more extensively during former times.
(12.
Mr. M'Lennan, 'Primitive Marriage,' 1865.
See especially on exogamy and infanticide, pp.
130, 138, 165.
) Barbarians find it difficult to support themselves and their children, and it is a simple plan to kill their infants.
In South America some tribes, according to Azara, formerly destroyed so many infants of both sexes that they were on the point of extinction.
In the Polynesian Islands women have been known to kill from four or five, to even ten of their children; and Ellis could not find a single woman who had not killed at least one.
In a village on the eastern frontier of India Colonel MacCulloch found not a single female child.
Wherever infanticide (13.
Dr. Gerland ('Ueber das Aussterben der Naturvlker,' 1868) has collected much information on infanticide, see especially ss.
27, 51, 54.
Azara ('Voyages,' etc.
, tom.
ii.
pp.
94, 116) enters in detail on the motives.
See also M'Lennan (ibid.
p.
139) for cases in India.
In the former reprints of the 2nd edition of this book an incorrect quotation from Sir G. Grey was unfortunately given in the above passage and has now been removed from the text.
) prevails the struggle for existence will be in so far less severe, and all the members of the tribe will have an almost equally good chance of rearing their few surviving children.
In most cases a larger number of female than of male infants are destroyed, for it is obvious that the latter are of more value to the tribe, as they will, when grown up, aid in defending it, and can support themselves.
But the trouble experienced by the women in rearing children, their consequent loss of beauty, the higher estimation set on them when few, and their happier fate, are assigned by the women themselves, and by various observers, as additional motives for
When, owing to female infanticide, the women of a tribe were few, the habit of capturing wives from neighbouring tribes would naturally arise.
Sir J. Lubbock, however, as we have seen, attributes the practice in chief part to the former existence of communal marriage, and to the men having consequently captured women from other tribes to hold as their sole property.
Additional causes might be assigned, such as the communities being very small, in which case, marriageable women would often be deficient.
That the habit was most extensively practised during former times, even by the ancestors of civilised nations, is clearly shewn by the preservation of many curious customs and ceremonies, of which Mr. M'Lennan has given an interesting account.
In our own marriages the "best man" seems originally to have been the chief abettor of the bridegroom in the act of capture.
Now as long as men habitually procured their wives through violence and craft, they would have been glad to seize on any woman, and would not have selected the more attractive ones.
But as soon as the practice of procuring wives from a distinct tribe was effected through barter, as now occurs in many places, the more attractive women would generally have been purchased.
The incessant crossing, however, between tribe and tribe, which necessarily follows from any form of this habit, would tend to keep all the people inhabiting the same country nearly uniform in character; and this would interfere with the power of sexual
The scarcity of women, consequent on female infanticide, leads, also, to another practice, that of polyandry, still common in several parts of the world, and which formerly, as Mr. M'Lennan believes, prevailed almost universally: but this latter conclusion
(14.
'Primitive Marriage,' p.
208; Sir J. Lubbock, 'Origin of Civilisation,' p.
100.
See also Mr. Morgan, loc.
cit.
, on the former prevalence of polyandry.
) Whenever two or more men are compelled to marry one woman, it is certain that all the women of the tribe will get married, and there will be no selection by the men of the more attractive women.
But under these circumstances the women no doubt will have the power of choice, and will prefer the more attractive men.
Azara, for instance, describes how carefully a Guana woman bargains for all sorts of privileges, before accepting some one or more husbands; and the men in consequence take unusual care of their personal appearance.
So amongst the Todas of India, who practise polyandry, the girls can accept or refuse any man.
(15.
Azara, 'Voyages,' etc.
, tom.
ii.
pp.
92-95; Colonel Marshall, 'Amongst the Todas,' p.
212.
) A very ugly man in these cases would perhaps altogether fail in getting a wife, or get one later in life; but the handsomer men, although more successful in obtaining wives, would not, as far as we can see, leave more offspring to inherit their beauty
EARLY BETROTHALS AND SLAVERY OF WOMEN.
With many savages it is the custom to betroth the females whilst mere infants; and this would effectually prevent preference being exerted on either side according to personal appearance.
But it would not prevent the more attractive women from being afterwards stolen or taken by force from their husbands by the more powerful men; and this often happens in Australia, America, and elsewhere.
The same consequences with reference to sexual selection would to a certain extent follow, when women are valued almost solely as slaves or beasts of burden, as is the case with many savages.
The men, however, at all times would prefer the handsomest slaves according to their standard of beauty.
We thus see that several customs prevail with savages which must greatly interfere with, or completely stop, the action of sexual selection.
On the other hand, the conditions of life to which savages are exposed, and some of their habits, are favourable to natural selection; and this comes into play at the same time with sexual selection.
Savages are known to suffer severely from recurrent famines; they do not increase their food by artificial means; they rarely refrain from marriage (16.
Burchell says ('Travels in S. Africa,' vol.
ii.
1824, p.
58), that among the wild nations of Southern Africa, neither men nor women ever pass their lives in a state of celibacy.
Azara ('Voyages dans l'Amrique Merid.
' tom.
ii.
1809, p.
21) makes precisely the same remark in regard to the wild Indians of South America.
), and generally marry whilst young.
Consequently they must be subjected to occasional hard struggles for existence, and the favoured individuals will alone survive.
At a very early period, before man attained to his present rank in the scale, many of his conditions would be different from what now obtains amongst savages.
Judging from the analogy of the lower animals, he would then either live with a single female, or be a polygamist.
The most powerful and able males would succeed best in obtaining attractive females.
They would also succeed best in the general struggle for life, and in defending their females, as well as their offspring, from enemies of all kinds.
At this early period the ancestors of man would not be sufficiently advanced in intellect to look forward to distant contingencies; they would not foresee that the rearing of all their children, especially their female children, would make the struggle for
They would be governed more by their instincts and less by their reason than are savages at the present day.
They would not at that period have partially lost one of the strongest of all instincts, common to all the lower animals, namely the love of their young offspring; and consequently they would not have practised female infanticide.
Women would not have been thus rendered scarce, and polyandry would not have been practised; for hardly any other cause, except the scarcity of women seems sufficient to break down the natural and widely prevalent feeling of jealousy, and the desire of
Polyandry would be a natural stepping-stone to communal marriages or almost promiscuous intercourse; though the best authorities believe that this latter habit preceded polyandry.
During primordial times there would be no early betrothals, for this implies foresight.
Nor would women be valued merely as useful slaves or beasts of burthen.
Both sexes, if the females as well as the males were permitted to exert any choice, would choose their partners not for mental charms, or property, or social position, but almost solely from external appearance.
All the adults would marry or pair, and all the offspring, as far as that was possible, would be reared; so that the struggle for existence would be periodically excessively severe.
Thus during these times all the conditions for sexual selection would have been more favourable than at a later period, when man had advanced in his intellectual powers but had retrograded in his instincts.
Therefore, whatever influence sexual selection may have had in producing the differences between the races of man, and between man and the higher Quadrumana, this influence would have been more powerful at a remote period than at the present day, though
THE MANNER OF ACTION OF SEXUAL SELECTION WITH MANKIND.
With primeval man under the favourable conditions just stated, and with those savages who at the present time enter into any marriage tie, sexual selection has probably acted in the following manner, subject to greater or less interference from female
The strongest and most vigorous men--those who could best defend and hunt for their families, who were provided with the best weapons and possessed the most property, such as a large number of dogs or other animals,--would succeed in rearing a greater
There can, also, be no doubt that such men would generally be able to select the more attractive women.
At present the chiefs of nearly every tribe throughout the world succeed in obtaining more than one wife.
I hear from Mr. Mantell that, until recently, almost every girl in New Zealand who was pretty, or promised to be pretty, was tapu to some chief.
With the Kafirs, as Mr. C. Hamilton states (17.
'Anthropological Review,' Jan.
1870, p.
xvi.
), "the chiefs generally have the pick of the women for many miles round, and are most persevering in establishing or confirming their privilege".
We have seen that each race has its own style of beauty, and we know that it is natural to man to admire each characteristic point in his domestic animals, dress, ornaments, and personal appearance, when carried a little beyond the average.
If then the several foregoing propositions be admitted, and I cannot see that they are doubtful, it would be an inexplicable circumstance if the selection of the more attractive women by the more powerful men of each tribe, who would rear on an average a
When a foreign breed of our domestic animals is introduced into a new country, or when a native breed is long and carefully attended to, either for use or ornament, it is found after several generations to have undergone a greater or less amount of change
This follows from unconscious selection during a long series of generations--that is, the preservation of the most approved individuals--without any wish or expectation of such a result on the part of the breeder.
So again, if during many years two careful breeders rear animals of the same family, and do not compare them together or with a common standard, the animals are found to have become, to the surprise of their owners, slightly different.
(18.
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
pp.
210-217.
) Each breeder has impressed, as von Nathusius well expresses it, the character of his own mind--his own taste and judgment--on his animals.
What reason, then, can be assigned why similar results should not follow from the long-continued selection of the most admired women by those men of each tribe who were able to rear the greatest number of children?
This would be unconscious selection, for an effect would be produced, independently of any wish or expectation on the part of the men who preferred certain women to others.
Let us suppose the members of a tribe, practising some form of marriage, to spread over an unoccupied continent, they would soon split up into distinct hordes, separated from each other by various barriers, and still more effectually by the incessant wars
The hordes would thus be exposed to slightly different conditions and habits of life, and would sooner or later come to differ in some small degree.
As soon as this occurred, each isolated tribe would form for itself a slightly different standard of beauty (19.
An ingenious writer argues, from a comparison of the pictures of Raphael, Rubens, and modern French artists, that the idea of beauty is not absolutely the same even throughout Europe: see the 'Lives of Haydn and Mozart,' by Bombet (otherwise M. Beyle),
278.
); and then unconscious selection would come into action through the more powerful and leading men preferring certain women to others.
Thus the differences between the tribes, at first very slight, would gradually and inevitably be more or less increased.
With animals in a state of nature, many characters proper to the males, such as size, strength, special weapons, courage and pugnacity, have been acquired through the law of battle.
The semi-human progenitors of man, like their allies the Quadrumana, will almost certainly have been thus modified; and, as savages still fight for the possession of their women, a similar process of selection has probably gone on in a greater or less
Other characters proper to the males of the lower animals, such as bright colours and various ornaments, have been acquired by the more attractive males having been preferred by the females.
There are, however, exceptional cases in which the males are the selectors, instead of having been the selected.
We recognise such cases by the females being more highly ornamented than the males,--their ornamental characters having been transmitted exclusively or chiefly to their female offspring.
One such case has been described in the order to which man belongs, that of the Rhesus monkey.
Man is more powerful in body and mind than woman, and in the savage state he keeps her in a far more abject state of bondage than does the male of any other animal; therefore it is not surprising that he should have gained the power of selection.
Women are everywhere conscious of the value of their own beauty; and when they have the means, they take more delight in decorating themselves with all sorts of ornaments than do men.
They borrow the plumes of male birds, with which nature has decked this sex, in order to charm the females.
As women have long been selected for beauty, it is not surprising that some of their successive variations should have been transmitted exclusively to the same sex; consequently that they should have transmitted beauty in a somewhat higher degree to their
Women, however, certainly transmit most of their characters, including some beauty, to their offspring of both sexes; so that the continued preference by the men of each race for the more attractive women, according to their standard of taste, will have
With respect to the other form of sexual selection (which with the lower animals is much the more common), namely, when the females are the selectors, and accept only those males which excite or charm them most, we have reason to believe that it formerly
Man in all probability owes his beard, and perhaps some other characters, to inheritance from an ancient progenitor who thus gained his ornaments.
But this form of selection may have occasionally acted during later times; for in utterly barbarous tribes the women have more power in choosing, rejecting, and tempting their lovers, or of afterwards changing their husbands, than might have been expected.
As this is a point of some importance, I will give in detail such evidence as I have been able to collect.
Hearne describes how a woman in one of the tribes of Arctic America repeatedly ran away from her husband and joined her lover; and with the Charruas of S. America, according to Azara, divorce is quite optional.
Amongst the Abipones, a man on choosing a wife bargains with the parents about the price.
But "it frequently happens that the girl rescinds what has been agreed upon between the parents and the bridegroom, obstinately rejecting the very mention of marriage".
She often runs away, hides herself, and thus eludes the bridegroom.
Captain Musters who lived with the Patagonians, says that their marriages are always settled by inclination; "if the parents make a match contrary to the daughter's will, she refuses and is never compelled to comply".
In Tierra del Fuego a young man first obtains the consent of the parents by doing them some service, and then he attempts to carry off the girl; "but if she is unwilling, she hides herself in the woods until her admirer is heartily tired of looking for
In the Fiji Islands the man seizes on the woman whom he wishes for his wife by actual or pretended force; but "on reaching the home of her abductor, should she not approve of the match, she runs to some one who can protect her; if, however, she is
With the Kalmucks there is a regular race between the bride and bridegroom, the former having a fair start; and Clarke "was assured that no instance occurs of a girl being caught, unless she has a partiality to the pursuer".
Amongst the wild tribes of the Malay Archipelago there is also a racing match; and it appears from M. Bourien's account, as Sir J. Lubbock remarks, that "the race, 'is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong,' but to the young man who has the good
A similar custom, with the same result, prevails with the Koraks of North- Eastern Asia.
Turning to Africa: the Kafirs buy their wives, and girls are severely beaten by their fathers if they will not accept a chosen husband; but it is manifest from many facts given by the Rev.
Mr. Shooter, that they have considerable power of choice.
Thus very ugly, though rich men, have been known to fail in getting wives.
The girls, before consenting to be betrothed, compel the men to shew themselves off first in front and then behind, and "exhibit their paces".
They have been known to propose to a man, and they not rarely run away with a favoured lover.
So again, Mr. Leslie, who was intimately acquainted with the Kafirs, says, "it is a mistake to imagine that a girl is sold by her father in the same manner, and with the same authority, with which he would dispose of a cow".
Amongst the degraded Bushmen of S. Africa, "when a girl has grown up to womanhood without having been betrothed, which, however, does not often happen, her lover must gain her approbation, as well as that of the parents".
(20.
Azara, 'Voyages,' etc.
, tom.
ii.
p.
23.
Dobrizhoffer, 'An Account of the Abipones,' vol.
ii.
1822, p.
207.
Capt.
Musters, in 'Proc.
R. Geograph.
Soc.
' vol.
xv.
p.
47.
Williams on the Fiji Islanders, as quoted by Lubbock, 'Origin of Civilisation,' 1870, p.
79.
On the Fuegians, King and Fitzroy, 'Voyages of the "Adventure" and "Beagle,"' vol.
ii.
1839, p.
182.
On the Kalmucks, quoted by M'Lennan, 'Primitive Marriage,' 1865, p.
32.
On the Malays, Lubbock, ibid.
p.
76.
The Rev.
J. Shooter, 'On the Kafirs of Natal,' 1857, pp.
52-60.
Mr. D. Leslie, 'Kafir Character and Customs,' 1871, p.
4.
On the Bush-men, Burchell, 'Travels in S. Africa,' ii.
1824, p.
59.
On the Koraks by McKennan, as quoted by Mr. Wake, in 'Anthropologia,' Oct.
1873, p.
75.
) Mr. Winwood Reade made inquiries for me with respect to the negroes of Western Africa, and he informs me that "the women, at least among the more intelligent Pagan tribes, have no difficulty in getting the husbands whom they may desire, although it is
They are quite capable of falling in love, and of forming tender, passionate, and faithful attachments".
Additional cases could be given.
We thus see that with savages the women are not in quite so abject a state in relation to marriage as has often been supposed.
They can tempt the men whom they prefer, and can sometimes reject those whom they dislike, either before or after marriage.
Preference on the part of the women, steadily acting in any one direction, would ultimately affect the character of the tribe; for the women would generally choose not merely the handsomest men, according to their standard of taste, but those who were at
Such well-endowed pairs would commonly rear a larger number of offspring than the less favoured.
The same result would obviously follow in a still more marked manner if there was selection on both sides; that is, if the more attractive, and at the same time more powerful men were to prefer, and were preferred by, the more attractive women.
And this double form of selection seems actually to have occurred, especially during the earlier periods of our long history.
We will now examine a little more closely some of the characters which distinguish the several races of man from one another and from the lower animals, namely, the greater or less deficiency of hair on the body, and the colour of the skin.
We need say nothing about the great diversity in the shape of the features and of the skull between the different races, as we have seen in the last chapter how different is the standard of beauty in these respects.
These characters will therefore probably have been acted on through sexual selection; but we have no means of judging whether they have been acted on chiefly from the male or female side.
The musical faculties of man have likewise been already discussed.
ABSENCE OF HAIR ON THE BODY, AND ITS DEVELOPMENT ON THE FACE AND HEAD.
From the presence of the woolly hair or lanugo on the human foetus, and of rudimentary hairs scattered over the body during maturity, we may infer that man is descended from some animal which was born hairy and remained so during life.
The loss of hair is an inconvenience and probably an injury to man, even in a hot climate, for he is thus exposed to the scorching of the sun, and to sudden chills, especially during wet weather.
As Mr. Wallace remarks, the natives in all countries are glad to protect their naked backs and shoulders with some slight covering.
No one supposes that the nakedness of the skin is any direct advantage to man; his body therefore cannot have been divested of hair through natural selection.
(21.
'Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection,' 1870, p.
346.
Mr. Wallace believes (p.
350) "that some intelligent power has guided or determined the development of man"; and he considers the hairless condition of the skin as coming under this head.
The Rev.
T.R. Stebbing, in commenting on this view ('Transactions of Devonshire Association for Science,' 1870) remarks, that had Mr. Wallace "employed his usual ingenuity on the question of man's hairless skin, he might have seen the possibility of its selection
) Nor, as shewn in a former chapter, have we any evidence that this can be due to the direct action of climate, or that it is the result of correlated development.
The absence of hair on the body is to a certain extent a secondary sexual character; for in all parts of the world women are less hairy than men.
Therefore we may reasonably suspect that this character has been gained through sexual selection.
We know that the faces of several species of monkeys, and large surfaces at the posterior end of the body of other species, have been denuded of hair; and this we may safely attribute to sexual selection, for these surfaces are not only vividly coloured,
I am informed by Mr. Bartlett that, as these animals gradually reach maturity, the naked surfaces grow larger compared with the size of their bodies.
The hair, however, appears to have been removed, not for the sake of nudity, but that the colour of the skin may be more fully displayed.
So again with many birds, it appears as if the head and neck had been divested of feathers through sexual selection, to exhibit the brightly-coloured skin.
As the body in woman is less hairy than in man, and as this character is common to all races, we may conclude that it was our female semi-human ancestors who were first divested of hair, and that this occurred at an extremely remote period before the
Whilst our female ancestors were gradually acquiring this new character of nudity, they must have transmitted it almost equally to their offspring of both sexes whilst young; so that its transmission, as with the ornaments of many mammals and birds, has
There is nothing surprising in a partial loss of hair having been esteemed as an ornament by our ape-like progenitors, for we have seen that innumerable strange characters have been thus esteemed by animals of all kinds, and have consequently been gained
Nor is it surprising that a slightly injurious character should have been thus acquired; for we know that this is the case with the plumes of certain birds, and with the horns of certain stags.
The females of some of the anthropoid apes, as stated in a former chapter, are somewhat less hairy on the under surface than the males; and here we have what might have afforded a commencement for the process of denudation.
With respect to the completion of the process through sexual selection, it is well to bear in mind the New Zealand proverb, "There is no woman for a hairy man".
All who have seen photographs of the Siamese hairy family will admit how ludicrously hideous is the opposite extreme of excessive hairiness.
And the king of Siam had to bribe a man to marry the first hairy woman in the family; and she transmitted this character to her young offspring of both sexes.
(22.
The 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol.
ii.
1868, p.
237.
) Some races are much more hairy than others, especially the males; but it must not be assumed that the more hairy races, such as the European, have retained their primordial condition more completely than the naked races, such as the Kalmucks or
It is more probable that the hairiness of the former is due to partial reversion; for characters which have been at some former period long inherited are always apt to return.
We have seen that idiots are often very hairy, and they are apt to revert in other characters to a lower animal type.
It does not appear that a cold climate has been influential in leading to this kind of reversion; excepting perhaps with the negroes, who have been reared during several generations in the United States (23.
'Investigations into Military and Anthropological Statistics of American Soldiers,' by B.A. Gould, 1869, p.
568:--Observations were carefully made on the hairiness of 2129 black and coloured soldiers, whilst they were bathing; and by looking to the published table, "it is manifest at a glance that there is but little, if any, difference between the white and the
It is, however, certain that negroes in their native and much hotter land of Africa, have remarkably smooth bodies.
It should be particularly observed, that both pure blacks and mulattoes were included in the above enumeration; and this is an unfortunate circumstance, as in accordance with a principle, the truth of which I have elsewhere proved, crossed races of man
), and possibly with the Ainos, who inhabit the northern islands of the Japan archipelago.
But the laws of inheritance are so complex that we can seldom understand their action.
If the greater hairiness of certain races be the result of reversion, unchecked by any form of selection, its extreme variability, even within the limits of the same race, ceases to be remarkable.
(24.
Hardly any view advanced in this work has met with so much disfavour (see for instance, Sprengel, 'Die Fortschritte des Darwinismus,' 1874, p.
80) as the above explanation of the loss of hair in mankind through sexual selection; but none of the opposed arguments seem to me of much weight, in comparison with the facts shewing that the nudity of the skin is to a certain extent a secondary sexual
) With respect to the beard in man, if we turn to our best guide, the Quadrumana, we find beards equally developed in both sexes of many species, but in some, either confined to the males, or more developed in them than in the females.
From this fact and from the curious arrangement, as well as the bright colours of the hair about the heads of many monkeys, it is highly probable, as before explained, that the males first acquired their beards through sexual selection as an ornament,
We know from Eschricht (25.
'Ueber die Richtung der Haare am Menschlichen Krper,' in Mller's 'Archiv.
fr Anat.
und Phys.
' 1837, s.
40.
) that with mankind the female as well as the male foetus is furnished with much hair on the face, especially round the mouth; and this indicates that we are descended from progenitors of whom both sexes were bearded.
It appears therefore at first sight probable that man has retained his beard from a very early period, whilst woman lost her beard at the same time that her body became almost completely divested of hair.
Even the colour of our beards seems to have been inherited from an ape-like progenitor; for when there is any difference in tint between the hair of the head and the beard, the latter is lighter coloured in all monkeys and in man.
In those Quadrumana in which the male has a larger beard than that of the female, it is fully developed only at maturity, just as with mankind; and it is possible that only the later stages of development have been retained by man.
In opposition to this view of the retention of the beard from an early period is the fact of its great variability in different races, and even within the same race; for this indicates reversion,--long lost characters being very apt to vary on
Nor must we overlook the part which sexual selection may have played in later times; for we know that with savages the men of the beardless races take infinite pains in eradicating every hair from their faces as something odious, whilst the men of the
The women, no doubt, participate in these feelings, and if so sexual selection can hardly have failed to have effected something in the course of later times.
It is also possible that the long-continued habit of eradicating the hair may have produced an inherited effect.
Dr. Brown-Sequard has shewn that if certain animals are operated on in a particular manner, their offspring are affected.
Further evidence could be given of the inheritance of the effects of mutilations; but a fact lately ascertained by Mr. Salvin (26.
On the tail-feathers of Motmots, 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society,' 1873, p.
429.
) has a more direct bearing on the present question; for he has shewn that the motmots, which are known habitually to bite off the barbs of the two central tail- feathers, have the barbs of these feathers naturally somewhat reduced.
(27.
Mr. Sproat has suggested ('Scenes and Studies of Savage Life,' 1868, p.
25) this same view.
Some distinguished ethnologists, amongst others M. Gosse of Geneva, believe that artificial modifications of the skull tend to be inherited.
) Nevertheless, with mankind the habit of eradicating the beard and the hairs on the body would probably not have arisen until these had already become by some means reduced.
It is difficult to form any judgment as to how the hair on the head became developed to its present great length in many races.
Eschricht (28.
'Ueber die Richtung,' ibid.
s.
40.
) states that in the human foetus the hair on the face during the fifth month is longer than that on the head; and this indicates that our semi-human progenitors were not furnished with long tresses, which must therefore have been a late acquisition.
This is likewise indicated by the extraordinary difference in the length of the hair in the different races; in the negro the hair forms a mere curly mat; with us it is of great length, and with the American natives it not rarely reaches to the ground.
Some species of Semnopithecus have their heads covered with moderately long hair, and this probably serves as an ornament and was acquired through sexual selection.
The same view may perhaps be extended to mankind, for we know that long tresses are now and were formerly much admired, as may be observed in the works of almost every poet; St. Paul says, "if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her;" and we have seen
COLOUR OF THE SKIN.
The best kind of evidence that in man the colour of the skin has been modified through sexual selection is scanty; for in most races the sexes do not differ in this respect, and only slightly, as we have seen, in others.
We know, however, from the many facts already given that the colour of the skin is regarded by the men of all races as a highly important element in their beauty; so that it is a character which would be likely to have been modified through selection, as
It seems at first sight a monstrous supposition that the jet-blackness of the negro should have been gained through sexual selection; but this view is supported by various analogies, and we know that negroes admire their own colour.
With mammals, when the sexes differ in colour, the male is often black or much darker than the female; and it depends merely on the form of inheritance whether this or any other tint is transmitted to both sexes or to one alone.
The resemblance to a negro in miniature of Pithecia satanas with his jet black skin, white rolling eyeballs, and hair parted on the top of the head, is almost ludicrous.
The colour of the face differs much more widely in the various kinds of monkeys than it does in the races of man; and we have some reason to believe that the red, blue, orange, almost white and black tints of their skin, even when common to both sexes, as
As the order of development during growth, generally indicates the order in which the characters of a species have been developed and modified during previous generations; and as the newly- born infants of the various races of man do not differ nearly as
SUMMARY.
We may conclude that the greater size, strength, courage, pugnacity, and energy of man, in comparison with woman, were acquired during primeval times, and have subsequently been augmented, chiefly through the contests of rival males for the possession of
The greater intellectual vigour and power of invention in man is probably due to natural selection, combined with the inherited effects of habit, for the most able men will have succeeded best in defending and providing for themselves and for their wives
As far as the extreme intricacy of the subject permits us to judge, it appears that our male ape-like progenitors acquired their beards as an ornament to charm or excite the opposite sex, and transmitted them only to their male offspring.
The females apparently first had their bodies denuded of hair, also as a sexual ornament; but they transmitted this character almost equally to both sexes.
It is not improbable that the females were modified in other respects for the same purpose and by the same means; so that women have acquired sweeter voices and become more beautiful than men.
It deserves attention that with mankind the conditions were in many respects much more favourable for sexual selection, during a very early period, when man had only just attained to the rank of manhood, than during later times.
For he would then, as we may safely conclude, have been guided more by his instinctive passions, and less by foresight or reason.
He would have jealously guarded his wife or wives.
He would not have practised infanticide; nor valued his wives merely as useful slaves; nor have been betrothed to them during infancy.
Hence we may infer that the races of men were differentiated, as far as sexual selection is concerned, in chief part at a very remote epoch; and this conclusion throws light on the remarkable fact that at the most ancient period, of which we have not as
The views here advanced, on the part which sexual selection has played in the history of man, want scientific precision.
He who does not admit this agency in the case of the lower animals, will disregard all that I have written in the later chapters on man.
We cannot positively say that this character, but not that, has been thus modified; it has, however, been shewn that the races of man differ from each other and from their nearest allies, in certain characters which are of no service to them in their daily
We have seen that with the lowest savages the people of each tribe admire their own characteristic qualities,--the shape of the head and face, the squareness of the cheek- bones, the prominence or depression of the nose, the colour of the skin, the length
Hence these and other such points could hardly fail to be slowly and gradually exaggerated, from the more powerful and able men in each tribe, who would succeed in rearing the largest number of offspring, having selected during many generations for their
For my own part I conclude that of all the causes which have led to the differences in external appearance between the races of man, and to a certain extent between man and the lower animals, sexual selection has been the most efficient.
CHAPTER XXI.
GENERAL SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION.
Main conclusion that man is descended from some lower form--Manner of development--Genealogy of man--Intellectual and moral faculties--Sexual Selection--Concluding remarks.
A brief summary will be sufficient to recall to the reader's mind the more salient points in this work.
Many of the views which have been advanced are highly speculative, and some no doubt will prove erroneous; but I have in every case given the reasons which have led me to one view rather than to another.
It seemed worth while to try how far the principle of evolution would throw light on some of the more complex problems in the natural history of man.
False facts are highly injurious to the progress of science, for they often endure long; but false views, if supported by some evidence, do little harm, for every one takes a salutary pleasure in proving their falseness: and when this is done, one path
The main conclusion here arrived at, and now held by many naturalists who are well competent to form a sound judgment, is that man is descended from some less highly organised form.
The grounds upon which this conclusion rests will never be shaken, for the close similarity between man and the lower animals in embryonic development, as well as in innumerable points of structure and constitution, both of high and of the most trifling
They have long been known, but until recently they told us nothing with respect to the origin of man.
Now when viewed by the light of our knowledge of the whole organic world, their meaning is unmistakable.
The great principle of evolution stands up clear and firm, when these groups or facts are considered in connection with others, such as the mutual affinities of the members of the same group, their geographical distribution in past and present times, and
It is incredible that all these facts should speak falsely.
He who is not content to look, like a savage, at the phenomena of nature as disconnected, cannot any longer believe that man is the work of a separate act of creation.
He will be forced to admit that the close resemblance of the embryo of man to that, for instance, of a dog--the construction of his skull, limbs and whole frame on the same plan with that of other mammals, independently of the uses to which the parts may
We have seen that man incessantly presents individual differences in all parts of his body and in his mental faculties.
These differences or variations seem to be induced by the same general causes, and to obey the same laws as with the lower animals.
In both cases similar laws of inheritance prevail.
Man tends to increase at a greater rate than his means of subsistence; consequently he is occasionally subjected to a severe struggle for existence, and natural selection will have effected whatever lies within its scope.
A succession of strongly-marked variations of a similar nature is by no means requisite; slight fluctuating differences in the individual suffice for the work of natural selection; not that we have any reason to suppose that in the same species, all parts
We may feel assured that the inherited effects of the long-continued use or disuse of parts will have done much in the same direction with natural selection.
Modifications formerly of importance, though no longer of any special use, are long- inherited.
When one part is modified, other parts change through the principle of correlation, of which we have instances in many curious cases of correlated monstrosities.
Something may be attributed to the direct and definite action of the surrounding conditions of life, such as abundant food, heat or moisture; and lastly, many characters of slight physiological importance, some indeed of considerable importance, have been
No doubt man, as well as every other animal, presents structures, which seem to our limited knowledge, not to be now of any service to him, nor to have been so formerly, either for the general conditions of life, or in the relations of one sex to the
Such structures cannot be accounted for by any form of selection, or by the inherited effects of the use and disuse of parts.
We know, however, that many strange and strongly-marked peculiarities of structure occasionally appear in our domesticated productions, and if their unknown causes were to act more uniformly, they would probably become common to all the individuals of the
We may hope hereafter to understand something about the causes of such occasional modifications, especially through the study of monstrosities: hence the labours of experimentalists, such as those of M. Camille Dareste, are full of promise for the future.
In general we can only say that the cause of each slight variation and of each monstrosity lies much more in the constitution of the organism, than in the nature of the surrounding conditions; though new and changed conditions certainly play an important
Through the means just specified, aided perhaps by others as yet undiscovered, man has been raised to his present state.
But since he attained to the rank of manhood, he has diverged into distinct races, or as they may be more fitly called, sub-species.
Some of these, such as the Negro and European, are so distinct that, if specimens had been brought to a naturalist without any further information, they would undoubtedly have been considered by him as good and true species.
Nevertheless all the races agree in so many unimportant details of structure and in so many mental peculiarities that these can be accounted for only by inheritance from a common progenitor; and a progenitor thus characterised would probably deserve to
It must not be supposed that the divergence of each race from the other races, and of all from a common stock, can be traced back to any one pair of progenitors.
On the contrary, at every stage in the process of modification, all the individuals which were in any way better fitted for their conditions of life, though in different degrees, would have survived in greater numbers than the less well-fitted.
The process would have been like that followed by man, when he does not intentionally select particular individuals, but breeds from all the superior individuals, and neglects the inferior.
He thus slowly but surely modifies his stock, and unconsciously forms a new strain.
So with respect to modifications acquired independently of selection, and due to variations arising from the nature of the organism and the action of the surrounding conditions, or from changed habits of life, no single pair will have been modified much
By considering the embryological structure of man,--the homologies which he presents with the lower animals,--the rudiments which he retains,--and the reversions to which he is liable, we can partly recall in imagination the former condition of our early
We thus learn that man is descended from a hairy, tailed quadruped, probably arboreal in its habits, and an inhabitant of the Old World.
This creature, if its whole structure had been examined by a naturalist, would have been classed amongst the Quadrumana, as surely as the still more ancient progenitor of the Old and New World monkeys.
The Quadrumana and all the higher mammals are probably derived from an ancient marsupial animal, and this through a long line of diversified forms, from some amphibian-like creature, and this again from some fish-like animal.
In the dim obscurity of the past we can see that the early progenitor of all the Vertebrata must have been an aquatic animal, provided with branchiae, with the two sexes united in the same individual, and with the most important organs of the body (such as
This animal seems to have been more like the larvae of the existing marine Ascidians than any other known form.
The high standard of our intellectual powers and moral disposition is the greatest difficulty which presents itself, after we have been driven to this conclusion on the origin of man.
But every one who admits the principle of evolution, must see that the mental powers of the higher animals, which are the same in kind with those of man, though so different in degree, are capable of advancement.
Thus the interval between the mental powers of one of the higher apes and of a fish, or between those of an ant and scale-insect, is immense; yet their development does not offer any special difficulty; for with our domesticated animals, the mental
No one doubts that they are of the utmost importance to animals in a state of nature.
Therefore the conditions are favourable for their development through natural selection.
The same conclusion may be extended to man; the intellect must have been all-important to him, even at a very remote period, as enabling him to invent and use language, to make weapons, tools, traps, etc.
, whereby with the aid of his social habits, he long ago became the most dominant of all living creatures.
A great stride in the development of the intellect will have followed, as soon as the half-art and half-instinct of language came into use; for the continued use of language will have reacted on the brain and produced an inherited effect; and this again
As Mr. Chauncey Wright (1.
'On the Limits of Natural Selection,' in the 'North American Review,' Oct.
1870, p.
295.
) has well remarked, the largeness of the brain in man relatively to his body, compared with the lower animals, may be attributed in chief part to the early use of some simple form of language,--that wonderful engine which affixes signs to all sorts of
The higher intellectual powers of man, such as those of ratiocination, abstraction, self- consciousness, etc.
, probably follow from the continued improvement and exercise of the other mental faculties.
The development of the moral qualities is a more interesting problem.
The foundation lies in the social instincts, including under this term the family ties.
These instincts are highly complex, and in the case of the lower animals give special tendencies towards certain definite actions; but the more important elements are love, and the distinct emotion of sympathy.
Animals endowed with the social instincts take pleasure in one another's company, warn one another of danger, defend and aid one another in many ways.
These instincts do not extend to all the individuals of the species, but only to those of the same community.
As they are highly beneficial to the species, they have in all probability been acquired through natural selection.
A moral being is one who is capable of reflecting on his past actions and their motives--of approving of some and disapproving of others; and the fact that man is the one being who certainly deserves this designation, is the greatest of all distinctions
But in the fourth chapter I have endeavoured to shew that the moral sense follows, firstly, from the enduring and ever-present nature of the social instincts; secondly, from man's appreciation of the approbation and disapprobation of his fellows; and
Owing to this condition of mind, man cannot avoid looking both backwards and forwards, and comparing past impressions.
Hence after some temporary desire or passion has mastered his social instincts, he reflects and compares the now weakened impression of such past impulses with the ever-present social instincts; and he then feels that sense of dissatisfaction which all
Any instinct, permanently stronger or more enduring than another, gives rise to a feeling which we express by saying that it ought to be obeyed.
A pointer dog, if able to reflect on his past conduct, would say to himself, I ought (as indeed we say of him) to have pointed at that hare and not have yielded to the passing temptation of hunting it.
Social animals are impelled partly by a wish to aid the members of their community in a general manner, but more commonly to perform certain definite actions.
Man is impelled by the same general wish to aid his fellows; but has few or no special instincts.
He differs also from the lower animals in the power of expressing his desires by words, which thus become a guide to the aid required and bestowed.
The motive to give aid is likewise much modified in man: it no longer consists solely of a blind instinctive impulse, but is much influenced by the praise or blame of his fellows.
The appreciation and the bestowal of praise and blame both rest on sympathy; and this emotion, as we have seen, is one of the most important elements of the social instincts.
Sympathy, though gained as an instinct, is also much strengthened by exercise or habit.
As all men desire their own happiness, praise or blame is bestowed on actions and motives, according as they lead to this end; and as happiness is an essential part of the general good, the greatest-happinesss principle indirectly serves as a nearly safe
As the reasoning powers advance and experience is gained, the remoter effects of certain lines of conduct on the character of the individual, and on the general good, are perceived; and then the self-regarding virtues come within the scope of public
But with the less civilised nations reason often errs, and many bad customs and base superstitions come within the same scope, and are then esteemed as high virtues, and their breach as heavy crimes.
The moral faculties are generally and justly esteemed as of higher value than the intellectual powers.
But we should bear in mind that the activity of the mind in vividly recalling past impressions is one of the fundamental though secondary bases of conscience.
This affords the strongest argument for educating and stimulating in all possible ways the intellectual faculties of every human being.
No doubt a man with a torpid mind, if his social affections and sympathies are well developed, will be led to good actions, and may have a fairly sensitive conscience.
But whatever renders the imagination more vivid and strengthens the habit of recalling and comparing past impressions, will make the conscience more sensitive, and may even somewhat compensate for weak social affections and sympathies.
The moral nature of man has reached its present standard, partly through the advancement of his reasoning powers and consequently of a just public opinion, but especially from his sympathies having been rendered more tender and widely diffused through the
It is not improbable that after long practice virtuous tendencies may be inherited.
With the more civilised races, the conviction of the existence of an all-seeing Deity has had a potent influence on the advance of morality.
Ultimately man does not accept the praise or blame of his fellows as his sole guide, though few escape this influence, but his habitual convictions, controlled by reason, afford him the safest rule.
His conscience then becomes the supreme judge and monitor.
Nevertheless the first foundation or origin of the moral sense lies in the social instincts, including sympathy; and these instincts no doubt were primarily gained, as in the case of the lower animals, through natural selection.
The belief in God has often been advanced as not only the greatest, but the most complete of all the distinctions between man and the lower animals.
It is however impossible, as we have seen, to maintain that this belief is innate or instinctive in man.
On the other hand a belief in all-pervading spiritual agencies seems to be universal; and apparently follows from a considerable advance in man's reason, and from a still greater advance in his faculties of imagination, curiosity and wonder.
I am aware that the assumed instinctive belief in God has been used by many persons as an argument for His existence.
But this is a rash argument, as we should thus be compelled to believe in the existence of many cruel and malignant spirits, only a little more powerful than man; for the belief in them is far more general than in a beneficent Deity.
The idea of a universal and beneficent Creator does not seem to arise in the mind of man, until he has been elevated by long-continued culture.
He who believes in the advancement of man from some low organised form, will naturally ask how does this bear on the belief in the immortality of the soul.
The barbarous races of man, as Sir J. Lubbock has shewn, possess no clear belief of this kind; but arguments derived from the primeval beliefs of savages are, as we have just seen, of little or no avail.
Few persons feel any anxiety from the impossibility of determining at what precise period in the development of the individual, from the first trace of a minute germinal vesicle, man becomes an immortal being; and there is no greater cause for anxiety
(2.
The Rev.
J.A. Picton gives a discussion to this effect in his 'New Theories and the Old Faith,' 1870.
) I am aware that the conclusions arrived at in this work will be denounced by some as highly irreligious; but he who denounces them is bound to shew why it is more irreligious to explain the origin of man as a distinct species by descent from some lower
The birth both of the species and of the individual are equally parts of that grand sequence of events, which our minds refuse to accept as the result of blind chance.
The understanding revolts at such a conclusion, whether or not we are able to believe that every slight variation of structure,--the union of each pair in marriage, the dissemination of each seed,--and other such events, have all been ordained for some
Sexual selection has been treated at great length in this work; for, as I have attempted to shew, it has played an important part in the history of the organic world.
I am aware that much remains doubtful, but I have endeavoured to give a fair view of the whole case.
In the lower divisions of the animal kingdom, sexual selection seems to have done nothing: such animals are often affixed for life to the same spot, or have the sexes combined in the same individual, or what is still more important, their perceptive and
When, however, we come to the Arthropoda and Vertebrata, even to the lowest classes in these two great Sub-Kingdoms, sexual selection has effected much.
In the several great classes of the animal kingdom,--in mammals, birds, reptiles, fishes, insects, and even crustaceans,--the differences between the sexes follow nearly the same rules.
The males are almost always the wooers; and they alone are armed with special weapons for fighting with their rivals.
They are generally stronger and larger than the females, and are endowed with the requisite qualities of courage and pugnacity.
They are provided, either exclusively or in a much higher degree than the females, with organs for vocal or instrumental music, and with odoriferous glands.
They are ornamented with infinitely diversified appendages, and with the most brilliant or conspicuous colours, often arranged in elegant patterns, whilst the females are unadorned.
When the sexes differ in more important structures, it is the male which is provided with special sense- organs for discovering the female, with locomotive organs for reaching her, and often with prehensile organs for holding her.
These various structures for charming or securing the female are often developed in the male during only part of the year, namely the breeding-season.
They have in many cases been more or less transferred to the females; and in the latter case they often appear in her as mere rudiments.
They are lost or never gained by the males after emasculation.
Generally they are not developed in the male during early youth, but appear a short time before the age for reproduction.
Hence in most cases the young of both sexes resemble each other; and the female somewhat resembles her young offspring throughout life.
In almost every great class a few anomalous cases occur, where there has been an almost complete transposition of the characters proper to the two sexes; the females assuming characters which properly belong to the males.
This surprising uniformity in the laws regulating the differences between the sexes in so many and such widely separated classes, is intelligible if we admit the action of one common cause, namely sexual selection.
Sexual selection depends on the success of certain individuals over others of the same sex, in relation to the propagation of the species; whilst natural selection depends on the success of both sexes, at all ages, in relation to the general conditions of
The sexual struggle is of two kinds; in the one it is between individuals of the same sex, generally the males, in order to drive away or kill their rivals, the females remaining passive; whilst in the other, the struggle is likewise between the
This latter kind of selection is closely analogous to that which man unintentionally, yet effectually, brings to bear on his domesticated productions, when he preserves during a long period the most pleasing or useful individuals, without any wish to
The laws of inheritance determine whether characters gained through sexual selection by either sex shall be transmitted to the same sex, or to both; as well as the age at which they shall be developed.
It appears that variations arising late in life are commonly transmitted to one and the same sex.
Variability is the necessary basis for the action of selection, and is wholly independent of it.
It follows from this, that variations of the same general nature have often been taken advantage of and accumulated through sexual selection in relation to the propagation of the species, as well as through natural selection in relation to the general
Hence secondary sexual characters, when equally transmitted to both sexes can be distinguished from ordinary specific characters only by the light of analogy.
The modifications acquired through sexual selection are often so strongly pronounced that the two sexes have frequently been ranked as distinct species, or even as distinct genera.
Such strongly-marked differences must be in some manner highly important; and we know that they have been acquired in some instances at the cost not only of inconvenience, but of exposure to actual danger.
The belief in the power of sexual selection rests chiefly on the following considerations.
Certain characters are confined to one sex; and this alone renders it probable that in most cases they are connected with the act of reproduction.
In innumerable instances these characters are fully developed only at maturity, and often during only a part of the year, which is always the breeding-season.
The males (passing over a few exceptional cases) are the more active in courtship; they are the better armed, and are rendered the more attractive in various ways.
It is to be especially observed that the males display their attractions with elaborate care in the presence of the females; and that they rarely or never display them excepting during the season of love.
It is incredible that all this should be purposeless.
Lastly we have distinct evidence with some quadrupeds and birds, that the individuals of one sex are capable of feeling a strong antipathy or preference for certain individuals of the other sex.
Bearing in mind these facts, and the marked results of man's unconscious selection, when applied to domesticated animals and cultivated plants, it seems to me almost certain that if the individuals of one sex were during a long series of generations to
I have not attempted to conceal that, excepting when the males are more numerous than the females, or when polygamy prevails, it is doubtful how the more attractive males succeed in leaving a large number of offspring to inherit their superiority in
Although we have some positive evidence that birds appreciate bright and beautiful objects, as with the bower-birds of Australia, and although they certainly appreciate the power of song, yet I fully admit that it is astonishing that the females of many
But we really know little about the minds of the lower animals.
It cannot be supposed, for instance, that male birds of paradise or peacocks should take such pains in erecting, spreading, and vibrating their beautiful plumes before the females for no purpose.
We should remember the fact given on excellent authority in a former chapter, that several peahens, when debarred from an admired male, remained widows during a whole season rather than pair with another bird.
Nevertheless I know of no fact in natural history more wonderful than that the female Argus pheasant should appreciate the exquisite shading of the ball-and-socket ornaments and the elegant patterns on the wing-feather of the male.
He who thinks that the male was created as he now exists must admit that the great plumes, which prevent the wings from being used for flight, and which are displayed during courtship and at no other time in a manner quite peculiar to this one species,
If so, he must likewise admit that the female was created and endowed with the capacity of appreciating such ornaments.
I differ only in the conviction that the male Argus pheasant acquired his beauty gradually, through the preference of the females during many generations for the more highly ornamented males; the aesthetic capacity of the females having been advanced
In the male through the fortunate chance of a few feathers being left unchanged, we can distinctly trace how simple spots with a little fulvous shading on one side may have been developed by small steps into the wonderful ball-and-socket ornaments; and it
Everyone who admits the principle of evolution, and yet feels great difficulty in admitting that female mammals, birds, reptiles, and fish, could have acquired the high taste implied by the beauty of the males, and which generally coincides with our own
For we can thus see how it has come to pass that certain mental faculties, in various and widely distinct groups of animals, have been developed in nearly the same manner and to nearly the same degree.
The reader who has taken the trouble to go through the several chapters devoted to sexual selection, will be able to judge how far the conclusions at which I have arrived are supported by sufficient evidence.
If he accepts these conclusions he may, I think, safely extend them to mankind; but it would be superfluous here to repeat what I have so lately said on the manner in which sexual selection apparently has acted on man, both on the male and female side,
He who admits the principle of sexual selection will be led to the remarkable conclusion that the nervous system not only regulates most of the existing functions of the body, but has indirectly influenced the progressive development of various bodily
Courage, pugnacity, perseverance, strength and size of body, weapons of all kinds, musical organs, both vocal and instrumental, bright colours and ornamental appendages, have all been indirectly gained by the one sex or the other, through the exertion of
Man scans with scrupulous care the character and pedigree of his horses, cattle, and dogs before he matches them; but when he comes to his own marriage he rarely, or never, takes any such care.
He is impelled by nearly the same motives as the lower animals, when they are left to their own free choice, though he is in so far superior to them that he highly values mental charms and virtues.
On the other hand he is strongly attracted by mere wealth or rank.
Yet he might by selection do something not only for the bodily constitution and frame of his offspring, but for their intellectual and moral qualities.
Both sexes ought to refrain from marriage if they are in any marked degree inferior in body or mind; but such hopes are Utopian and will never be even partially realised until the laws of inheritance are thoroughly known.
Everyone does good service, who aids towards this end.
When the principles of breeding and inheritance are better understood, we shall not hear ignorant members of our legislature rejecting with scorn a plan for ascertaining whether or not consanguineous marriages are injurious to man.
The advancement of the welfare of mankind is a most intricate problem: all ought to refrain from marriage who cannot avoid abject poverty for their children; for poverty is not only a great evil, but tends to its own increase by leading to recklessness in
On the other hand, as Mr. Galton has remarked, if the prudent avoid marriage, whilst the reckless marry, the inferior members tend to supplant the better members of society.
Man, like every other animal, has no doubt advanced to his present high condition through a struggle for existence consequent on his rapid multiplication; and if he is to advance still higher, it is to be feared that he must remain subject to a severe
Otherwise he would sink into indolence, and the more gifted men would not be more successful in the battle of life than the less gifted.
Hence our natural rate of increase, though leading to many and obvious evils, must not be greatly diminished by any means.
There should be open competition for all men; and the most able should not be prevented by laws or customs from succeeding best and rearing the largest number of offspring.
Important as the struggle for existence has been and even still is, yet as far as the highest part of man's nature is concerned there are other agencies more important.
For the moral qualities are advanced, either directly or indirectly, much more through the effects of habit, the reasoning powers, instruction, religion, etc.
, than through natural selection; though to this latter agency may be safely attributed the social instincts, which afforded the basis for the development of the moral sense.
The main conclusion arrived at in this work, namely, that man is descended from some lowly organised form, will, I regret to think, be highly distasteful to many.
But there can hardly be a doubt that we are descended from barbarians.
The astonishment which I felt on first seeing a party of Fuegians on a wild and broken shore will never be forgotten by me, for the reflection at once rushed into my mind--such were our ancestors.
These men were absolutely naked and bedaubed with paint, their long hair was tangled, their mouths frothed with excitement, and their expression was wild, startled, and distrustful.
They possessed hardly any arts, and like wild animals lived on what they could catch; they had no government, and were merciless to every one not of their own small tribe.
He who has seen a savage in his native land will not feel much shame, if forced to acknowledge that the blood of some more humble creature flows in his veins.
For my own part I would as soon be descended from that heroic little monkey, who braved his dreaded enemy in order to save the life of his keeper, or from that old baboon, who descending from the mountains, carried away in triumph his young comrade from a
Man may be excused for feeling some pride at having risen, though not through his own exertions, to the very summit of the organic scale; and the fact of his having thus risen, instead of having been aboriginally placed there, may give him hope for a still
But we are not here concerned with hopes or fears, only with the truth as far as our reason permits us to discover it; and I have given the evidence to the best of my ability.
We must, however, acknowledge, as it seems to me, that man with all his noble qualities, with sympathy which feels for the most debased, with benevolence which extends not only to other men but to the humblest living creature, with his god-like intellect
SUPPLEMENTAL NOTE.
ON SEXUAL SELECTION IN RELATION TO MONKEYS.
Reprinted from NATURE, November 2, 1876, p.
18.
In the discussion on Sexual Selection in my 'Descent of Man,' no case interested and perplexed me so much as the brightly-coloured hinder ends and adjoining parts of certain monkeys.
As these parts are more brightly coloured in one sex than the other, and as they become more brilliant during the season of love, I concluded that the colours had been gained as a sexual attraction.
I was well aware that I thus laid myself open to ridicule; though in fact it is not more surprising that a monkey should display his bright-red hinder end than that a peacock should display his magnificent tail.
I had, however, at that time no evidence of monkeys exhibiting this part of their bodies during their courtship; and such display in the case of birds affords the best evidence that the ornaments of the males are of service to them by attracting or
I have lately read an article by Joh.
von Fischer, of Gotha, published in 'Der Zoologische Garten,' April 1876, on the expression of monkeys under various emotions, which is well worthy of study by any one interested in the subject, and which shews that the author is a careful and acute
In this article there is an account of the behaviour of a young male mandrill when he first beheld himself in a looking-glass, and it is added, that after a time he turned round and presented his red hinder end to the glass.
Accordingly I wrote to Herr J. von Fischer to ask what he supposed was the meaning of this strange action, and he has sent me two long letters full of new and curious details, which will, I hope, be hereafter published.
He says that he was himself at first perplexed by the above action, and was thus led carefully to observe several individuals of various other species of monkeys, which he has long kept in his house.
He finds that not only the mandrill (Cynocephalus mormon) but the drill (C.
leucophaeus) and three other kinds of baboons (C.
hamadryas, sphinx, and babouin), also Cynopithecus niger, and Macacus rhesus and nemestrinus, turn this part of their bodies, which in all these species is more or less brightly coloured, to him when they are pleased, and to other persons as a sort of
He took pains to cure a Macacus rhesus, which he had kept for five years, of this indecorous habit, and at last succeeded.
These monkeys are particularly apt to act in this manner, grinning at the same time, when first introduced to a new monkey, but often also to their old monkey friends; and after this mutual display they begin to play together.
The young mandrill ceased spontaneously after a time to act in this manner towards his master, von Fischer, but continued to do so towards persons who were strangers and to new monkeys.
A young Cynopithecus niger never acted, excepting on one occasion, in this way towards his master, but frequently towards strangers, and continues to do so up to the present time.
From these facts Von Fischer concludes that the monkeys which behaved in this manner before a looking-glass (viz.
, the mandrill, drill, Cynopithecus niger, Macacus rhesus and nemestrinus) acted as if their reflection were a new acquaintance.
The mandrill and drill, which have their hinder ends especially ornamented, display it even whilst quite young, more frequently and more ostentatiously than do the other kinds.
Next in order comes Cynocephalus hamadryas, whilst the other species act in this manner seldomer.
The individuals, however, of the same species vary in this respect, and some which were very shy never displayed their hinder ends.
It deserves especial attention that Von Fischer has never seen any species purposely exhibit the hinder part of its body, if not at all coloured.
This remark applies to many individuals of Macacus cynomolgus and Cercocebus radiatus (which is closely allied to M. rhesus), to three species of Cercopithecus and several American monkeys.
The habit of turning the hinder ends as a greeting to an old friend or new acquaintance, which seems to us so odd, is not really more so than the habits of many savages, for instance that of rubbing their bellies with their hands, or rubbing noses
The habit with the mandrill and drill seems to be instinctive or inherited, as it was followed by very young animals; but it is modified or guided, like so many other instincts, by observation, for Von Fischer says that they take pains to make their
With respect to the origin of the habit, Von Fischer remarks that his monkeys like to have their naked hinder ends patted or stroked, and that they then grunt with pleasure.
They often also turn this part of their bodies to other monkeys to have bits of dirt picked off, and so no doubt it would be with respect to thorns.
But the habit with adult animals is connected to a certain extent with sexual feelings, for Von Fischer watched through a glass door a female Cynopithecus niger, and she during several days, "umdrehte und dem Mnnchen mit gurgelnden Tnen die stark
Beim Anblick dieses Gegenstandes erregte sich das Mnnchen sichtlich, denn es polterte heftig an den Stben, ebenfalls gurgelnde Laute ausstossend".
As all the monkeys which have the hinder parts of their bodies more or less brightly coloured live, according to Von Fischer, in open rocky places, he thinks that these colours serve to render one sex conspicuous at a distance to the other; but, as monkeys
It seems to me more probable that the bright colours, whether on the face or hinder end, or, as in the mandrill, on both, serve as a sexual ornament and attraction.
Anyhow, as we now know that monkeys have the habit of turning their hinder ends towards other monkeys, it ceases to be at all surprising that it should have been this part of their bodies which has been more or less decorated.
The fact that it is only the monkeys thus characterised which, as far as at present known, act in this manner as a greeting towards other monkeys renders it doubtful whether the habit was first acquired from some independent cause, and that afterwards the
This principle apparently comes into play on many occasions: thus it is generally admitted that the songs of birds serve mainly as an attraction during the season of love, and that the leks, or great congregations of the black-grouse, are connected with
I beg leave to refer to one other point in relation to sexual selection.
It has been objected that this form of selection, as far as the ornaments of the males are concerned, implies that all females within the same district must possess and exercise exactly the same taste.
It should, however, be observed, in the first place, that although the range of variation of a species may be very large, it is by no means indefinite.
I have elsewhere given a good instance of this fact in the pigeon, of which there are at least a hundred varieties differing widely in their colours, and at least a score of varieties of the fowl differing in the same kind of way; but the range of colour
Therefore the females of natural species cannot have an unlimited scope for their taste.
In the second place, I presume that no supporter of the principle of sexual selection believes that the females select particular points of beauty in the males; they are merely excited or attracted in a greater degree by one male than by another, and this
Even man, excepting perhaps an artist, does not analyse the slight differences in the features of the woman whom he may admire, on which her beauty depends.
The male mandrill has not only the hinder end of his body, but his face gorgeously coloured and marked with oblique ridges, a yellow beard, and other ornaments.
We may infer from what we see of the variation of animals under domestication, that the above several ornaments of the mandrill were gradually acquired by one individual varying a little in one way, and another individual in another way.
The males which were the handsomest or the most attractive in any manner to the females would pair oftenest, and would leave rather more offspring than other males.
The offspring of the former, although variously intercrossed, would either inherit the peculiarities of their fathers or transmit an increased tendency to vary in the same manner.
Consequently the whole body of males inhabiting the same country would tend from the effects of constant intercrossing to become modified almost uniformly, but sometimes a little more in one character and sometimes in another, though at an extremely slow
The process is like that which I have called unconscious selection by man, and of which I have given several instances.
In one country the inhabitants value a fleet or light dog or horse, and in another country a heavier and more powerful one; in neither country is there any selection of individual animals with lighter or stronger bodies and limbs; nevertheless after a
In two absolutely distinct countries inhabited by the same species, the individuals of which can never during long ages have intermigrated and intercrossed, and where, moreover, the variations will probably not have been identically the same, sexual
Nor does the belief appear to me altogether fanciful that two sets of females, surrounded by a very different environment, would be apt to acquire somewhat different tastes with respect to form, sound, or colour.
However this may be, I have given in my 'Descent of Man' instances of closely-allied birds inhabiting distinct countries, of which the young and the females cannot be distinguished, whilst the adult males differ considerably, and this may be attributed
INDEX.
Abbot, C., on the battles of seals.
Abductor of the fifth metatarsal, presence of, in man.
Abercrombie, Dr., on disease of the brain affecting speech.
Abipones, marriage customs of the.
Abortion, prevalence of the practice of.
Abou-Simbel, caves of.
Abramis brama.
Abstraction, power of, in animals.
Acalles, stridulation of.
Acanthodactylus capensis, sexual differences of colour in.
Accentor Modularis.
Acclimatisation, difference of, in different races of men.
Achetidae, stridulation of the; rudimentary stridulating organs in female.
Acilius sulcatus, elytra of the female.
Acomus, development of spurs in the female of.
Acridiidae, stridulation of the; rudimentary stridulating organs in female.
Acromio-basilar muscle, and quadrupedal gait.
Acting.
Actiniae, bright colours of.
Adams, Mr., migration of birds; intelligence of nut-hatch; on the Bombycilla carolinensis.
Admiral butterfly.
Adoption of the young of other animals by female monkeys.
Advancement in the organic scale, Von Baer's definition of.
Aeby, on the difference between the skulls of man and the quadrumana.
Aesthetic faculty, not highly developed in savages.
Affection, maternal; manifestation of, by animals; parental and filial, partly the result of natural selection; mutual, of birds; shewn by birds in confinement, for certain persons.
Africa, probably the birthplace of man; South, crossed population of; South, retention of colour by the Dutch in; South, proportion of the sexes in the butterflies of; tattooing practised in; Northern, coiffure of natives of.
Agassiz, L., on conscience in dogs; on the coincidence of the races of man with zoological provinces; on the number of species of man; on the courtship of the land-snails; on the brightness of the colours of male fishes during the breeding season; on the
Age, in relation to the transmission of characters in birds; variation in accordance with, in birds.
Agelaeus phoeniceus.
Ageronia feronia, noise produced by.
Agrion, dimorphism in.
Agrion Ramburii, sexes of.
Agrionidae, difference in the sexes of.
Agrotis exclamationis.
Ague, tertian, dog suffering from.
Ainos, hairiness of the.
Aitchison, Mr., on sheep.
Aithurus polytmus, young of.
Albino birds.
Alca torda, young of.
Alces palmata.
Alder and Hancock, MM.
, on the nudi-branch mollusca.
Allen, J.A., vigour of birds earliest hatched; effect of difference of temperature, light, etc.
, on birds; colours of birds; on the relative size of the sexes of Callorhinus ursinus; on the name of Otaria jubata; on the pairing of seals; on sexual differences in the colour of bats.
Allen, S., on the habits of Hoplopterus; on the plumes of herons; on the vernal moult of Herodius bubulcus.
Alligator, courtship of the male; roaring of the male.
Amadavat, pugnacity of male.
Amadina Lathami, display of plumage by the male.
Amadina castanotis, display of plumage by the male.
Amazons, butterflies of the; fishes of the.
America, variation in the skulls of aborigines of; wide range of aborigines of; lice of the natives of; general beardlessness of the natives of.
America, North, butterflies of; Indians of, women a cause of strife among the; Indians of, their notions of female beauty.
America, South, character of the natives of; population of parts of; piles of stones in; extinction of the fossil horse of; desert-birds of; slight sexual difference of the aborigines of; prevalence of infanticide in.
American languages, often highly artificial.
Americans, wide geographical range of; native, variability of; and negroes, difference of; aversion of, to hair on the face.
Ammophila, on the jaws of.
Ammotragus tragelaphus, hairy forelegs of.
Amphibia, affinity of, to the ganoid fishes; vocal organs of the.
Amphibians, breeding whilst immature.
Amphioxus.
Amphipoda, males sexually mature while young.
Amunoph III.
, negro character of, features of.
Anal appendages of insects.
Analogous variation in the plumage of birds.
Anas.
Anas acuta, male plumage of.
Anas boschas, male plumage of.
Anas histrionica.
Anas punctata.
Anastomus oscitans, sexes and young of; white nuptial plumage of.
Anatidae, voices of.
Anax junius, differences in the sexes of.
Andaman islanders, susceptible to change of climate.
Anderson, Dr., on the tail of Macacus brunneus; the Bufo sikimmensis; sounds of Echis carinata.
Andreana fulva.
Anglo-Saxons, estimation of the beard among the.
Animals, domesticated, more fertile than wild; cruelty of savages to; characters common to man and; domestic, change of breeds of.
Annelida, colours of.
Anobium tessellatum, sounds produced by.
Anolis cristatellus, male, crest of; pugnacity of the male; throat-pouch of.
Anser canadensis.
Anset cygnoides; knob at the base of the beak of.
Anser hyperboreus, whiteness of.
Antelope, prong-horned, horns of.
Antelopes, generally polygamous; horns of; canine teeth of some male; use of horns of; dorsal crests in; dewlaps of; winter change of two species of; peculiar markings of.
Antennae, furnished with cushions in the male of Penthe.
Anthidium manicatum, large male of.
Anthocharis cardamines; sexual difference of colour in.
Anthocharis genutia.
Anthocharis sara.
Anthophora acervorum, large male of.
Anthophora retusa, difference of the sexes in.
Anthropidae.
Anthus, moulting of.
Antics of birds.
Antigua, Dr. Nicholson's observations on yellow fever in.
Antilocapra americana, horns of.
Antilope bezoartica, horned females of; sexual difference in the colour of.
Antilope Dorcas and euchore.
Antilope euchore, horns of.
Antilope montana, rudimentary canines in the young male of.
Antilope niger, sing-sing, caama, and gorgon, sexual differences in the colours of.
Antilope oreas, horns of.
Antilope saiga, polygamous habits of.
Antilope strepsiceros, horns of.
Antilope subgutturosa, absence of suborbital pits in.
Antipathy, shewn by birds in confinement, to certain persons.
Ants, large size of the cerebral ganglia in; soldier, large jaws of; playing together; memory in; intercommunication of, by means of the antennae; habits of; difference of the sexes in; recognition of each other by, after separation.
Ants White, habits of.
Anura.
Apatania muliebris, male unknown.
Apathus, difference of the sexes in.
Apatura Iris.
Apes, difference of the young, from the adult; semi-erect attitude of some; mastoid processes of; influences of the jaw-muscles on the physiognomy of; female, destitute of large canines; building platforms; imitative faculties of; anthropomorphous;
Apes, long-armed, their mode of progression.
Aphasia, Dr. Bateman on.
Apis mellifica, large male of.
Apollo, Greek statues of.
Apoplexy in Cebus Azarae.
Appendages, anal, of insects.
Approbation, influence of the love of.
Aprosmictus scapulatus.
Apus, proportion of sexes.
Aquatic birds, frequency of white plumage in.
Aquila chrysaetos.
Arab women, elaborate and peculiar coiffure of.
Arabs, fertility of crosses with other races; gashing of cheeks and temples among the.
Arachnida.
Arakhan, artificial widening of the forehead by the natives of.
Arboricola, young of.
Archeopteryx.
Arctiidae, coloration of the.
Ardea asha, rufescens, and coerulea, change of colour in.
Ardea coerulea, breeding in immature plumage.
Ardea gularis, change of plumage in.
Ardea herodias, love-gestures of the male.
Ardea ludoviciana, age of mature plumage in; continued growth of crest and plumes in the male of.
Ardea nycticorax, cries of.
Ardeola, young of.
Ardetta, changes of plumage in.
Argenteuil.
Argus pheasant, display of plumage by the male; ocellated spots of the; gradation of characters in the.
Argyll, Duke of, on the physical weakness of man; the fashioning of implements peculiar to man; on the contest in man between right and wrong; on the primitive civilisation of man; on the plumage of the male Argus pheasant; on Urosticte Benjamini; on the
Argynnis, colouring of the lower surface of.
Aricoris epitus, sexual differences in the wings of.
Aristocracy, increased beauty of the.
Arms, proportions of, in soldiers and sailors; direction of the hair on the.
Arms and hands, free use of, indirectly correlated with diminution of canines.
Arrest of development.
Arrow-heads, stone, general resemblance of.
Arrows, use of.
Arteries, variations in the course of the.
Artery, effect of tying, upon the lateral channels.
Arthropoda.
Arts practised by savages.
Ascension, coloured incrustation on the rocks of.
Ascidia, affinity of the lancelet to; tad-pole like larvae of.
Ascidians, bright colours of some.
Asinus, Asiatic and African species of.
Asinus taeniopus.
Ass, colour-variations of the.
Ateles, effects of brandy on an; absence of the thumb in.
Ateles beelzebuth, ears of.
Ateles marginatus, colour of the ruff of; hair on the head of.
Ateuchus cicatricosus, habits of.
Ateuchus, stridulation of.
Athalia, proportions of the sexes in.
Atropus pulsatorius.
Attention, manifestations of, in animals.
Audouin, V., on a hymenopterous parasite with a sedentary male.
Audubon, J.J., on the pinioned goose; on the speculum of Mergus cucullatus; on the pugnacity of male birds; on courtship of Caprimulgus; on Tetrao cupido; on Ardea nycticorax; on Sturnella ludoviciana; on the vocal organs of Tetra cupido; on the drumming
Audobon and Bachman, MM.
, on squirrels fighting; on the Canadian lynx.
Aughey, Prof.
, on rattlesnakes.
Austen, N.L., on Anolis cristatellus.
Australia, not the birthplace of man; half-castes killed by the natives of; lice of the natives of.
Australia, South, variation in the skulls of aborigines of.
Australians, colour of new-born children of; relative height of the sexes of; women a cause of war among the.
Axis deer, sexual difference in the colour of the.
Aymaras, measurements of the; no grey hair among the; hairlessness of the face in the; long hair of the.
Azara, on the proportion of men and women among the Guaranys; on Palamedea cornuta; on the beards of the Guaranys; on strife for women among the Guanas; on infanticide; on the eradication of the eyebrows and eyelashes by the Indians of Paraguay; on
Babbage C., on the greater proportion of illegitimate female births.
Babirusa, tusks of the.
Baboon, revenge in a; rage excited in, by reading; manifestation of memory by a; employing a mat for shelter against the sun; protected from punishment by its companions.
Baboon, Cape, mane of the male; Hamadryas, mane of the male.
Baboon, effects of intoxicating liquors on; ears of; diversity of the mental faculties in; hands of; habits of; variability of the tail in; manifestation of maternal affection by; using stones and sticks as weapons; co-operation of; silence of, on
Baboons, courtship of.
Bachman, Dr., on the fertility of mulattoes.
Baer, K.E. von, on embryonic development; definition of advancement in the organic scale.
Bagehot, W., on the social virtues among primitive men; slavery formerly beneficial; on the value of obedience; on human progress; on the persistence of savage tribes in classical times.
Bailly, E.M., on the mode of fighting of the Italian buffalo; on the fighting of stags.
Bain, A., on the sense of duty; aid springing from sympathy; on the basis of sympathy; on the love of approbation etc.
; on the idea of beauty.
Baird, W., on a difference in colour between the males and females of some Entozoa.
Baker, Mr., observation on the proportion of the sexes in pheasant-chicks.
Baker, Sir S., on the fondness of the Arabs for discordant music; on sexual difference in the colours of an antelope; on the elephant and rhinoceros attacking white or grey horses; on the disfigurements practised by the negroes; on the gashing of the
"Balz" of the Black-cock.
Bantam, Sebright.
Banteng, horns of; sexual differences in the colours of the.
Banyai, colour of the.
Barbarism, primitive, of civilised nations.
Barbs, filamentous, of the feathers, in certain birds.
Barr, Mr., on sexual preference in dogs.
Barrago, F., on the Simian resemblances of man.
Barrington, Daines, on the language of birds; on the clucking of the hen; on the object of the song of birds; on the singing of female birds; on birds acquiring the songs of other birds; on the muscles of the larynx in song-birds; on the want of the power
Barrow, on the widow-bird.
Bartels, Dr., supernumerary mammae in men.
Bartlett, A.D., period of hatching of bird's eggs; on the tragopan; on the development of the spurs in Crossoptilon auritum; on the fighting of the males of Plectopterus gambensis; on the Knot; on display in male birds; on the display of plumage by the
Bartlett, on courting of Argus pheasant.
Bartram, on the courtship of the male alligator.
Basque language, highly artificial.
Bate, C.S., on the superior activity of male crustacea; on the proportions of the sexes in crabs; on the chelae of crustacea; on the relative size of the sexes in crustacea; on the colours of crustacea.
Bateman, Dr., tendency to imitation in certain diseased states; on Aphasia.
Bates, H.W., on variation in the form of the head of Amazonian Indians; on the proportion of the sexes among Amazonian butterflies; on sexual differences in the wings of butterflies; on the field-cricket; on Pyrodes pulcherrimus; on the horns of
; on the coloration of tropical butterflies; on the variability of Papilio Sesostris and Childrenae; on male and female butterflies inhabiting different stations; on mimicry; on the caterpillar of a Sphinx; on the vocal organs of the umbrella-bird; on the
Batokas, knocking out two upper incisors.
Batrachia, eagerness of male.
Bats, scent-glands; sexual differences in the colour of; fur of male frugivorous.
Battle, law of; among beetles; among birds; among mammals; in man.
Beak, sexual difference in the forms of the; in the colour of the.
Beaks, of birds, bright colours of.
Beard, development of, in man; analogy of the, in man and the quadrumana; variation of the development of the, in different races of men; estimation of, among bearded nations; probable origin of the.
Beard, in monkeys; of mammals.
Beautiful, taste for the, in birds; in the quadrumana.
Beauty, sense of, in animals; appreciation of, by birds; influence of; variability of the standard of.
Beauty, sense of, sufficiently permanent for action of sexual selection.
Beaven, Lieut.
, on the development of the horns in Cervus Eldi.
Beaver, instinct and intelligence of the; voice of the; castoreum of the.
Beavers, battles of male.
Bechstein, on female birds choosing the best singers among the males; on rivalry in song-birds; on the singing of female birds; on birds acquiring the songs of other birds; on pairing the canary and siskin; on a sub-variety of the monk pigeon; on spurred
Beddoe, Dr., on causes of difference in stature.
Bee-eater.
Bees, pollen-baskets and stings of; destruction of drones and queens by; female, secondary sexual characters of; proportion of sexes; difference of the sexes in colour and sexual selection.
Beetle, luminous larva of a.
Beetles, size of the cerebral ganglia in; dilatation of the foretarsi in male; blind; stridulation of.
Belgium, ancient inhabitants of.
Bell, Sir C., on emotional muscles in man; "snarling muscles;" on the hand.
Bell, T., on the numerical proportion of the sexes in moles; on the newts; on the croaking of the frog; on the difference in the coloration of the sexes in Zootoca vivipara; on moles fighting.
Bell-bird, sexual difference in the colour of the.
Bell-birds, colours of.
Belt, Mr., on the nakedness of tropical mankind; on a spider-monkey and eagle; habits of ants; Lampridae distasteful to mammals; mimicry of Leptalides; colours of Nicaraguan frogs; display of humming-birds; on the toucans; protective colouring of skunk.
Benevolence, manifested by birds.
Bennett, A.W., attachment of mated birds; on the habits of Dromaeus irroratus.
Bennett, Dr., on birds of paradise.
Berbers, fertility of crosses with other races.
Bernicla antarctica, colours of.
Bernicle gander pairing with a Canada goose.
Bert, M., crustaceans distinguish colours.
Bettoni, E., on local differences in the nests of Italian birds.
Beyle, M., see Bombet.
Bhoteas, colour of the beard in.
Bhringa, disc-formed tail-feathers of.
Bianconi, Prof.
, on structures as explained through mechanical principles.
Bibio, sexual differences in the genus.
Bichat, on beauty.
Bickes, proportion of sexes in man.
Bile, coloured, in many animals.
Bimana.
Birds, imitations of the songs of other birds by; dreaming; killed by telegraph wires; language of; sense of beauty in; pleasure of, in incubation; male, incubation by; and reptiles, alliance of; sexual differences in the beak of some; migratory, arrival
Birgus latro, habits of.
Birkbeck, Mr., on the finding of new mates by golden eagles.
Birthplace of man.
Births, numerical proportions of the sexes in, in animals and man; male and female, numerical proportion of, in England.
Bischoff, Prof.
, on the agreement between the brains of man and of the orang; figure of the embryo of the dog; on the convolutions of the brain in the human foetus; on the difference between the skulls of man and the quadrumana; resemblance between the ape's and man's.
Bishop, J., on the vocal organs of frogs; on the vocal organs of cervine birds; on the trachea of the Merganser.
Bison, American, co-operation of; mane of the male.
Bitterns, dwarf, coloration of the sexes of.
Biziura lobata, musky odour of the male; large size of male.
Blackbird, sexual differences in the; proportion of the sexes in the; acquisition of a song by; colour of the beak in the sexes of the; pairing with a thrush; colours and nidification of the; young of the; sexual difference in coloration of the.
Black-buck, Indian, sexual difference in the colour of the.
Blackcap, arrival of the male, before the female; young of the.
Black-cock, polygamous; proportion of the sexes in the; pugnacity and love-dance of the; call of the; moulting of the; duration of the courtship of the; and pheasant, hybrids of; sexual difference in coloration of the; crimson eye-cere of the.
Black-grouse, characters of young.
Blacklock, Dr., on music.
Blackwall, J., on the speaking of the magpie; on the desertion of their young by swallows; on the superior activity of male spiders; on the proportion of the sexes in spiders; on sexual variation of colour in spiders; on male spiders.
Bladder-nose Seal, hood of the.
Blaine, on the affections of dogs.
Blair, Dr., on the relative liability of Europeans to yellow fever.
Blake, C.C., on the jaw from La Naulette.
Blakiston, Captain, on the American snipe; on the dances of Tetrao phasianellus.
Blasius, Dr., on the species of European birds.
Bledius taurus, hornlike processes of male.
Bleeding, tendency to profuse.
Blenkiron, Mr., on sexual preference in horses.
Blennies, crest developed on the head of male, during the breeding season.
Blethisa multipunctata, stridulation of.
Bloch, on the proportions of the sexes in fishes.
Blood, arterial, red colour of.
Blood pheasant, number of spurs in.
Blow-fly, sounds made by.
Bluebreast, red-throated, sexual differences of the.
Blumenbach, on Man; on the large size of the nasal cavities in American aborigines; on the position of man; on the number of species of man.
Blyth, E., on the structure of the hand in the species of Hylobates; observations on Indian crows; on the development of the horns in the Koodoo and Eland antelopes; on the pugnacity of the males of Gallicrex cristatus; on the presence of spurs in the
Boar, wild, polygamous in India; use of the tusks by the; fighting of.
Boardman, Mr., Albino birds in U.S. Boitard and Corbie, MM.
, on the transmission of sexual peculiarities in pigeons; on the antipathy shewn by some female pigeons to certain males.
Bold, Mr., on the singing of a sterile hybrid canary.
Bombet, on the variability of the standard of beauty in Europe.
Bombus, difference of the sexes in.
Bombycidae, coloration of; pairing of the; colours of.
Bombycilla carolinensis, red appendages of.
Bombyx cynthia, proportion of the sexes in; pairing of.
Bombyx mori, difference of size of the male and female cocoons of; pairing of.
Bombyx Pernyi, proportion of sexes of.
Bombyx Yamamai, M. Personnat on; proportion of sexes of.
Bonaparte, C.L., on the call-notes of the wild turkey.
Bond, F., on the finding of new mates by crows.
Bone, implements of, skill displayed in making.
Boner, C., on the transfer of male characters to an old female chamois; on the habits of stags; on the pairing of red deer.
Bones, increase of, in length and thickness, when carrying a greater weight.
Bonizzi, P., difference of colour in sexes of pigeons.
Bonnet monkey.
Bonwick, J., extinction of Tasmanians.
Boomerang.
Boreus hyemalis, scarcity of the male.
Bory St. Vincent, on the number of species of man; on the colours of Labrus pavo.
Bos etruscus.
Bos gaurus, horns of.
Bos moschatus.
Bos primigenius.
Bos sondaicus, horns of, colours of.
Botocudos, mode of life of; disfigurement of the ears and lower lip of the.
Boucher de Perthes, J.C. de, on the antiquity of man.
Bourbon, proportion of the sexes in a species of Papilio from.
Bourien on the marriage-customs of the savages of the Malay Archipelago.
Bovidae, dewlaps of.
Bower-birds, habits of the; ornamented playing-places of.
Bows, use of.
Brachycephalic structure, possible explanation of.
Brachyura.
Brachyurus calvus, scarlet face of.
Bradley, Mr., abductor ossis metatarsi quinti in man.
Brain, of man, agreement of the, with that of lower animals; convolutions of, in the human foetus; influence of development of mental faculties upon the size of the; influence of the development of on the spinal column and skull; larger in some existing
Huxley; development of the gyri and sulci.
Brakenridge, Dr., on the influence of climate.
Brandt, A., on hairy men.
Braubach, Prof.
, on the quasi-religious feeling of a dog towards his master; on the self-restraint of dogs.
Brauer, F., on dimorphism in Neurothemis.
Brazil, skulls found in caves of; population of; compression of the nose by the natives of.
Break between man and the apes.
Bream, proportion of the sexes in the.
Breeding, age of, in birds.
Breeding season, sexual characters making their appearance in the, in birds.
Brehm, on the effects of intoxicating liquors on monkeys; on the recognition of women by male Cynocephali; on the diversity of the mental faculties of monkeys; on the habits of baboons; on revenge taken by monkeys; on manifestations of maternal affection
Brent, Mr., on the courtship of fowls.
Breslau, numerical proportion of male and female births in.
Bridgeman, Laura.
Brimstone butterfly, sexual difference of colour in the.
British, ancient, tattooing practised by.
Broca, Prof.
, on the occurrence of the supra-condyloid foramen in the human humerus; anthropomorphous apes more bipedal than quadrupedal; on the capacity of Parisian skulls at different periods; comparison of modern and mediaeval skulls; on tails of quadrupeds; on the
Brodie, Sir B., on the origin of the moral sense in man.
Bronn, H.G., on the copulation of insects of distinct species.
Bronze period, men of, in Europe.
Brown, R., sentinels of seals generally females; on the battles of seals; on the narwhal; on the occasional absence of the tusks in the female walrus; on the bladder-nose seal; on the colours of the sexes in Phoca Groenlandica; on the appreciation of music
Browne, Dr. Crichton, injury to infants during parturition.
Brown-Sequard, Dr., on the inheritance of the effects of operations by guinea-pig.
Bruce, on the use of the elephant's tusks.
Brulerie, P. de la, on the habits of Ateuchus cicatricosus; on the stridulation of Ateuchus.
Brunnich, on the pied ravens of the Feroe islands.
Bryant, Dr., preference of tame pigeon for wild mate.
Bryant, Captain, on the courtship of Callorhinus ursinus.
Bubas bison, thoracic projection of.
Bubalus caffer, use of horns.
Bucephalus capensis, difference of the sexes of, in colour.
Buceros, nidification and incubation of.
Buceros bicornis, sexual differences in the colouring of the casque, beak, and mouth in.
Buceros corrugatus, sexual differences in the beak of.
Buchner, L., on the origin of man; on the use of the human foot as a prehensile organ; on the mode of progression of the apes; on want of self-consciousness, etc.
, in savages.
Bucholz, Dr., quarrels of chamaeleons.
Buckinghamshire, numerical proportion of male and female births in.
Buckland, F., on the numerical proportion of the sexes in rats; on the proportion of the sexes in the trout; on Chimaera monstrosa.
Buckland, W., on the complexity of crinoids.
Buckler, W., proportion of sexes of Lepidoptera reared by.
Bucorax abyssinicus, inflation of the neck-wattle of the male during courtship.
Budytes Raii.
Buffalo, Cape.
Buffalo, Indian, horns of the.
Buffalo, Italian, mode of fighting of the.
Buffon, on the number of species of man.
Bufo sikimmensis.
Bugs.
Buist, R., on the proportion of the sexes in salmon; on the pugnacity of the male salmon.
Bulbul, pugnacity of the male; display of under tail-coverts by the male.
Bull, mode of fighting of the; curled frontal hair of the.
Buller, Dr., on the Huia; the attachment of birds.
Bullfinch, sexual differences in the; piping; female, singing of the; courtship of the; widowed, finding a new mate; attacking a reed-bunting; nestling, sex ascertained by pulling out breast feathers.
Bullfinches, distinguishing persons; rivalry of female.
Bulls, two young, attacking an old one; wild, battles of.
Bull-trout, male, colouring of, during the breeding season.
Bunting, reed, head feathers of the male; attacked by a bullfinch.
Buntings, characters of young.
Buphus coromandus, sexes and young of; change of colour in.
Burchell, Dr., on the zebra; on the extravagance of a Bushwoman in adorning herself; celibacy unknown among the savages of South Africa; on the marriage-customs of the Bushwomen.
Burke, on the number of species of man.
Burmese, colour of the beard in.
Burton, Captain, on negro ideas of female beauty; on a universal ideal of beauty.
Bushmen, marriage among.
Bushwoman, extravagant ornamentation of a.
Bushwomen, hair of; marriage-customs of.
Bustard, throat-pouch of the male; humming noise produced by a male; Indian, ear-tufts of.
Bustards, occurrence of sexual differences and of polygamy among the; love-gestures of the male; double moult in.
Butler, A.G., on sexual differences in the wings of Aricoris epitus; courtship of butterflies; on the colouring of the sexes in species of Thecla; on the resemblance of Iphias glaucippe to a leaf; on the rejection of certain moths and caterpillars by
Butterfly, noise produced by a; Emperor; meadow brown, instability of the ocellated spots of.
Butterflies, proportion of the sexes in; forelegs atrophied in some males; sexual difference in the neuration of the wings of; pugnacity of male; protective resemblances of the lower surface of; display of the wings by; white, alighting upon bits of paper;
Buxton, C., observations on macaws; on an instance of benevolence in a parrot.
Buzzard, Indian honey-; variation in the crest of.
Cabbage butterflies.
Cachalot, large head of the male.
Cadences, musical, perception of, by animals.
Caecum, large, in the early progenitors of man.
Cairina moschata, pugnacity of the male.
Californian Indians, decrease of.
Callianassa, chelae of, figured.
Callidryas, colours of sexes.
Callionymus lyra, characters of the male.
Callorhinus ursinus, relative size of the sexes of; courtship of.
Calotes maria.
Calotes nigrilabris, sexual difference in the colour of.
Cambridge, O. Pickard, on the sexes of spiders; on the size of male Nephila.
Camel, canine teeth of male.
Campbell, J., on the Indian elephant; on the proportion of male and female births in the harems of Siam.
Campylopterus hemileucurus.
Canaries distinguishing persons.
Canary, polygamy of the; change of plumage in, after moulting; female, selecting the best singing male; sterile hybrid, singing of a; female, singing of the; selecting a greenfinch; and siskin, pairing of.
Cancer pagurus.
Canestrini, G., on rudimentary characters and the origin of man; on rudimentary characters; on the movement of the ear in man; of the variability of the vermiform appendage in man; on the abnormal division of the malar bone in man; on abnormal conditions
Canfield, Dr., on the horns of the Antilocapra.
Canine teeth in man, diminution of, in man; diminution of, in horses; disappearance of, in male ruminants; large in the early progenitors of man.
Canines, and horns, inverse development of.
Canoes, use of.
Cantharis, difference of colour in the sexes of a species of.
Cantharus lineatus.
Capercailzie, polygamous; proportion of the sexes in the; pugnacity of the male; pairing of the; autumn meetings of the; call of the; duration of the courtship of; behaviour of the female; inconvenience of black colour to the female; sexual difference in
Capitonidae, colours and nidification of the.
Capra aegagrus, crest of the male; sexual difference in the colour of.
Capreolus Sibiricus subecaudatus.
Caprice, common to man and animals.
Caprimulgus, noise made by the males of some species of, with their wings.
Caprimulgus virginianus, pairing of.
Carabidae.
Carbonnier, on the natural history of the pike; on the relative size of the sexes in fishes; courtship of Chinese Macropus.
Carcineutes, sexual difference of colour in.
Carcinus moenas.
Cardinalis virginianus.
Carduelis elegans, sexual differences of the beak in.
Carnivora, marine, polygamous habits of; sexual differences in the colours of.
Carp, numerical proportion of the sexes in the.
Carr, R., on the peewit.
Carrier pigeon, late development of the wattle in the.
Carrion beetles, stridulation of.
Carrion-hawk, bright coloured female of.
Carus, Prof.
V., on the development of the horns in merino sheep; on antlers of red deer.
Cassowary, sexes and incubation of the.
Castnia, mode of holding wings.
Castoreum.
Castration, effects of.
Casuarius galeatus.
Cat, convoluted body in the extremity of the tail of a; sick, sympathy of a dog with a.
Cataract in Cebus Azarae.
Catarrh, liability of Cebus Azarae to.
Catarrhine monkeys.
Caterpillars, bright colours of.
Cathartes aura.
Cathartes jota, love-gestures of the male.
Catlin, G., correlation of colour and texture of hair in the Mandans; on the development of the beard among the North American Indians; on the great length of the hair in some North American tribes.
Caton, J.D., on the development of the horns in Cervus virginianus and strongyloceros; on the wild turkey; on the presence of traces of horns in the female wapiti; on the fighting of deer; on the crest of the male wapiti; on the colours of the Virginian
Cats, dreaming; tortoise-shell; enticed by valerian; colours of.
Cattle, rapid increase of, in South America; domestic, lighter in winter in Siberia; horns of; domestic, sexual differences of, late developed; numerical proportion of the sexes in.
Caudal vertebrae, number of, in macaques and baboons; basal, of monkeys, imbedded in the body.
Cavolini, observations on Serranus.
Cebus, maternal affection in a; gradation of species of.
Cebus Apella.
Cebus Azarae, liability of, to the same diseases as man; distinct sounds produced by; early maturity of the female.
Cebus capucinus, polygamous; sexual differences of colour in; hair on the head of.
Cebus vellerosus, hair on the head of.
Cecidomyiidae, proportions of the sexes in.
Celibacy, unknown among the savages of South Africa and South America.
Centipedes.
Cephalopoda, absence of secondary sexual characters in.
Cephalopterus ornatus.
Cephalopterus penduliger.
Cerambyx heros, stridulant organ of.
Ceratodus, paddle of.
Ceratophora aspera, nasal appendages of.
Ceratophora Stoddartii, nasal horn of.
Cerceris, habits of.
Cercocebus aethiops, whiskers, etc.
, of.
Cercopithecus, young, seized by an eagle and rescued by the troop; definition of species of.
Cercopithecus cephus, sexual difference of colour in.
Cercopithecus cynosurus and griseo-viridis, colour of the scrotum in.
Cercopithecus Diana, sexual differences of colour in.
Cercopithecus griseo-viridis.
Cercopithecus petaurista, whiskers, etc.
, of.
Ceres, of birds, bright colours of.
Ceriornis Temminckii, swelling of the wattles of the male during courtship.
Cervulus, weapons of.
Cervulus moschatus, rudimentary horns of the female.
Cervus alces.
Cervus campestris, odour of.
Cervus canadensis, traces of horns in the female; attacking a man; sexual difference in the colour of.
Cervus elaphus, battles of male; horns of, with numerous points; long hairs on the throat of.
Cervus Eldi.
Cervus mantchuricus.
Cervus paludosus, colours of.
Cervus strongyloceros.
Cervus virginianus, horns of, in course of modification.
Ceryle, male black-belted in some species of.
Cetacea, nakedness of.
Ceylon, frequent absence of beard in the natives of.
Chaffinch, proportion of the sexes in the; courtship of the.
Chaffinches, new mates found by.
Chalcophaps indicus, characters of young.
Chalcosoma atlas, sexual differences of.
Chamaeleo, sexual differences in the genus; combats of.
Chamaeleo bifurcus.
Chamaeleo Owenii.
Chamaeleo pumilus.
Chamaepetes unicolor, modified wing-feather in the male.
Chameleons.
Chamois, danger-signals of; transfer of male characters to an old female.
Champneys, Mr., acromio-basilar muscle and quadrupedal gait.
Chapman, Dr., on stridulation in Scolytus.
Chapuis, Dr., on the transmission of sexual peculiarities in pigeons; on streaked Belgian pigeons.
Char, male, colouring of, during the breeding season.
Characters, male, developed in females; secondary sexual, transmitted through both sexes; natural, artificial, exaggeration of, by man.
Charadrus hiaticula and pluvialis, sexes and young of.
Chardin on the Persians.
Charms, worn by women.
Charruas, freedom of divorce among the.
Chasmorhynchus, difference of colour in the sexes of; colours of.
Chasmorhynchus niveus.
Chasmorhynchus nudicollis.
Chasmorhynchus tricarunculatus.
Chastity, early estimation of.
Chatterers, sexual differences in.
Cheever, Rev.
H.T., census of the Sandwich Islands.
Cheiroptera, absence of secondary sexual characters in.
Chelae of crustacea.
Chelonia, sexual differences in.
Chenalopex aegyptiacus, wing-knobs of.
Chera progne.
Chest, proportions of, in soldiers and sailors; large, of the Quechua and Aymara Indians.
Chevrotains, canine teeth of.
Chiasognathus, stridulation of.
Chiasognathus Grantii, mandibles of.
Children, legitimate and illegitimate, proportion of the sexes in.
Chiloe, lice of the natives of; population of.
Chimaera monstrosa, bony process on the head of the male.
Chimaeroid fishes, prehensile organs of male.
Chimpanzee, ears of the; representatives of the eyebrows in the; hands of the; absence of mastoid processes in the; platforms built by the; cracking nuts with a stone; direction of the hair on the arms of the; supposed evolution of the; polygamous and
China, North, idea of female beauty in.
China, Southern, inhabitants of.
Chinese, use of flint tools by the; difficulty of distinguishing the races of the; colour of the beard in; general beardlessness of the; opinions of the, on the appearance of Europeans and Cingalese; compression of the feet of.
Chinsurdi, his opinion of beards.
Chlamydera maculata.
Chloeon, pedunculated eyes of the male of.
Chloephaga, coloration of the sexes in.
Chlorocoelus Tanana.
Chorda dorsalis.
Chough, red beak of the.
Chromidae, frontal protuberance in male; sexual differences in colour of.
Chrysemys picta, long claws of the male.
Chrysococcyx, characters of young of.
Chrysomelidae, stridulation of.
Cicada pruinosa.
Cicada septendecim.
Cicadae, songs of the; rudimentary sound-organs in females of.
Cicatrix of a burn, causing modification of the facial bones.
Cichla, frontal protuberance of male.
Cimetiere du Sud, Paris.
Cincloramphus cruralis, large size of male.
Cinclus aquaticus.
Cingalese, Chinese opinion of the appearance of the.
Cirripedes, complemental males of.
Civilisation, effects of, upon natural selection; influence of, in the competition of nations.
Clanging of geese, etc.
Claparede, E., on natural selection applied to man.
Clarke, on the marriage-customs of Kalmucks.
Classification.
Claus, C., on the sexes of Saphirina.
Cleft-palate, inherited.
Climacteris erythrops, sexes of.
Climate, cool, favourable to human progress; power of supporting extremes of, by man; want of connexion of, with colour; direct action of, on colours of birds.
Cloaca, existence of a, in the early progenitors of man.
Cloacal passage existing in the human embryo.
Clubs, used as weapons before dispersion of mankind.
Clucking of fowls.
Clythra 4-punctata, stridulation of.
Coan, Mr., Sandwich-islanders.
Cobbe, Miss, on morality in hypothetical bee-community.
Cobra, ingenuity of a.
Coccus.
Coccyx, in the human embryo; convoluted body at the extremity of the; imbedded in the body.
Cochin-China, notions of beauty of the inhabitants of.
Cock, blind, fed by its companion; game, killing a kite; comb and wattles of the; preference shewn by the, for young hens; game, transparent zone in the hackles of a.
Cock of the rock.
Cockatoos, nestling; black, immature plumage of.
Coelenterata, absence of secondary sexual characters in.
Coffee, fondness of monkeys for.
Cold, supposed effects of; power of supporting, by man.
Coleoptera, stridulation of; stridulant organs of, discussed.
Colias edusa and hyale.
Collingwood, C., on the pugnacity of the butterflies of Borneo; on butterflies being attracted by a dead specimen of the same species.
Colobus, absence of the thumb.
Colombia, flattened heads of savages of.
Colonists, success of the English as.
Coloration, protective, in birds.
Colour, supposed to be dependent on light and heat; correlation of, with immunity from certain poisons and parasites; purpose of, in lepidoptera; relation of, to sexual functions, in fishes; difference of, in the sexes of snakes; sexual differences of, in
Colours, admired alike by man and animals; bright, due to sexual selection; bright, among the lower animals; bright, protective to butterflies and moths; bright, in male fishes; transmission of, in birds.
Colquhoun, example of reasoning in a retriever.
Columba passerina, young of.
Colymbus glacialis, anomalous young of.
Comb, development of, in fowls.
Combs and wattles in male birds.
Community, preservation of variations useful to the, by natural selection.
Complexion, different in men and women, in an African tribe.
Compositae, gradation of species among the.
Comte, C., on the expression of the ideal of beauty by sculpture.
Conditions of life, action of changed, upon man; influence of, on plumage of birds.
Condor, eyes and comb of the.
Conjugations, origin of.
Conscience, absence of, in some criminals.
Constitution, difference of, in different races of men.
Consumption, liability of Cebus Azarae to; connection between complexion and.
Convergence of characters.
Cooing of pigeons and doves.
Cook, Captain, on the nobles of the Sandwich Islands.
Cope, E.D., on the Dinosauria.
Cophotis ceylanica, sexual differences of.
Copris.
Copris Isidis, sexual differences of.
Copris lunaris, stridulation of.
Corals, bright colours of.
Coral-snakes.
Cordylus, sexual difference of colour in a species of.
Corfu, habits of the Chaffinch in.
Cornelius, on the proportions of the sexes in Lucanus Cervus.
Corpora Wolffiana, agreement of, with the kidneys of fishes.
Correlated variation.
Correlation, influence of, in the production of races.
Corse, on the mode of fighting of the elephant.
Corvus corone.
Corvus graculus, red beak of.
Corvus pica, nuptial assembly of.
Corydalis cornutus, large jaws of the male.
Cosmetornis.
Cosmetornis vexillarius, elongation of wing-feathers in.
Cotingidae, sexual differences in; coloration of the sexes of; resemblance of the females of distinct species of.
Cottus scorpius, sexual differences in.
Coulter, Dr., on the Californian Indians.
Counting, origin of; limited power of, in primeval man.
Courage, variability of, in the same species; universal high appreciation of; importance of; characteristic of men.
Courtship, greater eagerness of males in; of fishes; of birds.
Cow, winter change of colour.
Crab, devil.
Crab, shore, habits of.
Crabro cribrarius, dilated tibiae of the male.
Crabs, proportions of the sexes in.
Cranz, on the inheritance of dexterity in seal-catching.
Crawfurd, on the number of species of man.
Crenilabrus massa and C. melops, nests, built by.
Crest, origin of, in Polish fowls.
Crests, of birds, difference of, in the sexes; dorsal hairy, of mammals.
Cricket, field-, stridulation of the; pugnacity of male.
Cricket, house-, stridulation of the.
Crickets, sexual differences in.
Crinoids, complexity of.
Crioceridae, stridulation of the.
Croaking of frogs.
Crocodiles, musky odour of, during the breeding season.
Crocodilia.
Crossbills, characters of young.
Crosses in man.
Crossing of races, effects of the.
Crossoptilon auritum, adornment of both sexes of; sexes alike in.
Crotch, G.R., on the stridulation of beetles; on the stridulation of Heliopathes; on the stridulation of Acalles; habit of female deer at breeding time.
Crow, Indians, long hair of the.
Crow, young of the.
Crows, vocal organs of the; living in triplets.
Crows, carrion, new mates found by.
Crows, Indian, feeding their blind companions.
Cruelty of savages to animals.
Crustacea, parasitic, loss of limbs by female; prehensile feet and antennae of; male, more active than female; parthenogenesis in; secondary sexual characters of; amphipod, males sexually mature while young; auditory hairs of.
Crystal worn in the lower lip by some Central African women.
Cuckoo fowls.
Culicidae, attracted by each other's humming.
Cullen, Dr., on the throat-pouch of the male bustard.
Cultivation of plants, probable origin of.
Cupples, Mr., on the numerical proportion of the sexes in dogs, sheep, and cattle; on the Scotch deerhound; on sexual preference in dogs.
Curculionidae, sexual difference in length of snout in some; hornlike processes in male; musical.
Curiosity, manifestations of, by animals.
Curlews, double moult in.
Cursores, comparative absence of sexual differences among the.
Curtis, J., on the proportion of the sexes in Athalia.
Cuvier, F., on the recognition of women by male quadrumana.
Cuvier, G., on the number of caudal vertebrae in the mandrill; on instinct and intelligence; views of, as to the position of man; on the position of the seals; on Hectocotyle.
Cyanalcyon, sexual difference in colours of; immature plumage of.
Cyanecula suecica, sexual differences of.
Cychrus, sounds produced by.
Cycnia mendica, sexual difference of, in colour.
Cygnus ferus, trachea of.
Cygnus immutabilis.
Cygnus olor, white young of.
Cyllo Leda, instability of the ocellated spots of.
Cynanthus, variation in the genus.
Cynipidae, proportion of the sexes in.
Cynocephalus, difference of the young from the adult; male, recognition of women by; polygamous habits of species of.
Cynocephalus babouin.
Cynocephalus chacma.
Cynocephalus gelada.
Cynocephalus hamadryas, sexual difference of colour in.
Cynocephalus leucophaeus, colours of the sexes of.
Cynocephalus mormon, colours of the male.
Cynocephalus porcarius, mane of the male.
Cynocephalus sphinx.
Cynopithecus niger, ear of.
Cypridina, proportions of the sexes in.
Cyprinidae, proportion of the sexes in the.
Cyprinidae, Indian.
Cyprinodontidae, sexual differences in the.
Cyprinus auratus.
Cypris, relation of the sexes in.
Cyrtodactylus rubidus.
Cystophora cristata, hood of.
Dacelo, sexual difference of colour in.
Dacelo Gaudichaudi, young male of.
Dal-ripa, a kind of ptarmigan.
Damalis albifrons, peculiar markings of.
Damalis pygarga, peculiar markings of.
Dampness of climate, supposed influence of, on the colour of the skin.
Danaidae.
Dances of birds.
Dancing, universality of.
Danger-signals of animals.
Daniell, Dr., his experience of residence in West Africa.
Darfur, protuberances artificially produced by natives of.
Darwin, F., on the stridulation of Dermestes murinus.
Dasychira pudibunda, sexual difference of colour in.
Davis, A.H., on the pugnacity of the male stag-beetle.
Davis, J.B., on the capacity of the skull in various races of men; on the beards of the Polynesians.
Death's Head Sphinx.
Death-rate higher in towns than in rural districts.
Death-tick.
De Candolle, Alph.
, on a case of inherited power of moving the scalp.
Declensions, origin of.
Decoration in birds.
Decticus.
Deer, development of the horns in; spots of young; horns of; use of horns of; horns of a, in course of modification; size of the horns of; female, pairing with one male whilst others are fighting for her; male, attracted by the voice of the female; male,
Deer, Axis, sexual difference in the colour of the.
Deer, fallow, different coloured herds of.
Deer, Mantchurian.
Deer, Virginian, colour of the, not affected by castration; colours of.
Deerhound, Scotch, greater size of the male.
Defensive orders of mammals.
De Geer, C., on a female spider destroying a male.
Dekay, Dr., on the bladder-nose seal.
Delorenzi, G., division of malar bone.
Demerara, yellow fever in.
Dendrocygna.
Dendrophila frontalis, young of.
Denison, Sir W., manner of ridding themselves of vermin among the Australians; extinction of Tasmanians.
Denny, H., on the lice of domestic animals.
Dermestes murinus, stridulation of.
Descent traced through the mother alone.
Deserts, protective colouring of animals inhabiting.
Desmarest, on the absence of suborbital pits in Antilope subgutturosa; on the whiskers of Macacus; on the colour of the opossum; on the colours of the sexes of Mus minutus; on the colouring of the ocelot; on the colours of seals; on Antilope caama; on the
Desmoulins, on the number of species of man; on the muskdeer.
Desor, on the imitation of man by monkeys.
Despine, P., on criminals destitute of conscience.
Development, embryonic of man; correlated.
Devil, not believed in by the Fuegians.
Devil-crab.
Devonian, fossil-insect from the.
Dewlaps, of Cattle and antelopes.
Diadema, sexual differences of colouring in the species of.
Diamond-beetles, bright colours of.
Diastema, occurrence of, in man.
Diastylidae, proportion of the sexes in.
Dicrurus, racket-shaped feathers in; nidification of.
Dicrurus macrocercus, change of plumage in.
Didelphis opossum, sexual difference in the colour of.
Differences, comparative, between different species of birds of the same sex.
Digits, supernumerary, more frequent in men than in women; supernumerary, inheritance of; supernumerary, early development of.
Dimorphism, in females of water-beetles; in Neurothemis and Agrion.
Diodorus, on the absence of beard in the natives of Ceylon.
Dipelicus Cantori, sexual differences of.
Diplopoda, prehensile limbs of the male.
Dipsas cynodon, sexual difference in the colour of.
Diptera.
Disease, generated by the contact of distinct peoples.
Diseases, common to man and the lower animals; difference of liability to, in different races of men; new, effects of, upon savages; sexually limited.
Display, coloration of Lepidoptera for; of plumage by male birds.
Distribution, wide, of man; geographical, as evidence of specific distinctness in man.
Disuse, effects of, in producing rudimentary organs; and use of parts, effects of; of parts, influence of, on the races of men.
Divorce, freedom of, among the Charruas.
Dixon, E.S., on the pairing of different species of geese; on the courtship of peafowl.
Dobrizhoffer, on the marriage-customs of the Abipones.
Dobson, Dr., on the Cheiroptera; scent-glands of bats; frugivorous bats.
Dogs, suffering from tertian ague; memory of; dreaming; diverging when drawing sledges over thin ice; exercise of reasoning faculties by; domestic, progress of, in moral qualities; distinct tones uttered by; parallelism between his affection for his master
Dolichocephalic structure, possible cause of.
Dolphins, nakedness of.
Domestic animals, races of; change of breeds of.
Domestication, influence of, in removing the sterility of hybrids.
D'Orbigny, A., on the influence of dampness and dryness on the colour of the skin; on the Yuracaras.
Dotterel.
Doubleday, E., on sexual differences in the wings of butterflies.
Doubleday, H., on the proportion of the sexes in the smaller moths; males of Lasiocampa quercus and on the attraction of the Saturnia carpini by the female; on the proportion of the sexes in the Lepidoptera; on the ticking of Anobium tesselatum; on the
Douglas, J.W., on the sexual differences of the Hemiptera; colours of British Homoptera.
Down, of birds.
Draco, gular appendages of.
Dragonet, Gemmeous.
Dragon-flies, caudal appendages of male; relative size of the sexes of; difference in the sexes of; want of pugnacity by the male.
Drake, breeding plumage of the.
Dreams, possible source of the belief in spiritual agencies.
Drill, sexual difference of colour in the.
Dromaeus irroratus.
Dromolaea, Saharan species of.
Drongo shrike.
Drongos, racket-shaped feathers in the tails of.
Dryness of climate, supposed influence of, on the colour of the skin.
Dryopithecus.
Duck, harlequin, age of mature plumage in the; breeding in immature plumage.
Duck, long-tailed, preference of male, for certain females.
Duck, pintail, pairing with a widgeon.
Duck, voice of the; pairing with a shield-drake; immature plumage of the.
Duck, wild, sexual differences in the; speculum and male characters of; pairing with a pin-tail drake.
Ducks, wild, becoming polygamous under partial domestication; dogs and cats recognised by.
Dufosse, Dr., sounds produced by fish.
Dugong, nakedness of; tusks of.
Dujardin, on the relative size of the cerebral ganglia, in insects.
Duncan, Dr., on the fertility of early marriages; comparative health of married and single.
Dupont, M., on the occurrence of the supra-condyloid foramen in the humerus of man.
Durand, J.P., on causes of variation.
Dureau de la Malle, on the songs of birds; on the acquisition of an air by blackbirds.
Dutch, retention of their colour by the, in South Africa.
Duty, sense of.
Duvaucel, female Hylobates washing her young.
Dyaks, pride of, in mere homicide.
Dynastes, large size of males of.
Dynastini, stridulation of.
Dytiscus, dimorphism of females of; grooved elytra of the female.
Eagle, young Cercopithecus rescued from, by the troop.
Eagle, white-headed, breeding in immature plumage.
Eagles, golden, new mates found by.
Ear, motion of the; external shell of the, useless in man; rudimentary point of the, in man.
Ears, more variable in men than women; piercing and ornamentation of the.
Earwigs, parental feeling in.
Echidna.
Echini, bright colours of some.
Echinodermata, absence of secondary sexual characters in.
Echis carinata.
Ecker, figure of the human embryo; on the development of the gyri and sulci of the brain; on the sexual differences in the pelvis in man; on the presence of a sagittal crest in Australians.
Edentata, former wide range of, in America; absence of secondary sexual characters in.
Edolius, racket-shaped feathers in.
Edwards, Mr., on the proportion of the sexes in North American species of Papilio.
Eels, hermaphroditism of.
Egerton, Sir P., on the use of the antlers of deer; on the pairing of red deer; on the bellowing of stags.
Eggs, hatched by male fishes.
Egret, Indian, sexes and young of.
Egrets, breeding plumage of; white.
Ehrenberg, on the mane of the male Hamadryas baboon.
Ekstrom, M., on Harelda glacialis.
Elachista rufocinerea, habits of male.
Eland, development of the horns of the.
Elands, sexual differences of colour in.
Elaphomyia, sexual differences in.
Elaphrus uliginosus, stridulation of.
Elaps.
Elateridae, proportion of the sexes in.
Elaters, luminous.
Elephant, rate of increase of the; nakedness of the; using a fan; Indian, forbearance to his keeper; polygamous habits of the; pugnacity of the male; tusks of; Indian, mode of fighting of the; male, odour emitted by the; attacking white or grey horses.
Elevation of abode, modifying influence of.
Elimination of inferior individuals.
Elk, winter change of the.
Elk, Irish, horns of the.
Ellice Islands, beards of the natives.
Elliot, D.G., on Pelecanus erythrorhynchus.
Elliot, R., on the numerical proportion of the sexes in young rats; on the proportion of the sexes in sheep.
Elliot, Sir W., on the polygamous habits of the Indian wild boar.
Ellis, on the prevalence of infanticide in Polynesia.
Elphinstone, Mr., on local difference of stature among the Hindoos; on the difficulty of distinguishing the native races of India.
Elytra, of the females of Dytiscus Acilius, Hydroporus.
Emberiza, characters of young.
Emberiza miliaria.
Emberiza schoeniclus, head-feathers of the male.
Embryo of man; of the dog.
Embryos of mammals, resemblance of the.
Emigration.
Emotions experienced by the lower animals in common with man; manifested by animals.
Emperor butterfly.
Emperor moth.
Emu, sexes and incubation of.
Emulation of singing birds.
Endurance, estimation of.
Energy, a characteristic of men.
England, numerical proportion of male and female births in.
Engleheart, Mr., on the finding of new mates by starlings.
English, success of, as colonists.
Engravers, short-sighted.
Entomostraca.
Entozoa, difference of colour between the males and females of some.
Environment, direct action of the, in causing differences between the sexes.
Envy, persistence of.
Eocene period, possible divergence of men during the.
Eolidae, colours of, produced by the biliary glands.
Epeira nigra, small size of the male of.
Ephemerae.
Ephemeridae.
Ephippiger vitium, stridulating organs of.
Epicalia, sexual differences of colouring in the species of.
Equus hemionus, winter change of.
Erateina, coloration of.
Ercolani, Prof.
, hermaphroditism in eels.
Erect attitude of man.
Eristalis, courting of.
Eschricht, on the development of hair in man; on a languinous moustache in a female foetus; on the want of definition between the scalp and the forehead in some children; on the arrangement of the hair in the human foetus; on the hairiness of the face in
Esmeralda, difference of colour in the sexes of.
Esox lucius.
Esox reticulatus.
Esquimaux, their belief in the inheritance of dexterity in seal-catching; mode of life of.
Estrelda amandava, pugnacity of the male.
Eubagis, sexual differences of colouring in the species of.
Euchirus longimanus, sound produced by.
Eudromias morinellus.
Eulampis jugularis, colours of the female.
Euler, on the rate of increase in the United States.
Eunomota superciliaris, racket-shaped feathers in the tail of.
Eupetomena macroura, colours of the female.
Euphema splendida.
Euplocamus erythrophthalmus, possession of spurs by the female.
Europe, ancient inhabitants of.
Europeans, difference of, from Hindoos; hairiness of, probably due to reversion.
Eurostopodus, sexes of.
Eurygnathus, different proportions of the head in the sexes of.
Eustephanus, sexual differences of species of; young of.
Exaggeration of natural characters by man.
Exogamy.
Experience, acquisition of, by animals.
Expression, resemblances in, between man and the apes.
Extinction of races, causes of.
Eye, destruction of the; change of position in; obliquity of, regarded as a beauty by the Chinese and Japanese.
Eyebrows, elevation of; development of long hairs in; in monkeys; eradicated in parts of South America and Africa; eradication of, by the Indians of Paraguay.
Eyelashes, eradication of, by the Indians of Paraguay.
Eyelids, coloured black, in part of Africa.
Eyes, pillared, of the male of Chloeon; difference in the colour of, in the sexes of birds.
Eyton, T.C., observations on the development of the horns in the fallow deer.
Eyzies, Les, human remains from.
Fabre, M., on the habits of Cerceris.
Facial bones, causes of modification of the.
Faculties, diversity of, in the same race of men; inheritance of; diversity of, in animals of the same species; mental variation of, in the same species; of birds.
Fakirs, Indian, tortures undergone by.
Falco leucocephalus.
Falco peregrinus.
Falco tinnunclus.
Falcon, peregrine, new mate found by.
Falconer, H., on the mode of fighting of the Indian elephant; on canines in a female deer; on Hyomoschus aquaticus.
Falkland Islands, horses of.
Fallow-deer, different coloured herds of.
Famines, frequency of, among savages.
Farr, Dr., on the effects of profligacy; on the influence of marriage on mortality.
Farrar, F.W., on the origin of language; on the crossing or blending of languages; on the absence of the idea of God in certain races of men; on early marriages of the poor; on the middle ages.
Farre, Dr., on the structure of the uterus.
Fashions, long prevalence of, among savages.
Faye, Prof.
, on the numerical proportion of male and female births in Norway and Russia; on the greater mortality of male children at and before birth.
Feathers, modified, producing sounds; elongated, in male birds; racket-shaped; barbless and with filamentous barbs in certain birds; shedding of margins of.
Feeding, high, probable influence of, in the pairing of birds of different species.
Feet, thickening of the skin on the soles of the; modification of, in man.
Felis canadensis, throat-ruff of.
Felis pardalis and F. mitis, sexual difference in the colouring of.
Female, behaviour of the, during courtship.
Female birds, differences of.
Females, presence of rudimentary male organs in; preference of, for certain males; pursuit of, by males; occurrence of secondary sexual characters in; development of male character by.
Females and males, comparative numbers of; comparative mortality of, while young.
Femur and tibia, proportions of, in the Aymara Indians.
Fenton, Mr., decrease of Maories; infanticide amongst the Maories.
Ferguson, Mr., on the courtship of fowls.
Fertilisation, phenomena of, in plants; in the lower animals.
Fertility lessened under changed conditions.
Fevers, immunity of Negroes and Mulattoes from.
Fiber zibethicus, protective colouring of it.
Fick, H., effect of conscription for military service.
Fidelity, in the elephant; of savages to one another; importance of.
Field-slaves, difference of, from house-slaves.
Fiji Archipelago, population of the.
Fiji Islands, beards of the natives; marriage-customs of the.
Fijians, burying their old and sick parents alive; estimation of the beard among the; admiration of, for a broad occiput.
Filial affection, partly the result of natural selection.
Filum terminale.
Finch, racket-shaped feathers in the tail of a.
Finches, spring change of colour in; British, females of the.
Fingers, partially coherent, in species of Hylobates.
Finlayson, on the Cochin Chinese.
Fire, use of.
Fischer, on the pugnacity of the male of Lethrus cephalotes.
Fischer, F. Von, on display of brightly coloured parts by monkeys in courtship.
Fish, eagerness of male; proportion of the sexes in; sounds produced by.
Fishes, kidneys of, represented by Corpora Wolffiana in the human embryo; male, hatching ova in their mouths; receptacles for ova possessed by; relative size of the sexes in; fresh-water, of the tropics; protective resemblances in; change of colour in;
Flamingo, age of mature plumage.
Flexor pollicis longus, similar variation of, in man.
Flies, humming of.
Flint tools.
Flints, difficulty of chipping into form.
Florida, Quiscalus major in.
Florisuga mellivora.
Flounder, coloration of the.
Flower, W.H., on the abductor of the fifth metatarsal in apes; on the position of the Seals; on the Pithecia monachu; on the throat-pouch of the male bustard.
Fly-catchers, colours and nidification of.
Foetus, human, woolly covering of the; arrangement of the hair on.
Food, influence of, upon stature.
Foot, prehensile power of the, retained in some savages; prehensile, in the early progenitors of man.
Foramen, supra-condyloid, exceptional occurrence of in the humerus of man; in the early progenitors of man.
Forbes, D., on the Aymara Indians; on local variation of colour in the Quichuas; on the hairlessness of the Aymaras and Quichuas; on the long hair of the Aymaras and Quichaus.
Forel, F., on white young swans.
Forester, Hon.
O.W., on an orphan hawk.
Formica rufa, size of the cerebral ganglia in.
Fossils, absence of, connecting man with the apes.
Fowl, occurrence of spurs in the female; game, early pugnacity of; Polish, early development of cranial peculiarities of; variations in plumage of; examples of correlated development in the; domestic, breeds and sub-breeds of.
Fowls, spangled Hamburg; inheritance of changes of plumage by; sexual peculiarities in, transmitted only to the same sex; loss of secondary sexual characters by male; Polish, origin of the crest in; period of inheritance of characters by; cuckoo-;
Fox, W.D., on some half-tamed wild ducks becoming polygamous, and on polygamy in the guinea-fowl and canary-bird; on the proportion of the sexes in cattle; on the pugnacity of the peacock; on a nuptial assembly of magpies; on the finding of new mates by
Foxes, wariness of young, in hunting districts; black.
Fraser, C., on the different colours of the sexes in a species of Squilla.
Fraser, G., colours of Thecla.
Frere, Hookham, quoting Theognis on selection in mankind.
Fringilla cannabina.
Fringilla ciris, age of mature plumage in.
Fringilla cyanea, age of mature plumage in.
Fringilla leucophrys, young of.
Fringilla spinus.
Fringilla tristis, change of colour in, in spring; young of.
Fringillidae, resemblance of the females of distinct species of.
Frog, bright coloured and distasteful to birds.
Frogs, male; temporary receptacles for ova possessed by; ready to breed before the females; fighting of; vocal organs of.
Frontal bone, persistence of the suture in.
Fruits, poisonous, avoided by animals.
Fuegians, difference of stature among the; power of sight in the; skill of, in stone-throwing; resistance of the, to their severe climate; mental capacity of the; quasi-religious sentiments of the; resemblance of, in mental characters, to Europeans; mode
Fulgoridae, songs of the.
Fur, whiteness of, in Arctic animals in winter.
Fur-bearing animals, acquired sagacity of.
Gallicrex, sexual difference in the colour of the irides in.
Gallicrex cristatus, pugnacity of male; red carbuncle occurring in the male during the breeding-season.
Gallinaceae, frequency of polygamous habits and of sexual differences in the; love-gestures of; decomposed feathers in; stripes of young; comparative sexual differences between the species of; plumage of.
Gallinaceous birds, weapons of the male; racket-shaped feathers on the heads of.
Gallinula chloropus, pugnacity of the male.
Galloperdix, spurs of; development of spurs in the female.
Gallophasis, young of.
Galls.
Gallus bankiva, neck-hackles of.
Gallus Stanleyi, pugnacity of the male.
Galton, Mr., on hereditary genius; gregariousness and independence in animals; on the struggle between the social and personal impulses; on the effects of natural selection on civilised nations; on the sterility of sole daughters; on the degree of
Gammarus, use of the chelae of.
Gammarus marinus.
Gannets, white only when mature.
Ganoid fishes.
Gaour, horns of the.
Gap between man and the apes.
Gaper, sexes and young of.
Gardner, on an example of rationality in a Gelasimus.
Garrulus glandarius.
Gartner, on sterility of hybrid plants.
Gasteropoda, pulmoniferous, courtship of.
Gasterosteus, nidification of.
Gasterosteus leiurus.
Gasterosteus trachurus.
Gastrophora, wings of, brightly coloured beneath.
Gauchos, want of humanity among the.
Gaudry, M., on a fossil monkey.
Gavia, seasonal change of plumage in.
Geese, clanging noise made by; pairing of different species of; Canada, selection of mates by.
Gegenbaur, C., on the number of digits in the Ichthyopterygia; on the hermaphroditism of the remote progenitors of the vertebrata; two types of nipple in mammals.
Gelasimus, proportions of the sexes in a species of; use of the enlarged chelae of the male; pugnacity of males of; rational actions of a; difference of colour in the sexes of a species of.
Gemmules, dormant in one sex.
Genius, hereditary.
Genius, fertility of men and women of.
Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, Isid.
, on the recognition of women by male quadrumana; on monstrosities; coincidences of arrested development with polydactylism; on animal-like anomalies in the human structure; on the correlation of monstrosities; on the distribution of hair in man and
Geographical distribution, as evidence of specific distinctions in man.
Geometrae, brightly coloured beneath.
Geophagus, frontal protuberance of, male; eggs hatched by the male, in the mouth or branchial cavity.
Georgia, change of colour in Germans settled in.
Geotrupes, stridulation of.
Gerbe, M., on the nest-building of Crenilabus massa and C. Melops.
Gerland, Dr., on the prevalence of infanticide; on the extinction of races.
Gervais, P., on the hairiness of the gorilla; on the mandrill.
Gesture-language.
Ghost-moth, sexual difference of colour in the.
Giard, M., disputes descent of vertebrates from Ascidians; colour of sponges and Ascidians; musky odour of Sphinx.
Gibbon, voice of.
Gibbon, Hoolock, nose of.
Gibbs, Sir D., on differences of the voice in different races of men.
Gill, Dr., male seals larger than females; sexual differences in seals.
Giraffe, its mode of using the horns; mute, except in the rutting season.
Giraud-Teulon, on the cause of short sight.
Glanders, communicable to man from the lower animals.
Glands, odoriferous, in mammals.
Glareola, double moult in.
Glomeris limbata, difference of colour in the sexes of.
Glow-worm, female, apterous; luminosity of the.
Gnats, dances of; auditory powers of.
Gnu, skeletons of, found locked together; sexual differences in colour of the.
Goat, male, wild, falling on his horns; male, odour emitted by; male, wild, crest of the; Berbura, mane, dewlap, etc.
, of the male; Kemas, sexual difference in the colour of the.
Goats, sexual differences in the horns of; horns of; mode of fighting of; domestic, sexual differences of, late developed; beards of.
Goatsucker, Virginian, pairing of the.
Gobies, nidification of.
God, want of the idea of, in some races of men.
Godron, M., on variability; on difference of stature; on the want of connexion between climate and the colour of the skin; on the colour of the skin; on the colour of infants.
Goldfinch, proportion of the sexes in the; sexual differences of the beak in the; courtship of the.
Goldfinch, North American, young of.
Goldfish.
Gomphus, proportions of the sexes in; difference in the sexes of.
Gonepteryx Rhamni, sexual difference of colour in.
Goodsir, Prof.
, on the affinity of the lancelet to the ascidians.
Goosander, young of.
Goose, Antarctic, colours of the.
Goose, Canada, pairing with a Bernicle gander.
Goose, Chinese, knob on the beak of the.
Goose, Egyptian.
Goose, Sebastopol, plumage of.
Goose, Snow-, whiteness of the.
Goose, Spur-winged.
Gorilla, semi-erect attitude of the; mastoid processes of the; protecting himself from rain with his hands; manner of sitting; supposed to be a kind of mandrill; polygamy of the; voice of the; cranium of; fighting of male.
Gosse, P.H., on the pugnacity of the male Humming-bird.
Gosse, M., on the inheritance of artificial modifications of the skull.
Gould, B.A., on variation in the length of the legs in man; measurements of American soldiers; on the proportions of the body and capacity of the lungs in different races of men; on the inferior vitality of mulattoes.
Gould, J., on migration of swifts; on the arrival of male snipes before the females; on the numerical proportion of the sexes in birds; on Neomorpha Grypus; on the species of Eustephanus; on the Australian musk-duck; on the relative size of the sexes in
Goureaux, on the stridulation of Mutilla europaea.
Gout, sexually transmitted.
Graba, on the Pied Ravens of the Feroe Islands; variety of the Guillemot.
Gradation of secondary sexual characters in birds.
Grallatores, absence of secondary sexual characters in; double moult in some.
Grallina, nidification of.
Grasshoppers, stridulation of the.
Gratiolet, Prof.
, on the anthropomorphous apes; on the evolution of the anthropomorphous apes; on the difference in the development of the brains of apes and of man.
Gray, Asa, on the gradation of species among the Compositae.
Gray, J.E., on the caudal vertebrae of monkeys; on the presence of rudiments of horns in the female of Cervulus moschatus; on the horns of goats and sheep; on crests of male antelopes; on the beard of the ibex; on the Berbura goat; on sexual differences in
"Greatest happiness principle".
Greeks, ancient.
Green, A.H., on beavers fighting; on the voice of the beaver.
Greenfinch, selected by a female canary.
Greg, W.R., on the effects of natural selection on civilised nations; on the early marriages of the poor; on the Ancient Greeks.
Grenadiers, Prussian.
Greyhounds, numerical proportion of the sexes in; numerical proportion of male and female births in.
Grouse, red, monogamous; pugnacity of young male; producing a sound by beating their wings together; duration of courtship of; colours and nidification of.
Gruber, Dr., on the occurrence of the supra-condyloid foramen in the humerus of man; on division of malar bone; stridulation of locust; on ephippiger.
Grus americanus, age of mature plumage in; breeding in immature plumage.
Grus virgo, trachea of.
Gryllus campestris, pugnacity of male.
Gryllus domesticus.
Grypus, sexual differences in the beak in.
Guanacoes, battles of; canine teeth of.
Guanas, strife for women among the; polyandry among the.
Guanche skeletons, occurrence of the supra-condyloid foramen in the humerus of.
Guaranys, proportion of men and women among; colour of new-born children of the; beards of the.
Guenee, A., on the sexes of Hyperythra.
Guilding, L., on the stridulation of the Locustidae.
Guillemot, variety of the.
Guinea, sheep of, with males only horned.
Guinea-fowl, monogamous; occasional polygamy of the; markings of the.
Guinea-pigs, inheritance of the effects of operations by.
Gulls, seasonal change of plumage in; white.
Gunther, Dr., on paddle of Ceradotus; on hermaphroditism in Serranus; on male fishes hatching ova in their mouths; on mistaking infertile female fishes for males; on the prehensile organs of male Plagiostomous fishes; spines and brushes on fishes; on the
Gynanisa Isis, ocellated spots of.
Gypsies, uniformity of, in various parts of the world.
Habits, bad, facilitated by familiarity; variability of the force of.
Haeckel, E., on the origin of man; on rudimentary characters; on death caused by inflammation of the vermiform appendage; on the canine teeth in man; on the steps by which man became a biped; on man as a member of the Catarrhine group; on the position of
Hagen, H., and Walsh, B.D., on American Neuroptera.
Hair, development of, in man; character of, supposed to be determined by light and heat; distribution of, in man; possibly removed for ornamental purposes; arrangement and direction of; of the early progenitors of man; different texture of, in distinct
Hairiness, difference of, in the sexes in man; variation of, in races of men.
Hairs and excretory pores, numerical relation of, in sheep.
Hairy family, Siamese.
Halbertsma, Prof.
, hermaphroditism in Serranus.
Hamadryas baboon, turning over stones; mane of the male.
Hamilton, C., on the cruelty of the Kaffirs to animals; on the engrossment of the women by the Kaffir chiefs.
Hammering, difficulty of.
Hancock, A., on the colours of the nudibranch Mollusca.
Hands, larger at birth, in the children of labourers; structure of, in the quadrumana; and arms, freedom of, indirectly correlated with diminution of canines.
Handwriting, inherited.
Handyside, Dr., supernumerary mammae in men.
Harcourt, E. Vernon, on Fringilla cannabina.
Hare, protective colouring of the.
Harelda glacialis.
Hares, battles of male.
Harlan, Dr., on the difference between field- and house-slaves.
Harris, J.M., on the relation of complexion to climate.
Harris, T.W., on the Katy-did locust; on the stridulation of the grasshoppers; on Oecanthus nivalis; on the colouring of Lepidoptera; on the colouring of Saturnia Io.
Harting, spur of the Ornithorhynchus.
Hartman, Dr., on the singing of Cicada septendecim.
Hatred, persistence of.
Haughton, S., on a variation of the flexor pollicis longus in man.
Hawks, feeding orphan nestling.
Hayes, Dr., on the diverging of sledge-dogs on thin ice.
Haymond, R., on the drumming of the male Tetrao umbellus; on the drumming of birds.
Head, altered position of, to suit the erect attitude of man; hairiness of, in man; processes of, in male beetles; artificial alterations of the form of the.
Hearne, on strife for women among the North American Indians; on the North American Indians' notion of female beauty; repeated elopements of a North American woman.
Heart, in the human embryo.
Heat, supposed effects of.
Hectocotyle.
Hedge-warbler, young of the.
Heel, small projection of, in the Aymara Indians.
Hegt, M., on the development of the spurs in peacocks.
Heliconidae, mimicry of, by other butterflies.
Heliopathes, stridulation peculiar to the male.
Heliothrix auriculata, young of.
Helix pomatia, example of individual attachment in.
Hellins, J., proportions of sexes of Lepidoptera reared by.
Helmholtz, on pleasure derived from harmonies; on the human eye; on the vibration of the auditory hairs of crustacea; the physiology of harmony.
Hemiptera.
Hemitragus, beardless in both sexes.
Hemsbach, M. von, on medial mamma in man.
Hen, clucking of.
Hepburn, Mr., on the autumn song of the water-ouzel.
Hepialus humuli, sexual difference of colour in the.
Herbs, poisonous, avoided by animals.
Hermaphroditism, of embryos; in fishes.
Herodias bubulcus, vernal moult of.
Heron, Sir R., on the habits of peafowl.
Herons, love-gestures of; decomposed feathers in; breeding plumage of; young of the; sometimes dimorphic; continued growth of crest and plumes in the males of some; change of colour in some.
Hesperomys cognatus.
Hetaerina, proportion of the sexes in; difference in the sexes of.
Heterocerus, stridulation of.
Hewitt, Mr., on a game-cock killing a kite; on the recognition of dogs and cats by ducks; on the pairing of a wild duck with a pintail drake; on the courtship of fowls; on the coupling of pheasants with common hens.
Hilgendorf, sounds produced by crustaceans.
Hindoo, his horror of breaking his caste.
Hindoos, local difference of stature among; difference of, from Europeans; colour of the beard in.
Hipparchia Janira, instability of the ocellated spots of.
Hippocampus, development of; marsupial receptacles of the male.
Hippocampus minor.
Hippopotamus, nakedness of.
Hips, proportions of, in soldiers and sailors.
Hodgson, S., on the sense of duty.
Hoffberg, on the horns of the reindeer; on sexual preferences shewn by reindeer.
Hoffman, Prof.
, protective colours; fighting of frogs.
Hog, wart-; river-.
Hog-deer.
Holland, Sir H., on the effects of new diseases.
Homologous structures, correlated variation of.
Homoptera, stridulation of the, and Orthoptera, discussed.
Honduras, Quiscalus major in.
Honey-buzzard of India, variation in the crest of.
Honey-sucker, females and young of.
Honey-suckers, moulting of the; Australian, nidification of.
Honour, law of.
Hooker, Dr., forbearance of elephant to his keeper; on the colour of the beard in man.
Hookham, Mr., on mental concepts in animals.
Hoolock Gibbon, nose of.
Hoopoe, sounds produced by male.
Hoplopterus armatus, wing-spurs of.
Hornbill, African, inflation of the neck-wattle of the male during courtship.
Hornbills, sexual difference in the colour of the eyes in; nidification and incubation of.
Horne, C., on the rejection of a brightly-coloured locust by lizards and birds.
Horns, sexual differences of, in sheep and goats; loss of, in female merino sheep; development of, in deer; development in antelopes; from the head and thorax, in male beetles; of deer; originally a masculine character in sheep; and canine teeth, inverse
Horse, fossil, extinction of the, in South America; polygamous; canine teeth of male; winter change of colour.
Horses, rapid increase of, in South America; diminution of canine teeth in; dreaming; of the Falkland Islands and Pampas; numerical proportion of the sexes, in; lighter in winter in Siberia; sexual preferences in; pairing preferently with those of the same
Hottentot women, peculiarities of.
Hottentots, lice of; readily become musicians; notions of female beauty of the; compression of nose by.
Hough, Dr. S., men's temperature more variable than women's; proportion of sexes in man.
House-slaves, difference of, from field-slaves.
Houzeau, on the baying of the dog; on reason in dogs; birds killed by telegraph wires; on the cries of domestic fowls and parrots; animals feel no pity; suicide in the Aleutian Islands.
Howorth, H.H., extinction of savages.
Huber, P., on ants playing together; on memory in ants; on the intercommunication of ants; on the recognition of each other by ants after separation.
Huc, on Chinese opinions of the appearance of Europeans.
Huia, the, of New Zealand.
Human, man, classed alone in a kingdom.
Human sacrifices.
Humanity, unknown among some savages; deficiency of, among savages.
Humboldt, A. von, on the rationality of mules; on a parrot preserving the language of a lost tribe; on the cosmetic arts of savages; on the exaggeration of natural characters by man; on the red painting of American Indians.
Hume, D., on sympathetic feelings.
Humming-bird, racket-shaped feathers in the tail of a; display of plumage by the male.
Humming-birds, ornament their nests; polygamous; proportion of the sexes in; sexual differences in; pugnacity of male; modified primaries of male; coloration of the sexes of; display by; nidification of the; colours of female; young of.
Humour, sense of, in dogs.
Humphreys, H.N., on the habits of the stickleback.
Hunger, instinct of.
Huns, ancient, flattening of the nose by the.
Hunter, J., on the number of species of man; on secondary sexual characters; on the general behaviour of female animals during courtship; on the muscles of the larynx in song-birds; on strength of males; on the curled frontal hair of the bull; on the
Hunter, W.W., on the recent rapid increase of the Santali; on the Santali.
Huss, Dr. Max, on mammary glands.
Hussey, Mr., on a partridge distinguishing persons.
Hutchinson, Col.
, example of reasoning in a retriever.
Hutton, Captain, on the male wild goat falling on his horns.
Huxley, T.H., on the structural agreement of man with the apes; on the agreement of the brain in man with that of lower animals; on the adult age of the orang; on the embryonic development of man; on the origin of man; on variation in the skulls of the
Hybrid birds, production of.
Hydrophobia, communicable between man and the lower animals.
Hydroporus, dimorphism of females of.
Hyelaphus porcinus.
Hygrogonus.
Hyla, singing species of.
Hylobates, absence of the thumb in; upright progression of some species of; maternal affection in a; direction of the hair on the arms of species of; females of, less hairy below than males.
Hylobates agilis, hair on the arms of; musical voice of the; superciliary ridge of; voice of.
Hylobates hoolock, sexual difference of colour in.
Hylobates lar, hair on the arms of; female less hairy.
Hylobates leuciscus, song of.
Hylobates syndactylus, laryngeal sac of.
Hylophila prasinana.
Hymenoptera, large size of the cerebral ganglia in; classification of; sexual differences in the wings of; aculeate, relative size of the sexes of.
Hymenopteron, parasitic, with a sedentary male.
Hyomoschus aquaticus.
Hyperythra, proportion of the sexes in.
Hypogymna dispar, sexual difference of colour in.
Hypopyra, coloration of.
Ibex, male, falling on his horns; beard of the.
Ibis, white, change of colour of naked skin in, during the breeding season; scarlet, young of the.
Ibis tantalus, age of mature plumage in; breeding in immature plumage.
Ibises, decomposed feathers in; white; and black.
Ichneumonidae, difference of the sexes in.
Ichthyopterygia.
Ichthyosaurians.
Idiots, microcephalous, their characters and habits; hairiness and animal nature of their actions; microcephalous, imitative faculties of.
Iguana tuberculata.
Iguanas.
Illegitimate and legitimate children, proportion of the sexes in.
Imagination, existence of, in animals.
Imitation, of man by monkeys; tendency to, in monkeys, microcephalous idiots and savages; influence of.
Immature plumage of birds.
Implacentata.
Implements, employed by monkeys; fashioning of, peculiar to man.
Impregnation, period of, influence of, upon sex.
Improvement, progressive, man alone supposed to be capable of.
Incisor teeth, knocked out or filed by some savages.
Increase, rate of; necessity of checks in.
Indecency, hatred of, a modern virtue.
India, difficulty of distinguishing the native races of; Cyprinidae of; colour of the beard in races of men of.
Indian, North American, honoured for scalping a man of another tribe.
Individuality, in animals.
Indolence of man, when free from a struggle for existence.
Indopicus carlotta, colours of the sexes of.
Infanticide, prevalence of; supposed cause of; prevalence and causes of.
Inferiority, supposed physical, of man.
Inflammation of the bowels, occurrence of, in Cebus Azarae.
Inheritance, of long and short sight; of effects of use of vocal and mental organs; of moral tendencies; laws of; sexual; sexually limited.
Inquisition, influence of the.
Insanity, hereditary.
insect, fossil, from the Devonian.
Insectivora, absence of secondary sexual characters in.
Insects, relative size of the cerebral ganglia in; male, appearance of, before the females; pursuit of female, by the males; period of development of sexual characters in; secondary sexual characters of; kept in cages; stridulation.
Insessores, vocal organs of.
Instep, depth of, in soldiers and sailors.
Instinct and intelligence.
Instinct, migratory, vanquishing the maternal.
Instinctive actions, the result of inheritance.
Instinctive impulses, difference of the force; and moral impulses, alliance of.
Instincts, complex origin of, through natural selection; possible origin of some; acquired, of domestic animals; variability of the force of; difference of force between the social and other; utilised for new purposes.
Instrumental music of birds.
Intellect, influence of, in natural selection in civilised society.
Intellectual faculties, their influence on natural selection in man; probably perfected through natural selection.
Intelligence, Mr. H. Spencer on the dawn of.
Intemperance, no reproach among savages; its destructiveness.
Intoxication in monkeys.
Iphias glaucippe.
Iris, sexual difference in the colour of the, in birds.
Ischio-pubic muscle.
Ithaginis cruentus, number of spurs in.
Iulus, tarsal suckers of the males of.
Jackals learning from dogs to bark.
Jack-snipe, coloration of the.
Jacquinot, on the number of species of man.
Jaeger, Dr., length of bones increased from carrying weights; on the difficulty of approaching herds of wild animals; male Silver-pheasant, rejected when his plumage was spoilt.
Jaguars, black.
Janson, E.W., on the proportions of the sexes in Tomicus villosus; on stridulant beetles.
Japan, encouragement of licentiousness in.
Japanese, general beardlessness of the; aversion of the, to whiskers.
Jardine, Sir W., on the Argus pheasant.
Jarrold, Dr., on modifications of the skull induced by unnatural position.
Jarves, Mr., on infanticide in the Sandwich Islands.
Javans, relative height of the sexes of; notions of female beauty.
Jaw, influence of the muscles of the, upon the physiognomy of the apes.
Jaws, smaller proportionately to the extremities; influence of food upon the size of; diminution of, in man; in man, reduced by correlation.
Jay, young of the; Canada, young of the.
Jays, new mates found by; distinguishing persons.
Jeffreys, J. Gwyn, on the form of the shell in the sexes of the Gasteropoda; on the influence of light upon the colours of shells.
Jelly-fish, bright colours of some.
Jenner, Dr., on the voice of the rook; on the finding of new mates by magpies; on retardation of the generative functions in birds.
Jenyns, L., on the desertion of their young by swallows; on male birds singing after the proper season.
Jerdon, Dr., on birds dreaming; on the pugnacity of the male bulbul; on the pugnacity of the male Ortygornis gularis; on the spurs of Galloperdix; on the habits of Lobivanellus; on the spoonbill; on the drumming of the Kalij-pheasant; on Indian bustards;
Jevons, W.S., on the migrations of man.
Jews, ancient use of flint tools by the; uniformity of, in various parts of the world; numerical proportion of male and female births among the; ancient, tattooing practised by.
Johnstone, Lieut.
, on the Indian elephant.
Jollofs, fine appearance of the.
Jones, Albert, proportion of sexes of Lepidoptera, reared by.
Juan Fernandez, humming-birds of.
Junonia, sexual differences of colouring in species of.
Jupiter, comparison with Assyrian effigies.
Kaffir skull, occurrence of the diastema in a.
Kaffirs, their cruelty to animals; lice of the; colour of the; engrossment of the handsomest women by the chiefs of the; marriage-customs of the.
Kalij-pheasant, drumming of the male; young of.
Kallima, resemblance of, to a withered leaf.
Kulmucks, general beardlessness of; aversion of, to hairs on the face; marriage-customs of the.
Kangaroo, great red, sexual difference in the colour of.
Kant, Imm.
, on duty; on self-restraint; on the number of species of man.
Katy-did, stridulation of the.
Keen, Dr., on the mental powers of snakes.
Keller, Dr., on the difficulty of fashioning stone implements.
Kent, W.S., elongation of dorsal fin of Callionymus lyra; courtship of Labrus mixtus; colours and courtship of Cantharus lineatus.
Kestrels, new mates found by.
Kidney, one, doing double work in disease.
King, W.R., on the vocal organs of Tetrao cupido; on the drumming of grouse; on the reindeer; on the attraction of male deer by the voice of the female.
King and Fitzroy, on the marriage-customs of the Fuegians.
King-crows, nidification of.
Kingfisher, racket-shaped feathers in the tail of a.
Kingfishers, colours and nidification of the; immature plumage of the; young of the.
King Lory, immature plumage of the.
Kingsley, C., on the sounds produced by the Umbrina.
Kirby and Spence, on sexual differences in the length of the snout in Curculionidae; on the courtship of insects; on the elytra of Dytiscus; on peculiarities in the legs of male insects; on the relative size of the sexes in insects; on the Fulgoridae; on
Kite, killed by a game-cock.
Knot, retention of winter plumage by the.
Knox, R., on the semilunar fold; on the occurrence of the supra-condyloid foramen in the humerus of man; on the features of the young Memmon.
Koala, length of the caecum in.
Kobus ellipsiprymnus, proportion of the sexes in.
Kolreuter, on the sterility of hybrid plants.
Koodoo, development of the horns of the; markings of the.
Koppen, F.T., on the migratory locust.
Koraks, marriage customs of.
Kordofan, protuberances artificially produced by natives of.
Korte, on the proportion of sexes in locusts; Russian locusts.
Kovalevsky, A., on the affinity of the Ascidia to the Vertebrata.
Kovalevsky, W., on the pugnacity of the male capercailzie; on the pairing of the capercailzie.
Krause, on a convoluted body at the extremity of the tail in a Macacus and a cat.
Kupffer, Prof.
, on the affinity of the Ascidia to the Vertebrata.
Labidocera Darwinii, prehensile organs of the male.
Labrus, splendid colours of the species of.
Labrus mixtus, sexual differences in.
Labrus pavo.
Lacertilia, sexual differences of.
Lafresnaye, M. de, on birds of paradise.
Lamarck, on the origin of man.
Lamellibranchiata.
Lamellicorn beetles, horn-like processes from the head and thorax of; influence of sexual selection on.
Lamellicornia, stridulation of.
Lamont, Mr., on the tusks of the walrus; on the use of its tusks by the walrus; on the bladder-nose seal.
Lampornis porphyrurus, colours of the female.
Lampyridae, distasteful to mammals.
Lancelet.
Landois, H., gnats attracted by sound; on the production of sound by the Cicadae; on the stridulating organ of the crickets; on Decticus; on the stridulating organs of the Acridiidae; stridulating apparatus, in Orthoptera; on the stridulation of
Landor, Dr., on remorse for not obeying tribal custom.
Language, an art; articulate, origin of; relation of the progress of, to the development of the brain; effects of inheritance in production of; complex structure of, among barbarous nations; natural selection in; gesture; primeval; of a lost tribe
Languages, presence of rudiments in; classification of; variability of; crossing or blending of; complexity of, no test of perfection or proof of special creation; resemblance of, evidence of community of origin.
Languages and species, identity of evidence of their gradual development.
Lanius, characters of young.
Lanius rufus, anomalous young of.
Lankester, E.R., on comparative longevity; on the destructive effects of intemperance.
Lanugo of the human foetus.
Lapponian language, highly artificial.
Lark, proportion of the sexes in the; female, singing of the.
Larks, attracted by a mirror.
Lartet, E., comparison of cranial capacities of skulls of recent and tertiary mammals; on the size of the brain in mammals; on Dryopithecus; on pre-historic flutes.
Larus, seasonal change of plumage in.
Larva, luminous, of a Brazilian beetle.
Larynx, muscles of the, in songbirds.
Lasiocampa quercus, attraction of males by the female; sexual difference of colour in.
Latham, R.G., on the migrations of man.
Latooka, perforation of the lower lip by the women of.
Laurillard, on the abnormal division of the malar bone in man.
Lawrence, W., on the superiority of savages to Europeans in power of sight; on the colour of negro infants; on the fondness of savages for ornaments; on beardless races; on the beauty of the English aristocracy.
Layard, E.L., on the instance of rationality in a cobra; on the pugnacity of Gallus Stanleyi.
Laycock, Dr., on vital periodicity; theroid nature of idiots.
Leaves, autumn, tints useless.
Lecky, Mr., on the sense of duty; on suicide; on the practice of celibacy; his view of the crimes of savages; on the gradual rise of morality.
Leconte, J.L., on the stridulant organ in the Coprini and Dynastini.
Lee, H., on the numerical proportion of the sexes in the trout.
Leg, calf of the, artificially modified.
Legitimate and illegitimate children, proportion of the sexes in.
Legs, variation of the length of the, in man; proportions of, in soldiers and sailors; front, atrophied in some male butterflies; peculiarities of, in male insects.
Leguay, on the occurrence of the supra-condyloid foramen in the humerus of man.
Lek of the black-cock and capercailzie.
Lemoine, Albert, on the origin of language.
Lemur macaco, sexual difference of colour in.
Lemuridae, ears of the; variability of the muscles in the; position and derivation of the; their origin.
Lemurs, uterus in the.
Lenguas, disfigurement of the ears of the.
Leopards, black.
Lepidoptera, numerical proportions of the sexes in the; colouring of; ocellated spots of.
Lepidosiren.
Leptalides, mimicry of.
Leptorhynchus angustatus, pugnacity of male.
Leptura testacea, difference of colour in the sexes.
Leroy, on the wariness of young foxes in hunting-districts; on the desertion of their young by swallows.
Leslie, D., marriage customs of Kaffirs.
Lesse, valley of the.
Lesson, on the birds of paradise; on the sea-elephant.
Lessona, M., observations on Serranus.
Lethrus cephalotes, pugnacity of the males of.
Leuciscus phoxinus.
Leuckart, R., on the vesicula prostatica; on the influence of the age of parents on the sex of offspring.
Levator claviculae muscle.
Libellula depressa, colour of the male.
Libellulidae, relative size of the sexes of; difference in the sexes of.
Lice of domestic animals and man.
Licentiousness a check upon population; prevalence of, among savages.
Lichtenstein, on Chera progne.
Life, inheritance at corresponding periods of.
Light, effects on complexion; influence of, upon the colours of shells.
Lilford, Lord, the ruff attracted by bright objects.
Limosa lapponica.
Linaria.
Linaria montana.
Lindsay, Dr. W.L., diseases communicated from animals to man; madness in animals; the dog considers his master his God.
Linnaeus, views of, as to the position of man.
Linnet, numerical proportion of the sexes in the; crimson forehead and breast of the; courtship of the.
Lion, polygamous; mane of the, defensive; roaring of the.
Lions, stripes of young.
Lips, piercing of the, by savages.
Lithobius, prehensile appendages of the female.
Lithosia, coloration in.
Littorina littorea.
Livingstone, Dr., manner of sitting of gorilla; on the influence of dampness and dryness on the colour of the skin; on the liability of negroes to tropical fevers after residence in a cold climate; on the spur-winged goose; on weaverbirds; on an African
Livonia, numerical proportion of male and female births in.
Lizards, relative size of the sexes of; gular pouches of.
Lloyd, L., on the polygamy of the capercailzie and bustard; on the numerical proportion of the sexes in the capercailzie and blackcock; on the salmon; on the colours of the sea-scorpion; on the pugnacity of male grouse; on the capercailzie and blackcock;
Lobivanellus, wing-spurs in.
Local influences, effect of, upon stature.
Lockwood, Mr., on the development of Hippocampus.
Lockwood, Rev.
S., musical mouse.
Locust, bright-coloured, rejected by lizards and birds.
Locust, migratory; selection by female.
Locustidae, stridulation of the; descent of the.
Locusts, proportion of sexes in; stridulation of.
Longicorn beetles, difference of the sexes of, in colour; stridulation of.
Lonsdale, Mr., on an example of personal attachment in Helix pomatia.
Lophobranchii, marsupial receptacles of the male.
Lophophorus, habits of.
Lophorina atra, sexual difference in coloration of.
Lophornis ornatus.
Lord, J.K., on Salmo lycaodon.
Lory, King; immature plumage of the.
Lory, King, constancy of.
Love-antics and dances of birds.
Lowne, B.T., on Musca vomitoria.
Loxia, characters of young of.
Lubbock, Sir J., on the antiquity of man; on the origin of man; on the mental capacity of savages; on the origin of implements; on the simplification of languages; on the absence of the idea of God among certain races of men; on the origin of the belief in
Lucanidae, variability of the mandibles in the male.
Lucanus, large size of males of.
Lucanus cervus, numerical proportion of sexes of; weapons of the male.
Lucanus elaphus, use of mandibles of; large jaws of male.
Lucas, Prosper, on pigeons; on sexual preference in horses and bulls.
Luminosity in insects.
Lunar periods.
Lund, Dr., on skulls found in Brazilian caves.
Lungs, enlargement of, in the Quichua and Aymara Indians; a modified swim-bladder; different capacity of, in races of man.
Luschka, Prof.
, on the termination of the coccyx.
Luxury, expectation of life uninfluenced by.
Lycaena, sexual differences of colour in species of.
Lycaenae, colours of.
Lyell, Sir C., on the antiquity of man; on the origin of man; on the parallelism of the development of species and languages; on the extinction of languages; on the Inquisition; on the fossil remains of vertebrata; on the fertility of mulattoes.
Lynx, Canadian throat-ruff of the.
Lyre-bird, assemblies of.
Macacus, ears of; convoluted body in the extremity of the tail of; variability of the tail in species of; whiskers of species of.
Macacus brunneus.
Macacus cynomolgus, superciliary ridge of; beard and whiskers of; becoming white with age.
Macacus ecaudatus.
Macacus lasiotus, facial spots of.
Macacus nemestrinus.
Macacus radiatus.
Macacus rhesus, sexual difference in the colour of.
Macalister, Prof.
, on variations of the palmaris accessorius muscle; on muscular abnormalities in man; on the greater variability of the muscles in men than in women.
Macaws, Mr. Buxton's observations on.
McCann, J., on mental individuality.
McClelland, J., on the Indian Cyprinidae.
Macculloch, Col.
, on an Indian village without any female children.
Macculloch, Dr., on tertian ague in a dog.
Macgillivray, W., on the vocal organs of birds; on the Egyptian goose; on the habits of woodpeckers; on the habits of the snipe; on the whitethroat; on the moulting of the snipes; on the moulting of the Anatidae; on the finding of new mates by magpies; on
Machetes, sexes and young of.
Machetes pugnax, supposed to be polygamous; numerical proportion of the sexes in; pugnacity of the male; double moult in.
McIntosh, Dr., colours of the Nemertians.
McKennan, marriage customs of Koraks.
Mackintosh, on the moral sense.
MacLachlan, R., on Apatania muliebris and Boreus hyemalis; on the anal appendages of male insects; on the pairing of dragon-flies; on dragon-flies; on dimorphism in Agrion; on the want of pugnacity in male dragon-flies; colour of ghost-moth in the Shetland
M'Lennan, Mr., on infanticide; on the origin of the belief in spiritual agencies; on the prevalence of licentiousness among savages; on the primitive barbarism of civilised nations; on traces of the custom of the forcible capture of wives; on polyandry.
Macnamara, Mr., susceptibility of Andaman islanders and Nepalese to change.
M'Neill, Mr., on the use of the antlers of deer; on the Scotch deerhound; on the long hairs on the throat of the stag; on the bellowing of stags.
Macropus, courtship of.
Macrorhinus proboscideus, structure of the nose of.
Magpie, power of speech of; vocal organs of the; nuptial assemblies of; new mates found by; stealing bright objects; young of the; coloration of the.
Maillard, M., on the proportion of the sexes in a species of Papilio from Bourbon.
Maine, Sir Henry, on the absorption of one tribe by another; a desire for improvement not general.
Major, Dr. C. Forsyth, on fossil Italian apes; skull of Bos etruscus; tusks of miocene pigs.
Makalolo, perforation of the upper lip by the.
Malar bone, abnormal division of, in man.
Malay Archipelago, marriage-customs of the savages of the.
Malays, line of separation between the Papuans and the; general beardlessness of the; staining of the teeth among; aversion of some, to hairs on the face.
Malays and Papuans, contrasted characters of.
Male animals, struggles of, for the possession of the females; eagerness of, in courtship; generally more modified than female; differ in the same way from females and young.
Male characters, developed in females; transfer of, to female birds.
Male, sedentary, of a hymenopterous parasite.
Malefactors.
Males, presence of rudimentary female organs in.
Males and females, comparative numbers of; comparative mortality of, while young.
Malherbe, on the woodpeckers.
Mallotus Peronii.
Mallotus villosus.
Malthus, T., on the rate of increase of population.
Maluridae, nidification of the.
Malurus, young of.
Mammae, rudimentary, in male mammals; supernumerary, in women; of male human subject.
Mammalia, Prof.
Owen's classification of; genealogy of the.
Mammals, recent and tertiary, comparison of cranial capacity of; nipples of; pursuit of female, by the males; secondary sexual characters of; weapons of; relative size of the sexes of; parallelism of, with birds in secondary sexual characters; voices of,
Man, variability of; erroneously regarded as more domesticated than other animals; migrations of; wide distribution of; causes of the nakedness of; supposed physical inferiority of; a member of the Catarrhine group; early progenitors of; transition from
Mandans, correlation of colour and texture of hair in the.
Mandible, left, enlarged in the male of Taphroderes distortus.
Mandibles, use of the, in Ammophila; large, of Corydalis cornutus; large, of male Lucanus elaphus.
Mandrill, number of caudal vertebrae in the; colours of the male.
Mantegazza, Prof.
, on last molar teeth of man; bright colours in male animals; on the ornaments of savages; on the beardlessness of the New Zealanders; on the exaggeration of natural characters by man.
Mantell, W., on the engrossment of pretty girls by the New Zealand chiefs.
Mantis, pugnacity of species of.
Maories, mortality of; infanticide and proportion of sexes; distaste for hairiness amongst men.
Marcus Aurelius, on the origin of the moral sense; on the influence of habitual thoughts.
Mareca penelope.
Marks, retained throughout groups of birds.
Marriage, restraints upon, among savages; influence of, upon morals; influence of, on mortality; development of.
Marriages, early; communal.
Marshall, Dr. W., protuberances on birds' heads; on the moulting of birds; advantage to older birds of paradise.
Marshall, Col.
, interbreeding amongst Todas; infanticide and proportion of sexes with Todas; choice of husband amongst Todas.
Marshall, Mr., on the brain of a Bushwoman.
Marsupials, development of the nictitating membrane in; uterus of; possession of nipples by; their origin from Monotremata; abdominal sacs of; relative size of the sexes of; colours of.
Marsupium, rudimentary in male marsupials.
Martin, W.C.L., on alarm manifested by an orang at the sight of a turtle; on the hair in Hylobates; on a female American deer; on the voice of Hylobates agilis; on Semnopithecus nemaeus.
Martin, on the beards of the inhabitants of St. Kilda.
Martins deserting their young.
Martins, C., on death caused by inflammation of the vermiform appendage.
Mastoid processes in man and apes.
Maudsley, Dr., on the influence of the sense of smell in man; on idiots smelling their food; on Laura Bridgman; on the development of the vocal organs; moral sense failing in incipient madness; change of mental faculties at puberty in man.
Mayers, W.F., on the domestication of the goldfish in China.
Mayhew, E., on the affection between individuals of different sexes in the dog.
Maynard, C.J., on the sexes of Chrysemys picta.
Meckel, on correlated variation of the muscles of the arm and leg.
Medicines, effect produced by, the same in man and in monkeys.
Medusae, bright colours of some.
Megalithic structures, prevalence of.
Megapicus validus, sexual difference of colour in.
Megasoma, large size of males of.
Meigs, Dr. A., on variation in the skulls of the natives of America.
Meinecke, on the numerical proportion of the sexes in butterflies.
Melanesians, decrease of.
Meldola, Mr., colours and marriage flight of Colias and Pieris.
Meliphagidae, Australian, nidification of.
Melita, secondary sexual characters of.
Meloe, difference of colour in the sexes of a species of.
Memnon, young.
Memory, manifestations of, in animals.
Mental characters, difference of, in different races of men.
Mental faculties, diversity of, in the same race of men; inheritance of; variation of, in the same species; similarity of the, in different races of man; of birds.
Mental powers, difference of, in the two sexes in man.
Menura Alberti, song of.
Menura superba, long tails of both sexes of.
Merganser, trachea of the male.
Merganser serrator, male plumage of.
Mergus cucullatus, speculum of.
Mergus merganser, young of.
Metallura, splendid tail-feathers of.
Methoca ichneumonides, large male of.
Meves, M., on the drumming of the snipe.
Mexicans, civilisation of the, not foreign.
Meyer, on a convoluted body at the extremity of the tail in a Macacus and a cat.
Meyer, Dr. A., on the copulation of Phryganidae of distinct species.
Meyer, Prof.
L., on development of helix of ear; men's ears more variable than women's; antennae serving as ears.
Migrations of man, effects of.
Migratory instinct of birds; vanquishing the maternal.
Mill, J.S., on the origin of the moral sense; on the "greatest happiness principle;" on the difference of the mental powers in the sexes of man.
Millipedes.
Milne-Edwards, H., on the use of enlarged chelae of the male Gelasimus.
Milvago leucurus, sexes and young of.
Mimicry.
Mimus polyglottus.
Mind, difference of, in man and the highest animals; similarity of the, in different races.
Minnow, proportion of the sexes in the.
Mirror, behaviour of monkeys before.
Mirrors, larks attracted by.
Mitchell, Dr., interbreeding in the Hebrides.
Mitford, selection of children in Sparta.
Mivart, St. George, on the reduction of organs; on the ears of the lemuroidea; on variability of the muscles in lemuroidea; on the caudal vertebrae of monkeys; on the classification of the primates; on the orang and on man; on differences in the
Mobius, Prof.
, on reasoning powers in a pike.
Mocking-thrush, partial migration of; young of the.
Modifications, unserviceable.
Moggridge, J.T., on habits of spiders; on habits of ants.
Moles, numerical proportion of the sexes in; battles of male.
Mollienesia petenensis, sexual difference in.
Mollusca, beautiful colours and shapes of; absence of secondary sexual characters in the.
Molluscoida.
Monacanthus scopas and M. Peronii.
Monboddo, Lord, on music.
Mongolians, perfection of the senses in.
Monkey, protecting his keeper from a baboon; bonnet-; rhesus-, sexual difference in colour of the; moustache-, colours of the.
Monkeys, liability of, to the same diseases as man; male, recognition of women by; diversity of the mental faculties in; breaking hard fruits with stones; hands of the; basal caudal vertebrae of, imbedded in the body; revenge taken by; maternal affection
Monogamy, not primitive.
Monogenists.
Mononychus pseudacori, stridulation of.
Monotremata, development of the nictitating membrane in; lactiferous glands of; connecting mammals with reptiles.
Monstrosities, analogous, in man and lower animals; caused by arrest of development; correlation of; transmission of.
Montagu, G., on the habits of the black and red grouse; on the pugnacity of the ruff; on the singing of birds; on the double moult of the male pintail.
Monteiro, Mr., on Bucorax abyssinicus.
Montes de Oca, M., on the pugnacity of male Humming-birds.
Monticola cyanea.
Monuments, as traces of extinct tribes.
Moose, battles of; horns of the, an incumbrance.
Moral and instinctive impulses, alliance of.
Moral faculties, their influence on natural selection in man.
Moral rules, distinction between the higher and lower.
Moral sense, so-called, derived from the social instincts; origin of the.
Moral tendencies, inheritance of.
Morality, supposed to be founded in selfishness; test of, the general welfare of the community; gradual rise of; influence of a high standard of.
Morgan, L.H., on the beaver; on the reasoning powers of the beaver; on the forcible capture of wives; on the castoreum of the beaver; marriage unknown in primeval times; on polyandry.
Morley, J., on the appreciation of praise and fear of blame.
Morris, F.O., on hawks feeding an orphan nestling.
Morse, Dr., colours of mollusca.
Morselli, E., division of the malar bone.
Mortality, comparative, of female and male.
Morton on the number of species of man.
Moschkau, Dr. A., on a speaking starling.
Moschus moschiferus, odoriferous organs of.
Motacillae, Indian, young of.
Moth, odoriferous.
Moths, absence of mouth in some males; apterous female; male, prehensile use of the tarsi by; male, attracted by females; sound produced by; coloration of; sexual differences of colour in.
Motmot, inheritance of mutilation of tail feathers; racket-shaped feathers in the tail of a.
Moult, double; double annual, in birds.
Moulting of birds.
Moults, partial.
Mouse, song of.
Moustache-monkey, colours of the.
Moustaches, in monkeys.
Mud-turtle, long claws of the male.
Mulattoes, persistent fertility of; immunity of, from yellow fever.
Mule, sterility and strong vitality of the.
Mules, rational.
Muller, Ferd.
, on the Mexicans and Peruvians.
Muller, Fritz, on astomatous males of Tanais; on the disappearance of spots and stripes in adult mammals; on the proportions of the sexes in some Crustacea; on secondary sexual characters in various Crustaceans; musical contest between male Cicadae; mode
Muller, Hermann, emergence of bees, from pupa; pollen-gathering of bees; proportion of sexes in bees; courting of Eristalis; colour and sexual selection with bees.
Muller, J., on the nictitating membrane and semilunar fold.
Muller, Max, on the origin of language; language implies power of general conception; struggle for life among the words, etc.
, of languages.
Muller, S., on the banteng; on the colours of Semnopithecus chrysomelas.
Muntjac-deer, weapons of the.
Murie, J., on the reduction of organs; on the ears of the Lemuroidea; on variability of the muscles in the Lemuroidea; basal caudal vertebrae of Macacus brunneus imbedded in the body; on the manner of sitting in short-tailed apes; on differences in the
Murray, A., on the Pediculi of different races of men.
Murray, T.A., on the fertility of Australian women with white men.
Mus coninga.
Mus minutus, sexual difference in the colour of.
Musca vomitoria.
Muscicapa grisola.
Muscicapa luctuosa.
Muscicapa ruticilla, breeding in immature plumage.
Muscle, ischio-pubic.
Muscles, rudimentary, occurrence of, in man; variability of the; effects of use and disuse upon; animal-like abnormalities of, in man; correlated variation of, in the arm and leg; variability of, in the hands and feet; of the jaws, influence of, on the
Musculus sternalis, Prof.
Turner on the.
Music, of birds; discordant, love of savages for; reason of power of perception of notes in animals; power of distinguishing notes; its connection with primeval speech; different appreciation of, by different peoples; origin of; effects of.
Musical cadences, perception of, by animals; powers of man.
Musk-deer, canine teeth of male; male, odoriferous organs of the; winter change of the.
Musk-duck, Australian; large size of male; of Guiana, pugnacity of the male.
Musk-ox, horns of.
Musk-rat, protective resemblance of the, to a clod of earth.
Musophagae, colours and nidification of the; both sexes of, equally brilliant.
Mussels opened by monkeys.
Mustela, winter change of two species of.
Musters, Captain, on Rhea Darwinii; marriages amongst Patagonians.
Mutilations, healing of; inheritance of.
Mutilla europaea, stridulation of.
Mutillidae, absence of ocelli in female.
Mycetes caraya, polygamous; vocal organs of; beard of; sexual differences of colour in; voice of.
Mycetes seniculus, sexual differences of colour in.
Myriapoda.
Nageli, on the influence of natural selection on plants; on the gradation of species of plants.
Nails, coloured yellow or purple in part of Africa.
Narwhal, tusks of the.
Nasal cavities, large size of, in American aborigines.
Nascent organs.
Nathusius, H. von, on the improved breeds of pigs; male domesticated animals more variable than females; horns of castrated sheep; on the breeding of domestic animals.
Natural selection, its effects on the early progenitors of man; influence of, on man; limitation of the principle; influence of, on social animals; Mr. Wallace on the limitation of, by the influence of the mental faculties in man; influence of, in the
Natural and sexual selection contrasted.
Naulette, jaw from, large size of the canines in.
Neanderthal skull, capacity of the.
Neck, proportion of, in soldiers and sailors.
Necrophorus, stridulation of.
Nectarinia, young of.
Nectariniae, moulting of the; nidification of.
Negro, resemblance of a, to Europeans in mental characters.
Negro-women, their kindness to Mungo Park.
Negroes, Caucasian features in; character of; lice of; fertility of, when crossed with other races; blackness of; variability of; immunity of, from yellow fever; difference of, from Americans; disfigurements of the; colour of new-born children of;
Nemertians, colours of.
Neolithic period.
Neomorpha, sexual difference of the beak in.
Nephila, size of male.
Nests, made by fishes; decoration of, by Humming-birds.
Neumeister, on a change of colour in pigeons after several moultings.
Neuration, difference of, in the two sexes of some butterflies and hymenoptera.
Neuroptera.
Neurothemis, dimorphism in.
New Zealand, expectation by the natives of, of their extinction; practice of tattooing in; aversion of natives of, to hairs on the face; pretty girls engrossed by the chiefs in.
Newton, A., on the throat-pouch of the male bustard; on the differences between the females of two species of Oxynotus; on the habits of the Phalarope, dotterel, and godwit.
Newts.
Nicholson, Dr., on the non-immunity of dark Europeans from yellow fever.
Nictitating membrane.
Nidification of fishes; relation of, to colour; of British birds.
Night-heron, cries of the.
Nightingale, arrival of the male before the female; object of the song of the.
Nightingales, new mates found by.
Nightjar, selection of a mate by the female; Australian, sexes of; coloration of the.
Nightjars, noise made by some male, with their wings; elongated feathers in.
Nilghau, sexual differences of colour in the.
Nilsson, Prof.
, on the resemblance of stone arrow-heads from various places; on the development of the horns of the reindeer.
Nipples, absence of, in Monotremata.
Nitsche, Dr., ear of foetal orang.
Nitzsch, C.L., on the down of birds.
Noctuae, brightly-coloured beneath.
Noctuidae, coloration of.
Nomadic habits, unfavourable to human progress.
Nordmann, A., on Tetrao urogalloides.
Norfolk Island, half-breeds on.
Norway, numerical proportion of male and female births in.
Nose, resemblance of, in man and the apes; piercing and ornamentation of the; very flat, not admired in negroes; flattening of the.
Nott and Gliddon, on the features of Rameses II.
; on the features of Amunoph III.
; on skulls from Brazilian caves; on the immunity of negroes and mulattoes from yellow fever; on the deformation of the skull among American tribes.
Novara, voyage of the, suicide in New Zealand.
Nudibranch Mollusca, bright colours of.
Numerals, Roman.
Nunemaya, natives of, bearded.
Nuthatch, of Japan, intelligence of; Indian.
Obedience, value of.
Observation, powers of, possessed by birds.
Occupations, sometimes a cause of diminished stature; effect of, upon the proportions of the body.
Ocelli, absence of, in female Mutilidae.
Ocelli of birds, formation and variability of the.
Ocelot, sexual differences in the colouring of the.
Ocyhaps lophotes.
Odonata.
Odonestis potatoria, sexual difference of colour in.
Odour, correlation of, with colour of skin; of moths; emitted by snakes in the breeding season; of mammals.
Oecanthus nivalis, difference of colour in the sexes of.
Oecanthus pellucidus.
Ogle, Dr. W., relation between colour and power of smell.
Oidemia.
Oliver, on sounds produced by Pimelia striata.
Omaloplia brunnea, stridulation of.
Onitis furcifer, processes of anterior femora of the male, and on the head and thorax of the female.
Onthophagus.
Onthophagus rangifer, sexual differences of; variations in the horns of the male.
Ophidia, sexual differences of.
Ophidium.
Opossum, wide range of, in America.
Optic nerve, atrophy of the, caused by destruction of the eye.
Orang-Outan, Bischoff on the agreement of the brain of the, with that of man; adult age of the; ears of the; vermiform appendage of; hands of the; absence of mastoid processes in the; platforms built by the; alarmed at the sight of a turtle; using a stick
Oranges, treatment of, by monkeys.
Orange-tip butterfly.
Orchestia Darwinii, dimorphism of males of.
Orchestia Tucuratinga, limbs of.
Ordeal, trial by.
Oreas canna, colours of.
Oreas Derbianus, colours of.
Organs, prehensile; utilised for new purposes.
Organic scale, von Baer's definition of progress in.
Orioles, nidification of.
Oriolus, species of, breeding in immature plumage.
Oriolus melanocephalus, coloration of the sexes in.
Ornaments, prevalence of similar; of male birds; fondness of savages for.
Ornamental characters, equal transmission of, to both sexes, in mammals; of monkeys.
Ornithoptera croesus.
Ornithorhynchus, reptilian tendency of; spur of the male.
Orocetes erythrogastra, young of.
Orrony, Grotto of.
Orsodacna atra, difference of colour in the sexes of.
Orsodacna ruficollis.
Orthoptera, metamorphosis of; stridulating apparatus of; colours of; rudimentary stridulating organs in female; stridulation of the, and Homoptera, discussed.
Ortygornis gularis, pugnacity of the male.
Oryctes, stridulation of; sexual differences in the stridulant organs of.
Oryx leucoryx, use of the horns of.
Osphranter rufus, sexual difference in the colour of.
Ostrich, African, sexes and incubation of the.
Ostriches, stripes of young.
Otaria jubata, mane of the male.
Otaria nigrescens, difference in the coloration of the sexes of.
Otis bengalensis, love-antics of the male.
Otis tarda, throat-pouch of the male; polygamous.
Ouzel, ring-, colours and nidification of the.
Ouzel, water-, singing in the autumn; colours and nidification of the.
Ovibos moschatus, horns of.
Ovipositor of insects.
Ovis cycloceros, mode of fighting of.
Ovule of man.
Owen, Prof.
, on the Corpora Wolffiana; on the great toe in man; on the nictitating membrane and semilunar fold; on the development of the posterior molars in different races of man; on the length of the caecum in the Koala; on the coccygeal vertebrae; on rudimentary
Owls, white, new mates found by.
Oxynotus, difference of the females of two species of.
Pachydermata.
Pachytylus migratorius.
Paget, on the abnormal development of hairs in man; on the thickness of the skin on the soles of the feet of infants.
Pagurus, carrying the female.
Painting, pleasure of savages in.
Palaemon, chelae of a species of.
Palaeornis, sexual differences of colour in.
Palaeornis javanicus, colour of beak of.
Palaeornis rosa, young of.
Palamedea cornuta, spurs on the wings.
Paleolithic period.
Palestine, habits of the chaffinch in.
Pallas, on the perfection of the senses in the Mongolians; on the want of connexion between climate and the colour of the skin; on the polygamous habits of Antilope Saiga; on the lighter colour of horses and cattle in winter in Siberia; on the tusks of the
Palmaris accessorius, muscle variations of the.
Pampas, horses of the.
Pangenesis, hypothesis of.
Panniculus carnosus.
Pansch, on the brain of a foetal Cebus apella.
Papilio, proportion of the sexes in North American species of; sexual differences of colouring in species of; coloration of the wings in species of.
Papilio ascanius.
Papilio Sesostris and Childrenae, variability of.
Papilio Turnus.
Papilionidae, variability in the.
Papuans, line of separation between the, and the Malays; beards of the; teeth of.
Papuans and Malays, contrast in characters of.
Paradise, Birds of; supposed by Lesson to be polygamous; rattling of their quills by; racket-shaped feathers in; sexual differences in colour of; decomposed feathers in; display of plumage by the male; sexual differences in colour of.
Paradisea apoda, barbless feathers in the tail of; plumage of; and P. papuana; divergence of the females of; increase of beauty with age.
Paradisea papuana, plumage of.
Paraguay, Indians of, eradication of eyebrows and eyelashes by.
Parallelism of development of species and languages.
Parasites, on man and animals; as evidence of specific identity or distinctness; immunity from, correlated with colour.
Parental feeling in earwigs, starfishes, and spiders; affection, partly a result of natural selection.
Parents, age of, influence upon sex of offspring.
Parinae, sexual difference of colour in.
Park, Mungo, negro-women teaching their children to love the truth; his treatment by the negro-women; on negro opinions of the appearance of white men.
Parker, Mr., no bird or reptile in line of mammalian descent.
Parrakeet, young of; Australian, variation in the colour of the thighs of a male.
Parrot, racket-shaped feathers in the tail of a; instance of benevolence in a.
Parrots, change of colour in; imitative faculties of; living in triplets; affection of; colours and nidification of the; immature plumage of the; colours of; sexual differences of colour in; musical powers of.
Parthenogenesis in the Tenthredinae; in Cynipidae; in Crustacea.
Partridge, monogamous; proportion of the sexes in the; Indian; female.
Partridge-"dances".
Partridges, living in triplets; spring coveys of male; distinguishing persons.
Parus coeruleus.
Passer, sexes and young of.
Passer brachydactylus.
Passer domesticus.
Passer montanus.
Patagonians, self-sacrifice by; marriages of.
Patterson, Mr., on the Agrionidae.
Patteson, Bishop, decrease of Melanesians.
Paulistas of Brazil.
Pavo cristatus.
Pavo muticus, possession of spurs by the female.
Pavo nigripennis.
Payaguas Indians, thin legs and thick arms of the.
Payan, Mr., on the proportion of the sexes in sheep.
Peacock, polygamous; sexual characters of; pugnacity of the; Javan, possessing spurs; rattling of the quills by; elongated tail-coverts of the; love of display of the; ocellated spots of the; inconvenience of long tail of the, to the female; continued
Peacock-butterfly.
Peafowl, preference of females for a particular male; first advances made by the female.
Pediculi of domestic animals and man.
Pedigree of man.
Pedionomus torquatus, sexes of.
Peel, J., on horned sheep.
Peewit, wing-tubercles of the male.
Pelagic animals, transparency of.
Pelecanus erythrorhynchus, horny crest on the beak of the male, during the breeding season.
Pelecanus onocrotalus, spring plumage of.
Pelele, an African ornament.
Pelican, blind, fed by his companions; young, guided by old birds; pugnacity of the male.
Pelicans, fishing in concert.
Pelobius Hermanni, stridulation of.
Pelvis, alteration of, to suit the erect attitude of man; differences of the, in the sexes of man.
Penelope nigra, sound produced by the male.
Pennant, on the battles of seals; on the bladder-nose seal.
Penthe, antennal cushions of the male.
Perch, brightness of male, during breeding season.
Peregrine falcon, new mate found by.
Period of variability, relation of, to sexual selection.
Periodicity, vital, Dr. Laycock on.
Periods, lunar, followed by functions in man and animals.
Periods of life, inheritance at corresponding.
Perisoreus canadensis, young of.
Peritrichia, difference of colour in the sexes of a species of.
Periwinkle.
Pernis cristata.
Perrier, M., on sexual selection; on bees.
Perseverance, a characteristic of man.
Persians, said to be improved by intermixture with Georgians and Circassians.
Personnat, M., on Bombyx Yamamai.
Peruvians, civilisation of the, not foreign.
Petrels, colours of.
Petrocincla cyanea, young of.
Petrocossyphus.
Petronia.
Pfeiffer, Ida, on Javan ideas of beauty.
Phacochoerus aethiopicus, tusks and pads of.
Phalanger, Vulpine, black varieties of the.
Phalaropus fulicarius.
Phalaropus hyperboreus.
Phanaeus.
Phanaeus carnifex, variation of the horns of the male.
Phanaeus faunus, sexual differences of.
Phanaeus lancifer.
Phaseolarctus cinereus, taste for rum and tobacco.
Phasgonura viridissima, stridulation of.
Phasianus Soemmerringii.
Phasianus versicolor.
Phasianus Wallichii.
Pheasant, polygamous; and black grouse, hybrids of; production of hybrids with the common fowl; immature plumage of the.
Pheasant, Amherst, display of.
Pheasant, Argus, display of plumage by the male; ocellated spots of the; gradation of characters in the.
Pheasant, Blood- Pheasant, Cheer.
Pheasant, Eared, length of the tail in the; sexes alike in the.
Pheasant, Fire-backed, possessing spurs.
Pheasant, Golden, display of plumage by the male; age of mature plumage in the; sex of young, ascertained by pulling out head-feathers.
Pheasant, Kalij, drumming of the male.
Pheasant, Reeve's, length of the tail in.
Pheasant, Silver, triumphant male, deposed on account of spoiled plumage; sexual coloration of the.
Pheasant, Soemmerring's.
Pheasant, Tragopan, display of plumage by the male; marking of the sexes of the.
Pheasants, period of acquisition of male characters in the family of the; proportion of sexes in chicks of; length of the tail in.
Philters, worn by women.
Phoca groenlandica, sexual difference in the coloration of.
Phoenicura ruticilla.
Phosphorescence of insects.
Phryganidae, copulation of distinct species of.
Phryniscus nigricans.
Physical inferiority, supposed, of man.
Pickering, on the number of species of man.
Picton, J.A., on the soul of man.
Picus auratus.
Picus major.
Pieris.
Pigeon, female, deserting a weakened mate; carrier, late development of the wattle in; pouter, late development of crop in; domestic, breeds and sub-breeds of.
Pigeons, nestling, fed by the secretion of the crop of both parents; changes of plumage in; transmission of sexual peculiarities in; Belgian, with black-streaked males; changing colour after several moultings; numerical proportion of the sexes in; cooing
Pigs, origin of the improved breeds of; numerical proportion of the sexes in; stripes of young; tusks of miocene; sexual preference shewn by.
Pike, American, brilliant colours of the male, during the breeding season.
Pike, reasoning powers of; male, devoured by females.
Pike, L.O., on the psychical elements of religion.
Pimelia striata, sounds produced by the female.
Pinel, hairiness in idiots.
Pintail, drake, plumage of; pairing with a wild duck.
Pintail Duck, pairing with a widgeon.
Pipe-fish, filamentous; marsupial receptacles of the male.
Pipits, moulting of the.
Pipra, modified secondary wing-feathers of male.
Pipra deliciosa.
Pirates stridulus, stridulation of.
Pitcairn island, half-breeds on.
Pithecia leucocephala, sexual differences of colour in.
Pithecia Satanas, beard of; resemblance of, to a negro.
Pits, suborbital, of Ruminants.
Pittidae, nidification of.
Placentata.
Plagiostomous fishes.
Plain-wanderer, Australian.
Planariae, bright colours of some.
Plantain-eaters, colours and nidification of the; both sexes of, equally brilliant.
Plants, cultivated, more fertile than wild; Nageli, on natural selection in; male flowers of, mature before the female; phenomena of fertilisation in.
Platalea, change of plumage in.
Platyblemus.
Platycercus, young of.
Platyphyllum concavum.
Platyrrhine monkeys.
Platysma myoides.
Plecostomus, head-tentacles of the males of a species of.
Plecostomus barbatus, peculiar beard of the male.
Plectropterus gambensis, spurred wings of.
Ploceus.
Plovers, wing-spurs of; double moult in.
Plumage, changes of, inheritance of, by fowls; tendency to analogous variation in; display of, by male birds; changes of, in relation to season; immature, of birds; colour of, in relation to protection.
Plumes on the head in birds, difference of, in the sexes.
Pneumora, structure of.
Podica, sexual difference in the colour of the irides.
Poeppig, on the contact of civilised and savage races.
Poison, avoidance of, by animals.
Poisonous fruits and herbs avoided by animals.
Poisons, immunity from, correlated with colour.
Polish fowls, origin of the crest in.
Pollen and van Dam, on the colours of Lemur macaco.
Polyandry, in certain Cyprinidae; among the Elateridae.
Polydactylism in man.
Polygamy, influence of, upon sexual selection; superinduced by domestication; supposed increase of female births by.
In the stickleback.
Polygenists.
Polynesia, prevalence of infanticide in.
Polynesians, wide geographical range of; difference of stature among the; crosses of; variability of; heterogeneity of the; aversion of, to hairs on the face.
Polyplectron, number of spurs in; display of plumage by the male; gradation of characters in; female of.
Polyplectron chinquis.
Polyplectron Hardwickii.
Polyplectron malaccense.
Polyplectron Napoleonis.
Polyzoa.
Pomotis.
Pontoporeia affinis.
Porcupine, mute, except in the rutting season.
Pores, excretory, numerical relation of, to the hairs in sheep.
Porpitae, bright colours of some.
Portax picta, dorsal crest and throat-tuft of; sexual differences of colour in.
Portunus puber, pugnacity of.
Potamochoerus pencillatus, tusks and facial knobs of the.
Pouchet, G., the relation of instinct to intelligence; on the instincts of ants; on the caves of Abou-Simbel; on the immunity of negroes from yellow fever; change of colour in fishes.
Pouter pigeon, late development of the large crop in.
Powell, Dr., on stridulation.
Power, Dr., on the different colours of the sexes in a species of Squilla.
Powys, Mr., on the habits of the chaffinch in Corfu.
Pre-eminence of man.
Preference for males by female birds; shewn by mammals, in pairing.
Prehensile organs.
Presbytis entellus, fighting of the male.
Preyer, Dr., on function of shell of ear; on supernumerary mammae in women.
Prichard, on the difference of stature among the Polynesians; on the connection between the breadth of the skull in the Mongolians and the perfection of their senses; on the capacity of British skulls of different ages; on the flattened heads of the
Primary sexual organs.
Primates, sexual differences of colour in.
Primogeniture, evils of.
Prionidae, difference of the sexes in colour.
Proctotretus multimaculatus.
Proctotretus tenuis, sexual difference in the colour of.
Profligacy.
Progenitors, early, of man.
Progress, not the normal rule in human society; elements of.
Prong-horn antelope, horns of.
Proportions, difference of, in distinct races.
Protective colouring in butterflies; in lizards; in birds; in mammals.
Protective nature of the dull colouring of female Lepidoptera.
Protective resemblances in fishes.
Protozoa, absence of secondary sexual characters in.
Pruner-Bey, on the occurrence of the supra-condyloid foramen in the humerus of man; on the colour of negro infants.
Prussia, numerical proportion of male and female births in.
Psocus, proportions of the sexes in.
Ptarmigan, monogamous; summer and winter plumage of the; nuptial assemblages of; triple moult of the; protective coloration of.
Puff-birds, colours and nidification of the.
Pugnacity of fine-plumaged male birds.
Pumas, stripes of young.
Puppies learning from cats to clean their faces.
Pycnonotus haemorrhous, pugnacity of the male; display of under-tail coverts by the male.
Pyranga aestiva, male aiding in incubation; male characters in female of.
Pyrodes, difference of the sexes in colour.
Quadrumana, hands of; differences between man and the; sexual differences of colour in; ornamental characters of; analogy of sexual differences of, with those of man; fighting of males for the females; monogamous habits of; beards of the.
Quain, R., on the variation of the muscles in man.
Quatrefages, A. de, on the occurrence of a rudimentary tail in man; on variability; on the moral sense as a distinction between man and animals; civilised men stronger than savages; on the fertility of Australian women with white men; on the Paulistas of
Quechua, see Quichua.
Querquedula acuta.
Quetelet, proportion of sexes in man; relative size in man and woman.
Quichua Indians; local variation of colour in the; no grey hair among the; hairlessness of the; long hair of the.
Quiscalus major, proportions of the sexes of, in Florida and Honduras.
Rabbit, white tail of the.
Rabbits, domestic, elongation of the skull in; modification of the skull in, by the lopping of the ear; danger-signals of; numerical proportion of the sexes in.
Races, distinctive characters of; or species of man; crossed, fertility or sterility of; of man, variability of the; of man, resemblance of, in mental characters; formation of; of man, extinction of; effects of the crossing of; of man, formation of the; of
Raffles, Sir S., on the banteng.
Rafts, use of.
Rage, manifested by animals.
Raia batis, teeth of.
Raia clavata, female spined on the back; sexual difference in the teeth of.
Raia maculata, teeth of.
Rails, spur-winged.
Ram, mode of fighting of the; African, mane of an; fat-tailed.
Rameses II.
, features of.
Ramsay, Mr., on the Australian musk-duck; on the regent-bird; on the incubation of Menura superba.
Rana esculenta, vocal sacs of.
Rat, common, general dispersion of, a consequence of superior cunning; supplantation of the native in New Zealand, by the European rat; common, said to be polygamous; numerical proportion of the sexes in.
Rats, enticed by essential oils.
Rationality of birds.
Rattlesnakes, difference of the sexes in the; rattles as a call.
Raven, vocal organs of the; stealing bright objects; pied, of the Feroe Islands.
Rays, prehensile organs of male.
Razor-bill, young of the.
Reade, Winwood, suicide among savages in Africa; mulattoes not prolific; effect of castration of horned sheep; on the Guinea sheep; on the occurrence of a mane in an African ram; on singing of negroes; on the negroes' appreciation of the beauty of their
Reason in animals.
Redstart, American, breeding in immature plumage.
Redstarts, new mates found by.
Reduvidae, stridulation of.
Reed-bunting, head-feathers of the male; attacked by a bullfinch.
Reefs, fishes frequenting.
Reeks, H., retention of horns by breeding deer; cow rejected by a bull; destruction of piebald rabbits by cats.
Regeneration, partial, of lost parts in man.
Regent bird.
Reindeer, horns of the; battles of; horns of the female; antlers of, with numerous points; winter change of the; sexual preferences shown by.
Relationship, terms of.
Religion, deficiency of among certain races; psychical elements of.
Remorse, deficiency of, among savages.
Rengger, on the diseases of Cebus Azarae; on the diversity of the mental faculties of monkeys; on the Payaguas Indians; on the inferiority of Europeans to savages in their senses; revenge taken by monkeys; on maternal affection in a Cebus; on the reasoning
Representative species, of birds.
Reproduction, unity of phenomena of, throughout the mammalia; period of, in birds.
Reproductive system, rudimentary structures in the; accessory parts of.
Reptiles.
Reptiles and birds, alliance of.
Resemblances, small, between man and the apes.
Retrievers, exercise of reasoning faculties by.
Revenge, manifested by animals.
Reversion, perhaps the cause of some bad dispositions.
Rhagium, difference of colour in the sexes of a species of.
Rhamphastos carinatus.
Rhea Darwinii.
Rhinoceros, nakedness of; horns of; horns of, used defensively; attacking white or grey horses.
Rhynchaea, sexes and young of.
Rhynchaea australis.
Rhynchaea bengalensis.
Rhynchaea capensis.
Rhythm, perception of, by animals.
Richard, M., on rudimentary muscles in man.
Richardson, Sir J., on the pairing of Tetrao umbellus; on Tetrao urophasianus; on the drumming of grouse; on the dances of Tetrao phasianellus; on assemblages of grouse; on the battles of male deer; on the reindeer; on the horns of the musk-ox; on antlers
Richter, Jean Paul, on imagination.
Riedel, on profligate female pigeons.
Riley, Mr., on mimicry in butterflies; bird's disgust at taste of certain caterpillars.
Ring-ouzel, colours and nidification of the.
Ripa, Father, on the difficulty of distinguishing the races of the Chinese.
Rivalry, in singing, between male birds.
River-hog, African, tusks and knobs of the.
Rivers, analogy of, to islands.
Roach, brightness of the male during breeding-season.
Robbery, of strangers, considered honourable.
Robertson, Mr., remarks on the development of the horns in the roebuck and red deer.
Robin, pugnacity of the male; autumn song of the; female singing of the; attacking other birds with red in their plumage; young of the.
Robinet, on the difference of size of the male and female cocoons of the silk-moth.
Rodents, uterus in the; absence of secondary sexual characters in; sexual differences in the colours of.
Roe, winter changes of the.
Rohfs, Dr., Caucasian features in negro; fertility of mixed races in Sahara; colours of birds in Sahara; ideas of beauty amongst the Bornuans.
Rolle, F., on the origin of man; on a change in German families settled in Georgia.
Roller, harsh cry of.
Romans, ancient, gladiatorial exhibitions of the.
Rook, voice of the.
Rossler, Dr., on the resemblance of the lower surface of butterflies to the bark of trees.
Rostrum, sexual difference in the length of in some weevils.
Royer, Madlle.
, mammals giving suck.
Rudimentary organs, origin of.
Rudiments, presence of, in languages.
Rudolphi, on the want of connexion between climate and the colour of the skin.
Ruff, supposed to be polygamous; proportion of the sexes in the; pugnacity of the; double moult in; duration of dances of; attraction of the, to bright objects.
Ruminants, male, disappearance of canine teeth in; generally polygamous; suborbital pits of; sexual differences of colour in.
Rupicola crocea, display of plumage by the male.
Ruppell, on canine teeth in deer and antelopes.
Russia, numerical proportion of male and female births in.
Ruticilla.
Rutimeyer, Prof.
, on the physiognomy of the apes; on tusks of miocene boar; on the sexual differences of monkeys.
Rutlandshire, numerical proportion of male and female births in.
Sachs, Prof.
, on the behaviour of the male and female elements in fertilisation.
Sacrifices, human.
Sagittal crest, in male apes and Australians.
Sahara, fertility of mixed races in; birds of the; animal inhabitants of the.
Sailors, growth of, delayed by conditions of life; long-sighted.
Sailors and soldiers, difference in the proportions of.
St. John, Mr., on the attachment of mated birds.
St. Kilda, beards of the inhabitants of.
Salmo eriox, and Salmo umbla, colouring of the male, during the breeding season.
Salmo lycaodon.
Salmo salar.
Salmon, leaping out of fresh water; male, ready to breed before the female; proportion of the sexes in; male, pugnacity of the; male, characters of, during the breeding season; spawning of the; breeding of immature male.
Salvin, O., inheritance of mutilated feathers; on the Humming-birds; on the numerical proportion of the sexes in Humming-birds; on Chamaepetes and Penelope; on Selasphorus platycercus; Pipra deliciosa; on Chasmorhynchus.
Samoa Islands, beardlessness of the natives of.
Sandhoppers, claspers of male.
Sand-skipper.
Sandwich Islands, variation in the skulls of the natives of the; decrease of native population; population of; superiority of the nobles in the.
Sandwich Islanders, lice of.
San-Giuliano, women of.
Santali, recent rapid increase of the; Mr. Hunter on the.
Saphirina, characters of the males of.
Sarkidiornis melanonotus, characters of the young.
Sars, O., on Pontoporeia affinis.
Saturnia carpini, attraction of males by the female.
Saturnia Io, difference of coloration in the sexes of.
Saturniidae, coloration of the.
Savage, Dr., on the fighting of the male gorillas; on the habits of the gorilla.
Savage and Wyman on the polygamous habits of the gorilla.
Savages, uniformity of, exaggerated; long-sighted; rate of increase among, usually small; retention of the prehensile power of the feet by; imitative faculties of; causes of low morality of; tribes of, supplanting one another; improvements in the arts
Saviotti, Dr., division of malar bone.
Saw-fly, pugnacity of a male.
Saw-flies, proportions of the sexes in.
Saxicola rubicola, young of.
Scalp, motion of the.
Scent-glands in snakes.
Schaaffhausen, Prof.
, on the development of the posterior molars in different races of man; on the jaw from La Naulette; on the correlation between muscularity and prominent supra-orbital ridges; on the mastoid processes of man; on modifications of the cranial bones; on human
Schaum, H., on the elytra of Dytiscus and Hydroporus.
Scherzer and Schwarz, measurements of savages.
Schelver, on dragon-flies.
Schiodte, on the stridulation of Heterocerus.
Schlegel, F. von, on the complexity of the languages of uncivilised peoples.
Schlegel, Prof.
, on Tanysiptera.
Schleicher, Prof, on the origin of language.
Schomburgk, Sir R., on the pugnacity of the male musk-duck of Guiana; on the courtship of Rupicola crocea.
Schoolcraft, Mr., on the difficulty of fashioning stone implements.
Schopenhauer, on importance of courtship to mankind.
Schweinfurth, complexion of negroes.
Sciaena aquila.
Sclater, P.L., on modified secondary wing-feathers in the males of Pipra; on elongated feathers in nightjars; on the species of Chasmorhynchus; on the plumage of Pelecanus onocrotalus; on the plantain-eaters; on the sexes and young of Tadorna variegata; on
Scolecida, absence of secondary sexual characters in.
Scolopax frenata, tail feathers of; Scolopax gallinago, drumming of.
Scolopax javensis, tail-feathers of.
Scolopax major, assemblies of.
Scolopax Wilsonii, sound produced by.
Scolytus, stridulation of.
Scoter-duck, black, sexual difference in coloration of the; bright beak of male.
Scott, Dr., on idiots smelling their food.
Scott, J., on the colour of the beard in man.
Scrope, on the pugnacity of the male salmon; on the battles of stags.
Scudder, S.H., imitation of the stridulation of the Orthoptera; on the stridulation of the Acridiidae; on a Devonian insect; on stridulation.
Sculpture, expression of the ideal of beauty by.
Sea-anemones, bright colours of.
Sea-bear, polygamous.
Sea-elephant, male, structure of the nose of the; polygamous.
Sea-lion, polygamous.
Seal, bladder-nose.
Seals, their sentinels generally females; evidence furnished by, on classification; polygamous habits of; battles of male; canine teeth of male; sexual differences; pairing of; sexual peculiarities of; in the coloration of; appreciation of music by.
Sea-scorpion, sexual differences in.
Season, changes of colour in birds, in accordance with the; changes of plumage of birds in relation to.
Seasons, inheritance at corresponding.
Sebituani, African chief, trying to alter a fashion.
Sebright Bantam.
Secondary sexual characters; relations of polygamy to; transmitted through both sexes; gradation of, in birds.
Sedgwick, W., on hereditary tendency to produce twins.
Seemann, Dr., on the different appreciation of music by different peoples; on the effects of music.
Seidlitz, on horns of reindeer.
Selasphorus platycercus, acuminate first primary of the male.
Selby, P.J., on the habits of the black and red grouse.
Selection as applied to primeval man.
Selection, double.
Selection, injurious forms of, in civilised nations.
Selection of male by female birds.
Selection, methodical, of Prussian grenadiers.
Selection, sexual, explanation of; influence of, on the colouring of Lepidoptera.
Selection, sexual and natural, contrasted.
Self-command, habit of, inherited; estimation of.
Self-consciousness, in animals.
Self-preservation, instinct of.
Self-sacrifice, by savages; estimation of.
Semilunar fold.
Semnopithecus, long hair on the heads of species of.
Semnopithecus chrysomelas, sexual differences of colour in.
Semnopithecus comatus, ornamental hair on the head of.
Semnopithecus frontatus, beard etc.
, of.
Semnopithecus nasica, nose of.
Semnopithecus nemaeus, colouring of.
Semnopithecus rubicundus, ornamental hair on the head of.
Senses, inferiority of Europeans to savages in the.
Sentinels, among animals.
Serpents, instinctively dreaded by apes and monkeys.
Serranus, hermaphroditism in.
Setina, noise produced by.
Sex, inheritance limited by.
Sexes, relative proportions of, in man; proportions of, sometimes influenced by selection; probable relation of the, in primeval man.
Sexual and natural selection, contrasted.
Sexual characters, effects of the loss of; limitation of.
Sexual characters, secondary; relations of polygamy to; transmitted through both sexes; gradation of, in birds.
Sexual differences in man.
Sexual selection, explanation of; influence of, on the colouring of Lepidoptera; objections to; action of, in mankind.
Sexual selection in spiders.
Sexual selection, supplemental note on.
Sexual similarity.
Shaler, Prof.
, sizes of sexes in whales.
Shame.
Sharks, prehensile organs of male.
Sharpe, Dr., Europeans in the tropics.
Sharpe, R.B., on Tanysiptera sylvia; on Ceryle; on the young male of Dacelo Gaudi-chaudi.
Shaw, Mr., on the pugnacity of the male salmon.
Shaw, J., on the decorations of birds.
Sheep, danger-signals of; sexual differences in the horns of; horns of; domestic, sexual differences of, late developed; numerical proportion of the sexes in; inheritance of horns by one sex; effect of castration; mode of fighting of; arched foreheads of
Sheep, Merino, loss of horns in females of; horns of.
Shells, difference in form of, in male and female Gasteropoda; beautiful colours and shapes of.
Shield-drake, pairing with a common duck; New Zealand, sexes and young of.
Shooter, J., on the Kaffirs; on the marriage-customs of the Kaffirs.
Shrew-mice, odour of.
Shrike, Drongo.
Shrikes, characters of young.
Shuckard, W.E., on sexual differences in the wings of Hymenoptera.
Shyness of adorned male birds; Siagonium, proportions of the sexes in; dimorphism in males of.
Siam, proportion of male and female births in.
Siamese, general beardlessness of the; notions of beauty of the; hairy family of.
Sidgwick, H., on morality in hypothetical bee community; our actions not entirely directed by pain and pleasure.
Siebold, C.T., von, on the proportion of sexes in the Apus; on the auditory apparatus of the stridulent Orthoptera.
Sight, inheritance of long and short.
Signal-cries of monkeys.
Silk-moth, proportion of the sexes in; Ailanthus, Prof.
Canestrini, on the destruction of its larvae by wasps; difference of size of the male and female cocoons of the; pairing of the.
Simiadae, their origin and divisions.
Similarity, sexual.
Singing of the Cicadae and Fulgoridae; of tree-frogs; of birds, object of the.
Sirenia, nakedness of.
Sirex juvencus.
Siricidae, difference of the sexes in.
Siskin, pairing with a canary.
Sitana, throat-pouch of the males of.
Size, relative, of the sexes of insects.
Skin, dark colour of, a protection against heat.
Skin, movement of the; nakedness of, in man; colour of the.
Skin and hair, correlation of colour of.
Skull, variation of, in man; cubic contents of, no absolute test of intellect; Neanderthal, capacity of the; causes of modification of the; difference of, in form and capacity, in different races of men; variability of the shape of the; differences of, in
Skunk, odour emitted by the; white tail of, protective.
Slavery, prevalence of; of women.
Slaves, difference between field- and house-slaves.
Sloth, ornaments of male.
Smell, sense of, in man and animals.
Smith, Adam, on the basis of sympathy.
Smith, Sir A., on the recognition of women by male Cynocephali; on revenge by a baboon; on an instance of memory in a baboon; on the retention of their colour by the Dutch in South Africa; on the polygamy of the South African antelopes; on the polygamy of
Smith, F., on the Cynipidae and Tenthredinidae; on the relative size of the sexes of Aculeate Hymenoptera; on the difference between the sexes of ants and bees; on the stridulation of Trox sabulosus; on the stridulation of Mononychus pseudacori.
Smynthurus luteus, courtship of.
Snakes, sexual differences of; mental powers of; male, ardency of.
"Snarling muscles".
Snipe, drumming of the; coloration of the.
Snipe, painted, sexes and young of.
Snipe, solitary, assemblies of.
Snipes, arrival of male before the female; pugnacity of male; double moult in.
Snow-goose, whiteness of the.
Sociability, the sense of duty connected with; impulse to, in animals; manifestations of, in man; instinct of, in animals.
Social animals, affection of, for each other; defence of, by the males.
Sociality, probable, of primeval men; influence of, on the development of the intellectual faculties; origin of, in man.
Soldiers, American, measurements of.
Soldiers and sailors, difference in the proportions of.
Solenostoma, bright colours and marsupial sac of the females of.
Song, of male birds appreciated by their females; want of, in brilliant plumaged birds; of birds.
Sorex, odour of.
Sounds, admired alike by man and animals; produced by fishes; produced by male frogs and toads; instrumentally produced by birds.
Spain, decadence of.
Sparassus smaragdulus, difference of colour in the sexes of.
Sparrow, pugnacity of the male; acquisition of the Linnet's song by a; coloration of the; immature plumage of the.
Sparrow, white-crowned, young of the.
Sparrows, house- and tree-.
Sparrows, new mates found by.
Sparrows, sexes and young of; learning to sing.
Spathura Underwoodi.
Spawning of fishes.
Spear, used before dispersion of man.
Species, causes of the advancement of; distinctive characters of; or races of man; sterility and fertility of, when crossed; supposed, of man; gradation of; difficulty of defining; representative, of birds; of birds, comparative differences between the
Spectrum femoratum, difference of colour in the sexes of.
Speech, connection between the brain and the faculty of; connection of intonation with music.
Spel, of the black-cock.
Spencer, Herbert, on the influence of food on the size of the jaws; on the dawn of intelligence; on the origin of the belief in spiritual agencies; on the origin of the moral sense; on music.
Spengel, disagrees with explanation of man's hairlessness.
Sperm-whales, battles of male.
Sphingidae, coloration of the.
Sphinx, Humming-bird.
Sphinx, Mr. Bates on the caterpillar of a.
Sphinx moth, musky odour of.
Spiders, parental feeling in; male, more active than female; proportion of the sexes in; secondary sexual characters of; courtship of male; attracted by music; male, small size of.
Spilosoma menthastri, rejected by turkeys.
Spine, alteration of, to suit the erect attitude of man.
Spirits, fondness of monkeys for.
Spiritual agencies, belief in, almost universal.
Spiza cyanea and ciris.
Spoonbill, Chinese, change of plumage in.
Spots, retained throughout groups of birds; disappearance of, in adult mammals.
Sprengel, C.K., on the sexuality of plants.
Springboc, horns of the.
Sproat, Mr., on the extinction of savages in Vancouver Island; on the eradication of facial hair by the natives of Vancouver Island; on the eradication of the beard by the Indians of Vancouver Island.
Spurs, occurrence of, in female fowls; development of, in various species of Phasianidae; of Gallinaceous birds; development of, in female Gallinaceae.
Squilla, different colours of the sexes of a species of.
Squirrels, battles of male; African, sexual differences in the colouring of; black.
Stag, long hairs of the throat of; horns of the; battles of; horns of the, with numerous branches; bellowing of the; crest of the.
Stag-beetle, numerical proportion of sexes of; use of jaws; large size of male; weapons of the male.
Stainton, H.T., on the numerical proportion of the sexes in the smaller moths; habits of Elachista rufocinerea; on the coloration of moths; on the rejection of Spilosoma menthastri by turkeys; on the sexes of Agrotis exclamationis.
Staley, Bishop, mortality of infant Maories.
Stallion, mane of the.
Stallions, two, attacking a third; fighting; small canine teeth of.
Stansbury, Captain, observations on pelicans.
Staphylinidae, hornlike processes in male.
Starfishes, parental feeling in; bright colours of some.
Stark, Dr., on the death-rate in towns and rural districts; on the influence of marriage on mortality; on the higher mortality of males in Scotland.
Starling, American field-, pugnacity of male.
Starling, red-winged, selection of a mate by the female.
Starlings, three, frequenting the same nest; new mates found by.
Statues, Greek, Egyptian, Assyrian, etc.
, contrasted.
Stature, dependence of, upon local influences.
Staudinger, Dr., on breeding Lepidoptera; his list of Lepidoptera.
Staunton, Sir G., hatred of indecency a modern virtue.
Stealing of bright objects by birds.
Stebbing, T.R., on the nakedness of the human body.
Stemmatopus.
Stendhal, see Bombet.
Stenobothrus pratorum, stridulation.
Stephen, Mr. L., on the difference in the minds of men and animals; on general concepts in animals; distinction between material and formal morality.
Sterility, general, of sole daughters; when crossed, a distinctive character of species; under changed conditions.
Sterna, seasonal change of plumage in.
Stickleback, polygamous; male, courtship of the; male, brilliant colouring of, during the breeding season; nidification of the.
Sticks used as implements and weapons by monkeys.
Sting in bees.
Stokes, Captain, on the habits of the great bower-bird.
Stoliczka, Dr., on colours in snakes.
Stoliczka, on the pre-anal pores of lizards.
Stonechat, young of the.
Stone implements, difficulty of making; as traces of extinct tribes.
Stones, used by monkeys for breaking hard fruits and as missiles; piles of.
Stork, black, sexual differences in the bronchi of the; red beak of the.
Storks, sexual difference in the colour of the eyes of.
Strange, Mr., on the satin bowerbird.
Strepsiceros kudu, horns of; markings of.
Stretch, Mr., on the numerical proportion in the sexes of chickens.
Stridulation, by males of Theridion; of Hemiptera; of the Orthoptera and Homoptera discussed; of beetles.
Stripes, retained throughout groups of birds; disappearance of, in adult mammals.
Strix flammea.
Structure, existence of unserviceable modifications of.
Struggle for existence, in man.
Struthers, Dr., on the occurrence of the supra-condyloid foramen in the humerus of man.
Sturnella ludoviciana, pugnacity of the male.
Sturnus vulgaris.
Sub-species.
Suffering, in strangers, indifference of savages to.
Suicide, formerly not regarded as a crime; rarely practised among the lowest savages.
Suidae, stripes of the young.
Sulivan, Sir B.J., on speaking of parrots; on two stallions attacking a third.
Sumatra, compression of the nose by the Malays of.
Sumner, Archb.
, man alone capable of progressive improvement.
Sun-birds, nidification of.
Superciliary ridge in man.
Supernumerary digits, more frequent in men than in women; inheritance of; early development of.
Superstitions, prevalence of.
Superstitious customs.
Supra-condyloid foramen in the early progenitors of man.
Suspicion, prevalence of, among animals.
Swallow-tail butterfly.
Swallows deserting their young.
Swan, black, wild, trachea of the; white, young of; red beak of the; black-necked.
Swans, young.
Swaysland, Mr., on the arrival of migratory birds.
Swifts, migration of.
Swinhoe, R., on the common rat in Formosa and China; behaviour of lizards when caught; on the sounds produced by the male hoopoe; on Dicrurus macrocercus and the spoonbill; on the young of Ardeola; on the habits of Turnix; on the habits of Rhynchaea
Sylvia atricapilla, young of.
Sylvia cinerea, aerial love-dance of the male.
Sympathy, among animals; its supposed basis.
Sympathies, gradual widening of.
Syngnathous fishes, abdominal pouch in male.
Sypheotides auritus, acuminated primaries of the male; ear-tufts of.
Tabanidae, habits of.
Tadorna variegata, sexes and young of.
Tadorna vulpanser.
Tahitians, compression of the nose by the.
Tail, rudimentary, occurrence of, in man; convoluted body in the extremity of the; absence of, in man and the higher apes; variability of, in species of Macacus and in baboons; presence of, in the early progenitors of man; length of, in pheasants;
Tait, Lawson, on the effects of natural selection on civilised nations.
Tanager, scarlet, variation in the male.
Tanagra aestiva, age of mature plumage in.
Tanagra rubra, young of.
Tanais, absence of mouth in the males of some species of; relations of the sexes in; dimorphic males of a species of.
Tankerville, Earl, on the battles of wild bulls.
Tanysiptera, races of, determined from adult males.
Tanysiptera sylvia, long tail-feathers of.
Taphroderes distortus, enlarged left mandible of the male.
Tapirs, longitudinal stripes of young.
Tarsi, dilatation of front, in male beetles.
Tarsius.
Tasmania, half-castes killed by the natives of.
Tasmanians, extinction of.
Taste, in the Quadrumana.
Tattooing, universality of.
Taylor, G., on Quiscalus major.
Taylor, Rev.
R., on tattooing in New Zealand.
Tea, fondness of monkeys for.
Teal, constancy of.
Tear-sacs, of Ruminants.
Teebay, Mr., on changes of plumage in spangled Hamburg fowls.
Teeth, rudimentary incisor, in Ruminants; posterior molar, in man; wisdom; diversity of; canine, in the early progenitors of man; canine, of male mammals; in man, reduced by correlation; staining of the; front, knocked out or filed by some savages.
Tegetmeier, Mr., on the transmission of colours in pigeons by one sex alone; numerical proportion of male and female births in dogs; on the abundance of male pigeons; on the wattles of game-cocks; on the courtship of fowls; on the loves of pigeons; on dyed
Tembeta, S. American ornament.
Temper, in dogs and horses, inherited.
Tench, proportions of the sexes in the; brightness of male, during breeding season.
Tenebrionidae, stridulation of.
Tennent, Sir J.E., on the tusks of the Ceylon Elephant; on the frequent absence of beard in the natives of Ceylon; on the Chinese opinion of the aspect of the Cingalese.
Tennyson, A., on the control of thought.
Tenthredinidae, proportions of the sexes in; fighting habits of male; difference of the sexes in.
Tephrodornis, young of.
Terai, in India.
Termites, habits of.
Terns, white; and black.
Terns, seasonal change of plumage in.
Terror, common action of, upon the lower animals and man.
Testudo elegans.
Testudo nigra.
Tetrao cupido, battles of; sexual difference in the vocal organs of.
Tetrao phasianellus, dances of; duration of dances of.
Tetrao scoticus.
Tetrao tetrix, pugnacity of the male.
Tetrao umbellus, pairing of; battles of; drumming of the male.
Tetrao urogalloides, dances of.
Tetrao urogallus, pugnacity of the male.
Tetrao urophasianus, inflation of the oesophagus in the male.
Thamnobia, young of.
Thecla, sexual differences of colouring in species of.
Thecla rubi, protective colouring of.
Thecophora fovea.
Theognis, selection in mankind.
Theridion, stridulation of males of.
Theridion lineatum.
Thomisus citreus, and Thomisus floricolens, difference of colour in the sexes of.
Thompson, J.H., on the battles of sperm-whales.
Thompson, W., on the colouring of the male char during the breeding season; on the pugnacity of the males of Gallinula chloropus; on the finding of new mates by magpies; on the finding of new mates by Peregrine falcons.
Thorax, processes of, in male beetles.
Thorell, T., on the proportion of sexes in spiders.
Thornback, difference in the teeth of the two sexes of the.
Thoughts, control of.
Thrush, pairing with a blackbird; colours and nidification of the.
Thrushes, characters of young.
Thug, remorse of a.
Thumb, absence of, in Ateles and Hylobates.
Thury, M., on the numerical proportion of male and female births among the Jews.
Thylacinus, possession of the marsupial sac by the male.
Thysanura.
Tibia, dilated, of the male Crabro cribrarius.
Tibia and femur, proportions of, in the Aymara Indians.
Tierra del Fuego, marriage-customs of.
Tiger, colours and markings of the.
Tigers, depopulation of districts by, in India.
Tillus elongatus, difference of colour in the sexes of.
Timidity, variability of, in the same species.
Tinca vulgaris.
Tipula, pugnacity of male.
Tits, sexual difference of colour in.
Toads, male, treatment of ova by some; male, ready to breed before the female.
Todas, infanticide and proportion of sexes; practice polyandry; choice of husbands amongst.
Toe, great, condition of, in the human embryo.
Tomicus villosus, proportion of the sexes in.
Tomtit, blue, sexual difference of colour in the.
Tonga Islands, beardlessness of the natives of.
Tooke, Horne, on language.
Tools, flint; used by monkeys; use of.
Topknots in birds.
Tortoise, voice of the male.
Tortures, submitted to by American savages.
Totanus, double moult in.
Toucans, colours and nidification of the; beaks and ceres of the.
Towns, residence in, a cause of diminished stature.
Toynbee, J., on the external shell of the ear in man.
Trachea, convoluted and imbedded in the sternum, in some birds; structure of the, in Rhynchaea.
Trades, affecting the form of the skull.
Tragelaphus, sexual differences of colour in.
Tragelaphus scriptus, dorsal crest of; markings of.
Tragopan, swelling of the wattles of the male, during courtship; display of plumage by the male; marking of the sexes of the.
Tragops dispar, sexual difference in the colour of.
Training, effect of, on the mental difference between the sexes of man.
Transfer of male characters to female birds.
Transmission, equal, of ornamental characters, to both sexes in mammals.
Traps, avoidance of, by animals; use of.
Treachery, to comrades, avoidance of, by savages.
Tremex columbae.
Tribes, extinct; extinction of.
Trichius, difference of colour in the sexes of a species of.
Trigla.
Trigonocephalus, noise made by tail of.
Trimen, R., on the proportion of the sexes in South African butterflies; on the attraction of males by the female Lasiocampa quercus; on Pneumora; on difference of colour in the sexes of beetles; on moths brilliantly coloured beneath; on mimicry in
Tringa, sexes and young of.
Tringa cornuta.
Triphaena, coloration of the species of.
Tristram, H.B., on unhealthy districts in North Africa; on the habits of the chaffinch in Palestine; on the birds of the Sahara; on the animals inhabiting the Sahara.
Triton cristatus.
Triton palmipes.
Triton punctatus.
Troglodyte skulls, greater than those of modern Frenchmen.
Troglodytes vulgaris.
Trogons, colours and nidification of the.
Tropic-birds, white only when mature.
Tropics, freshwater fishes of the.
Trout, proportion of the sexes in; male, pugnacity of the.
Trox sabulosus, stridulation of.
Truth, not rare between members of the same tribe; more highly appreciated by certain tribes.
Tulloch, Major, on the immunity of the negro from certain fevers.
Tumbler, almond, change of plumage in the.
Turdus merula, young of.
Turdus migratorius.
Turdus musicus.
Turdus polyglottus, young of.
Turdus torquatus.
Turkey, wild, pugnacity of young male; wild, notes of the; swelling of the wattles of the male; variety of, with a top-knot; recognition of a dog by a; male, wild, acceptable to domesticated females; wild, first advances made by older females; wild,
Turkey-cock, scraping of the wings of, upon the ground; wild, display of plumage by; fighting habits of.
Turner, Prof.
W., on muscular fasciculi in man referable to the panniculus carnosus; on the occurrence of the supra-condyloid foramen in the human humerus; on muscles attached to the coccyx in man; on the filum terminale in man; on the variability of the muscles; on
Turnix, sexes of some species of.
Turtle-dove, cooing of the.
Tuttle, H., on the number of species of man.
Tylor, E.B., on emotional cries, gestures, etc.
, of man; on the origin of the belief in spiritual agencies; remorse for violation of tribal usage in marrying; on the primitive barbarism of civilised nations; on the origin of counting; inventions of savages; on resemblances, of the mental characters in
Type of structure, prevalence of.
Typhaeus, stridulating organs of; stridulation of.
Twins, tendency to produce, hereditary.
Twite, proportion of the sexes in.
Ugliness, said to consist in an approach to the lower animals.
Umbrella-bird.
Umbrina, sounds produced by.
United States, rate of increase in; influence of natural selection on the progress of; change undergone by Europeans in the.
Upupa epops, sounds produced by the male.
Uraniidae, coloration of the.
Uria troile, variety of (=U.
lacrymans).
Urodela.
Urosticte Benjamini, sexual differences in.
Use and disuse of parts, effects of; influence of, on the races of man.
Uterus, reversion in the; more or less divided, in the human subject; double, in the early progenitors of man.
Vaccination, influence of.
Vancouver Island, Mr. Sproat on the savages of; natives of, eradication of facial hair by the.
Vanellus cristatus, wing tubercles of the male.
Vanessae, resemblance of lower surface of, to bark of trees.
Variability, causes of; in man, analogous to that in the lower animals; of the races of man; greater in men than in women; period of, relation of the, to sexual selection; of birds; of secondary sexual characters in man.
Variation, laws of; correlated; in man; analogous; analogous, in plumage of birds.
Variations, spontaneous.
Varieties, absence of, between two species, evidence of their distinctness.
Variety, an object in nature.
Variola, communicable between man and the lower animals.
Vaureal, human bones from.
Veddahs, monogamous habits of.
Veitch, Mr., on the aversion of Japanese ladies to whiskers.
Vengeance, instinct of.
Venus Erycina, priestesses of.
Vermes.
Vermiform appendage.
Verreaux, M., on the attraction of numerous males by the female of an Australian Bombyx.
Vertebrae, caudal, number of in macaques and baboons; of monkeys, partly imbedded in the body.
Vertebrata, common origin of the; most ancient progenitors of; origin of the voice in air-breathing.
Vesicula prostatica, the homologue of the uterus.
Vibrissae, represented by long hairs in the eyebrows.
Vidua.
Vidua axillaris.
Villerme, M., on the influence of plenty upon stature.
Vinson, Aug.
, courtship of male spider; on the male of Epeira nigra.
Viper, difference of the sexes in the.
Virey, on the number of species of man.
Virtues, originally social only; gradual appreciation of.
Viscera, variability of, in man.
Vlacovich, Prof.
, on the ischio-pubic muscle.
Vocal music of birds.
Vocal organs of man; of birds; of frogs; of the Insessores; difference of, in the sexes of birds; primarily used in relation to the propagation of the species.
Vogt, Karl, on the origin of species; on the origin of man; on the semilunar fold in man; on microcephalous idiots; on the imitative faculties of microcephalous idiots; on skulls from Brazilian caves; on the evolution of the races of man; on the formation
Voice in mammals; in monkeys and man; in man; origin of, in air-breathing vertebrates.
Von Baer, see Baer.
Vulpian, Prof.
, on the resemblance between the brains of man and the higher apes.
Vultures, selection of a mate by the female; colours of.
Waders, young of.
Wagner, R., on the occurrence of the diastema in a Kaffir skull; on the bronchi of the black stork.
Wagtail, Ray's, arrival of the male before the female.
Wagtails, Indian, young of.
Waist, proportions of, in soldiers and sailors.
Waitz, Prof.
, on the number of species of man; on the liability of negroes to tropical fevers after residence in a cold climate; on the colour of Australian infants; on the beardlessness of negroes; on the fondness of mankind for ornaments; on negro ideas of female
Waldeyer, M., on the hermaphroditism of the vertebrate embryo.
Wales, North, numerical proportion of male and female births in.
Walkenaer and Gervais, spider attracted by music; on the Myriapoda.
Walker, Alex.
, on the large size of the hands of labourers' children.
Walker, F., on sexual differences in the diptera.
Wallace, Dr. A., on the prehensile use of the tarsi in male moths; on the rearing of the Ailanthus silkmoth; on breeding Lepidoptera; proportion of sexes of Bombyx cynthia, B. yamamai, and B. Pernyi reared by; on the development of Bombyx cynthia and B.
Wallace, A.R., on the origin of man; on the power of imitation in man; on the use of missiles by the orang; on the varying appreciation of truth among different tribes; on the limits of natural selection in man; on the occurrence of remorse among savages;
Walrus, development of the nictitating membrane in the; tusks of the; use of the tusks by the.
Walsh, B.D., on the proportion of the sexes in Papilio Turnus; on the Cynipidae and Cecidomyidae; on the jaws of Ammophila; on Corydalis cornutus; on the prehensile organs of male insects; on the antennae of Penthe; on the caudal appendages of dragonflies;
Wapiti, battles of; traces of horns in the female; attacking a man; crest of the male; sexual difference in the colour of the.
Warbler, hedge-; young of the.
Warblers, superb, nidification of.
Wariness, acquired by animals.
Warington, R., on the habits of the stickleback; on the brilliant colours of the male stickleback during the breeding season.
Wart-hog, tusks and pads of the.
Watchmakers, short-sighted.
Waterhen.
Waterhouse, C.O., on blind beetles; on difference of colour in the sexes of beetles.
Waterhouse, G.R., on the voice of Hylobates agilis.
Water-ouzel, autumn song of the.
Waterton, C., on the Bell-bird; on the pairing of a Canada goose with a Bernicle gander; on hares fighting.
Wattles, disadvantageous to male birds in fighting.
Weale, J., Mansel, on a South African caterpillar.
Wealth, influence of.
Weapons, used by man; employed by monkeys; offensive, of males; of mammals.
Weaver-bird.
Weaver-birds, rattling of the wings of; assemblies of.
Webb, Dr., on the wisdom teeth.
Wedderburn, Mr., assembly of black game.
Wedgwood, Hensleigh, on the origin of language.
Weevils, sexual difference in length of snout in some.
Weir, Harrison, on the numerical proportion of the sexes in pigs and rabbits; on the sexes of young pigeons; on the songs of birds; on pigeons; on the dislike of blue pigeons to other coloured varieties; on the desertion of their mates by female pigeons.
Weir, J. Jenner, on the nightingale and blackcap; on the relative sexual maturity of male birds; on female pigeons deserting a feeble mate; on three starlings frequenting the same nest; on the proportion of the sexes in Machetes pugnax and other birds; on
Weisbach, Dr., measurement of men of different races; on the greater variability of men than of women; on the relative proportions of the body in the sexes of different races of man.
Weismann, Prof.
, colours of Lycaenae.
Welcker, M., on brachycephaly and dolichocephaly; on sexual differences in the skull in man.
Wells, Dr., on the immunity of coloured races from certain poisons.
Westring, on the stridulation of males of Theridion; on the stridulation of Reduvius personatus; on the stridulation of beetles; on the stridulation of Omaloplia brunnea; on the stridulating organs of the Coleoptera; on sounds produced by Cychrus.
Westropp, H.M., on reason in a bear; on the prevalence of certain forms of ornamentation.
Westwood, J.O., on the classification of the Hymenoptera; on the Culicidae and Tabanidae; on a Hymenopterous parasite with a sedentary male; on the proportions of the sexes in Lucanus cervus and Siagonium; on the absence of ocelli in female Mutillidae; on
Whale, Sperm-, battles of male.
Whales, nakedness of.
Whately, Arch.
, language not peculiar to man; on the primitive civilisation of man.
Whewell, Prof.
, on maternal affection.
Whiskers, in monkeys.
White, F.B., noise produced by Hylophila.
White, Gilbert, on the proportion of the sexes in the partridge; on the house-cricket; on the object of the song of birds; on the finding of new mates by white owls; on spring coveys of male partridges.
Whiteness, a sexual ornament in some birds; of mammals inhabiting snowy countries.
White-throat, aerial love-dance of the male.
Whitney, Prof.
, on the development of language; language not indispensable for thought.
Widgeon, pairing with a pintail duck.
Widow-bird, polygamous; breeding plumage of the male; female, rejecting the unadorned male.
Widows and widowers, mortality of.
Wilckens, Dr., on the modification of domestic animals in mountainous regions; on a numerical relation between the hairs and excretory pores in sheep.
Wilder, Dr. Burt, on the greater frequency of supernumerary digits in men than in women.
Williams, on the marriage-customs of the Fijians.
Wilson, Dr., on the conical heads of the natives of North-Western Africa; on the Fijians; on the persistence of the fashion of compressing the skull.
Wing-spurs.
Wings, differences of, in the two sexes of butterflies and Hymenoptera; play of, in the courtship of birds.
Winter, change of colour of mammals in.
Witchcraft.
Wives, traces of the forcible capture of.
Wolf, winter change of the.
Wolff, on the variability of the viscera in man.
Wollaston, T.V., on Eurygnathus; on musical Curculionidae; on the stridulation of Acalles.
Wolves, learning to bark from dogs; hunting in packs.
Wolves, black.
Wombat, black varieties of the.
Women, distinguished from men by male monkeys; preponderance of, in numbers; selection of, for beauty; effects of selection of, in accordance with different standards of beauty; practice of capturing; early betrothals and slavery of; freedom of selection
Wonder, manifestations of, by animals.
Wonfor, Mr., on sexual peculiarities, in the wings of butterflies.
Wood, J., on muscular variations in man; on the greater variability of the muscles in men than in women.
Wood, T.W., on the colouring of the orange-tip butterfly; on the habits of the Saturniidae; quarrels of chamaeleons; on the habits of Menura Alberti; on Tetrao cupido; on the display of plumage by male pheasants; on the ocellated spots of the Argus
Woodcock, coloration of the.
Woodpecker, selection of a mate by the female.
Woodpeckers, tapping of; colours and nidification of the; characters of young.
Woolner, Mr., observations on the ear in man.
Wormald, Mr., on the coloration of Hypopyra.
Wounds, healing of.
Wren, young of the.
Wright, C.A., on the young of Orocetes and Petrocincla.
Wright, Chauncey, great brain-power requisite for language; on correlative acquisition; on the enlargement of the brain in man.
Wright, Mr., on the Scotch deer-hound; on sexual preference in dogs; on the rejection of a horse by a mare.
Wright, W. von, on the protective plumage of the Ptarmigan.
Writing.
Wyman, Prof.
, on the prolongation of the coccyx in the human embryo; on the condition of the great toe in the human embryo; on the occurrence of the supra-condyloid foramen in the humerus of man; on variation in the skulls of the natives of the Sandwich Islands; on
Xenarchus, on the Cicadae.
Xenophon, selection in mankind advocated by.
Xenorhynchus, sexual difference in the colour of the eyes in.
Xiphophorus Hellerii, peculiar anal fin of the male.
Xylocopa, difference of the sexes in.
Yarrel, W., on the habits of the Cyprinidae; on Raia clavata; on the characters of the male salmon during the breeding season; on the characters of the rays; on the gemmeous dragonet; on colours of salmon; on the spawning of the salmon; on the incubation
Yellow fever, immunity of negroes and mulattoes from.
Youatt, Mr., on the development of the horns in cattle.
Yura-caras, their notions of beauty.
Zebra, rejection of an ass by a female; stripes of the.
Zebus, humps of.
Zigzags, prevalence of, as ornaments.
Zincke, Mr., on European emigration to America.
Zootoca vivipara, sexual difference in the colour of.
Zouteveen, Dr., polydactylism; proportion of sexes at Cape of Good Hope; spiders attracted by music; on sounds produced by fish.
Zygaenidae, coloration of the.
THE END.Produced by John Hamm The Internet Wiretap Online Edition of THE VOYAGE OF THE BEAGLE BY CHARLES DARWIN About the online edition.
The degree symbol is represented as "degs".
Italics are represented as _italics_.
Footnotes are collected at the end of each chapter.
THE VOYAGE OF THE BEAGLE PREFACE I have stated in the preface to the first Edition of this work, and in the Zoology of the Voyage of the Beagle, that it was in consequence of a wish expressed by Captain Fitz Roy, of having some scientific person on board,
As I feel that the opportunities which I enjoyed of studying the Natural History of the different countries we visited, have been wholly due to Captain Fitz Roy, I hope I may here be permitted to repeat my expression of gratitude to him; and to add that,
Both to Captain Fitz Roy and to all the Officers of the Beagle [1] I shall ever feel most thankful for the undeviating kindness with which I was treated during our long voyage.
This volume contains, in the form of a Journal, a history of our voyage, and a sketch of those observations in Natural History and Geology, which I think will possess some interest for the general reader.
I have in this edition largely condensed and corrected some parts, and have added a little to others, in order to render the volume more fitted for popular reading; but I trust that naturalists will remember, that they must refer for details to the larger
The Zoology of the Voyage of the Beagle includes an account of the Fossil Mammalia, by Professor Owen; of the Living Mammalia, by Mr. Waterhouse; of the Birds, by Mr. Gould; of the Fish, by the Rev.
L. Jenyns; and of the Reptiles, by Mr. Bell.
I have appended to the descriptions of each species an account of its habits and range.
These works, which I owe to the high talents and disinterested zeal of the above distinguished authors, could not have been undertaken, had it not been for the liberality of the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty's Treasury, who, through the representation
I have myself published separate volumes on the 'Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs;' on the 'Volcanic Islands visited during the Voyage of the Beagle;' and on the 'Geology of South America.
' The sixth volume of the 'Geological Transactions' contains two papers of mine on the Erratic Boulders and Volcanic Phenomena of South America.
Messrs.
Waterhouse, Walker, Newman, and White, have published several able papers on the Insects which were collected, and I trust that many others will hereafter follow.
The plants from the southern parts of America will be given by Dr. J. Hooker, in his great work on the Botany of the Southern Hemisphere.
The Flora of the Galapagos Archipelago is the subject of a separate memoir by him, in the 'Linnean Transactions.
' The Reverend Professor Henslow has published a list of the plants collected by me at the Keeling Islands; and the Reverend J. M. Berkeley has described my cryptogamic plants.
I shall have the pleasure of acknowledging the great assistance which I have received from several other naturalists, in the course of this and my other works; but I must be here allowed to return my most sincere thanks to the Reverend Professor Henslow,
DOWN, BROMLEY, KENT, June 9, 1845 [1] I must take this opportunity of returning my sincere thanks to Mr. Bynoe, the surgeon of the Beagle, for his very kind attention to me when I was ill at Valparaiso.
THE VOYAGE OF THE BEAGLE CHAPTER I ST.
JAGO--CAPE DE VERD ISLANDS Porto Praya--Ribeira Grande--Atmospheric Dust with Infusoria--Habits of a Sea-slug and Cuttle-fish--St. Paul's Rocks, non-volcanic--Singular Incrustations--Insects the first Colonists of Islands--Fernando
AFTER having been twice driven back by heavy southwestern gales, Her Majesty's ship Beagle, a ten-gun brig, under the command of Captain Fitz Roy, R. N., sailed from Devonport on the 27th of December, 1831.
The object of the expedition was to complete the survey of Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego, commenced under Captain King in 1826 to 1830,--to survey the shores of Chile, Peru, and of some islands in the Pacific--and to carry a chain of chronometrical
On the 6th of January we reached Teneriffe, but were prevented landing, by fears of our bringing the cholera: the next morning we saw the sun rise behind the rugged outline of the Grand Canary island, and suddenly illuminate the Peak of Teneriffe, whilst
This was the first of many delightful days never to be forgotten.
On the 16th of January, 1832, we anchored at Porto Praya, in St. Jago, the chief island of the Cape de Verd archipelago.
The neighbourhood of Porto Praya, viewed from the sea, wears a desolate aspect.
The volcanic fires of a past age, and the scorching heat of a tropical sun, have in most places rendered the soil unfit for vegetation.
The country rises in successive steps of table-land, interspersed with some truncate conical hills, and the horizon is bounded by an irregular chain of more lofty mountains.
The scene, as beheld through the hazy atmosphere of this climate, is one of great interest; if, indeed, a person, fresh from sea, and who has just walked, for the first time, in a grove of cocoa-nut trees, can be a judge of anything but his own happiness.
The island would generally be considered as very uninteresting, but to anyone accustomed only to an English landscape, the novel aspect of an utterly sterile land possesses a grandeur which more vegetation might spoil.
A single green leaf can scarcely be discovered over wide tracts of the lava plains; yet flocks of goats, together with a few cows, contrive to exist.
It rains very seldom, but during a short portion of the year heavy torrents fall, and immediately afterwards a light vegetation springs out of every crevice.
This soon withers; and upon such naturally formed hay the animals live.
It had not now rained for an entire year.
When the island was discovered, the immediate neighbourhood of Porto Praya was clothed with trees, [1] the reckless destruction of which has caused here, as at St. Helena, and at some of the Canary islands, almost entire sterility.
The broad, flat-bottomed valleys, many of which serve during a few days only in the season as water-courses, are clothed with thickets of leafless bushes.
Few living creatures inhabit these valleys.
The commonest bird is a kingfisher (Dacelo Iagoensis), which tamely sits on the branches of the castor-oil plant, and thence darts on grasshoppers and lizards.
It is brightly coloured, but not so beautiful as the European species: in its flight, manners, and place of habitation, which is generally in the driest valley, there is also a wide difference.
One day, two of the officers and myself rode to Ribeira Grande, a village a few miles eastward of Porto Praya.
Until we reached the valley of St. Martin, the country presented its usual dull brown appearance; but here, a very small rill of water produces a most refreshing margin of luxuriant vegetation.
In the course of an hour we arrived at Ribeira Grande, and were surprised at the sight of a large ruined fort and cathedral.
This little town, before its harbour was filled up, was the principal place in the island: it now presents a melancholy, but very picturesque appearance.
Having procured a black Padre for a guide, and a Spaniard who had served in the Peninsular war as an interpreter, we visited a collection of buildings, of which an ancient church formed the principal part.
It is here the governors and captain-generals of the islands have been buried.
Some of the tombstones recorded dates of the sixteenth century.
[2] The heraldic ornaments were the only things in this retired place that reminded us of Europe.
The church or chapel formed one side of a quadrangle, in the middle of which a large clump of bananas were growing.
On another side was a hospital, containing about a dozen miserable-looking inmates.
We returned to the Venda to eat our dinners.
A considerable number of men, women, and children, all as black as jet, collected to watch us.
Our companions were extremely merry; and everything we said or did was followed by their hearty laughter.
Before leaving the town we visited the cathedral.
It does not appear so rich as the smaller church, but boasts of a little organ, which sent forth singularly inharmonious cries.
We presented the black priest with a few shillings, and the Spaniard, patting him on the head, said, with much candour, he thought his colour made no great difference.
We then returned, as fast as the ponies would go, to Porto Praya.
Another day we rode to the village of St. Domingo, situated near the centre of the island.
On a small plain which we crossed, a few stunted acacias were growing; their tops had been bent by the steady trade-wind, in a singular manner--some of them even at right angles to their trunks.
The direction of the branches was exactly N. E. by N., and S. W. by S., and these natural vanes must indicate the prevailing direction of the force of the trade-wind.
The travelling had made so little impression on the barren soil, that we here missed our track, and took that to Fuentes.
This we did not find out till we arrived there; and we were afterwards glad of our mistake.
Fuentes is a pretty village, with a small stream; and everything appeared to prosper well, excepting, indeed, that which ought to do so most--its inhabitants.
The black children, completely naked, and looking very wretched, were carrying bundles of firewood half as big as their own bodies.
Near Fuentes we saw a large flock of guinea-fowl--probably fifty or sixty in number.
They were extremely wary, and could not be approached.
They avoided us, like partridges on a rainy day in September, running with their heads cocked up; and if pursued, they readily took to the wing.
The scenery of St. Domingo possesses a beauty totally unexpected, from the prevalent gloomy character of the rest of the island.
The village is situated at the bottom of a valley, bounded by lofty and jagged walls of stratified lava.
The black rocks afford a most striking contrast with the bright green vegetation, which follows the banks of a little stream of clear water.
It happened to be a grand feast-day, and the village was full of people.
On our return we overtook a party of about twenty young black girls, dressed in excellent taste; their black skins and snow-white linen being set off by coloured turbans and large shawls.
As soon as we approached near, they suddenly all turned round, and covering the path with their shawls, sung with great energy a wild song, beating time with their hands upon their legs.
We threw them some vintems, which were received with screams of laughter, and we left them redoubling the noise of their song.
One morning the view was singularly clear; the distant mountains being projected with the sharpest outline on a heavy bank of dark blue clouds.
Judging from the appearance, and from similar cases in England, I supposed that the air was saturated with moisture.
The fact, however, turned out quite the contrary.
The hygrometer gave a difference of 29.
6 degs.
, between the temperature of the air, and the point at which dew was precipitated.
This difference was nearly double that which I had observed on the previous mornings.
This unusual degree of atmospheric dryness was accompanied by continual flashes of lightning.
Is it not an uncommon case, thus to find a remarkable degree of aerial transparency with such a state of weather?
Generally the atmosphere is hazy; and this is caused by the falling of impalpably fine dust, which was found to have slightly injured the astronomical instruments.
The morning before we anchored at Porto Praya, I collected a little packet of this brown-coloured fine dust, which appeared to have been filtered from the wind by the gauze of the vane at the mast-head.
Mr. Lyell has also given me four packets of dust which fell on a vessel a few hundred miles northward of these islands.
Professor Ehrenberg [3] finds that this dust consists in great part of infusoria with siliceous shields, and of the siliceous tissue of plants.
In five little packets which I sent him, he has ascertained no less than sixty-seven different organic forms!
The infusoria, with the exception of two marine species, are all inhabitants of fresh-water.
I have found no less than fifteen different accounts of dust having fallen on vessels when far out in the Atlantic.
From the direction of the wind whenever it has fallen, and from its having always fallen during those months when the harmattan is known to raise clouds of dust high into the atmosphere, we may feel sure that it all comes from Africa.
It is, however, a very singular fact, that, although Professor Ehrenberg knows many species of infusoria peculiar to Africa, he finds none of these in the dust which I sent him.
On the other hand, he finds in it two species which hitherto he knows as living only in South America.
The dust falls in such quantities as to dirty everything on board, and to hurt people's eyes; vessels even have run on shore owing to the obscurity of the atmosphere.
It has often fallen on ships when several hundred, and even more than a thousand miles from the coast of Africa, and at points sixteen hundred miles distant in a north and south direction.
In some dust which was collected on a vessel three hundred miles from the land, I was much surprised to find particles of stone above the thousandth of an inch square, mixed with finer matter.
After this fact one need not be surprised at the diffusion of the far lighter and smaller sporules of cryptogamic plants.
The geology of this island is the most interesting part of its natural history.
On entering the harbour, a perfectly horizontal white band, in the face of the sea cliff, may be seen running for some miles along the coast, and at the height of about forty-five feet above the water.
Upon examination this white stratum is found to consist of calcareous matter with numerous shells embedded, most or all of which now exist on the neighbouring coast.
It rests on ancient volcanic rocks, and has been covered by a stream of basalt, which must have entered the sea when the white shelly bed was lying at the bottom.
It is interesting to trace the changes produced by the heat of the overlying lava, on the friable mass, which in parts has been converted into a crystalline limestone, and in other parts into a compact spotted stone Where the lime has been caught up by the
The beds of lava rise in successive gently-sloping plains, towards the interior, whence the deluges of melted stone have originally proceeded.
Within historical times, no signs of volcanic activity have, I believe, been manifested in any part of St. Jago.
Even the form of a crater can but rarely be discovered on the summits of the many red cindery hills; yet the more recent streams can be distinguished on the coast, forming lines of cliffs of less height, but stretching out in advance of those belonging to
During our stay, I observed the habits of some marine animals.
A large Aplysia is very common.
This sea-slug is about five inches long; and is of a dirty yellowish colour veined with purple.
On each side of the lower surface, or foot, there is a broad membrane, which appears sometimes to act as a ventilator, in causing a current of water to flow over the dorsal branchiae or lungs.
It feeds on the delicate sea-weeds which grow among the stones in muddy and shallow water; and I found in its stomach several small pebbles, as in the gizzard of a bird.
This slug, when disturbed, emits a very fine purplish-red fluid, which stains the water for the space of a foot around.
Besides this means of defence, an acrid secretion, which is spread over its body, causes a sharp, stinging sensation, similar to that produced by the Physalia, or Portuguese man-of-war.
I was much interested, on several occasions, by watching the habits of an Octopus, or cuttle-fish.
Although common in the pools of water left by the retiring tide, these animals were not easily caught.
By means of their long arms and suckers, they could drag their bodies into very narrow crevices; and when thus fixed, it required great force to remove them.
At other times they darted tail first, with the rapidity of an arrow, from one side of the pool to the other, at the same instant discolouring the water with a dark chestnut-brown ink.
These animals also escape detection by a very extraordinary, chameleon-like power of changing their colour.
They appear to vary their tints according to the nature of the ground over which they pass: when in deep water, their general shade was brownish purple, but when placed on the land, or in shallow water, this dark tint changed into one of a yellowish green.
The colour, examined more carefully, was a French grey, with numerous minute spots of bright yellow: the former of these varied in intensity; the latter entirely disappeared and appeared again by turns.
These changes were effected in such a manner, that clouds, varying in tint between a hyacinth red and a chestnut-brown, [4] were continually passing over the body.
Any part, being subjected to a slight shock of galvanism, became almost black: a similar effect, but in a less degree, was produced by scratching the skin with a needle.
These clouds, or blushes as they may be called, are said to be produced by the alternate expansion and contraction of minute vesicles containing variously coloured fluids.
[5] This cuttle-fish displayed its chameleon-like power both during the act of swimming and whilst remaining stationary at the bottom.
I was much amused by the various arts to escape detection used by one individual, which seemed fully aware that I was watching it.
Remaining for a time motionless, it would then stealthily advance an inch or two, like a cat after a mouse; sometimes changing its colour: it thus proceeded, till having gained a deeper part, it darted away, leaving a dusky train of ink to hide the hole
While looking for marine animals, with my head about two feet above the rocky shore, I was more than once saluted by a jet of water, accompanied by a slight grating noise.
At first I could not think what it was, but afterwards I found out that it was this cuttle-fish, which, though concealed in a hole, thus often led me to its discovery.
That it possesses the power of ejecting water there is no doubt, and it appeared to me that it could certainly take good aim by directing the tube or siphon on the under side of its body.
From the difficulty which these animals have in carrying their heads, they cannot crawl with ease when placed on the ground.
I observed that one which I kept in the cabin was slightly phosphorescent in the dark.
ST.
PAUL'S ROCKS.
--In crossing the Atlantic we hove-to during the morning of February 16th, close to the island of St. Paul's.
This cluster of rocks is situated in 0 degs.
58' north latitude, and 29 degs.
15' west longitude.
It is 540 miles distant from the coast of America, and 350 from the island of Fernando Noronha.
The highest point is only fifty feet above the level of the sea, and the entire circumference is under three-quarters of a mile.
This small point rises abruptly out of the depths of the ocean.
Its mineralogical constitution is not simple; in some parts the rock is of a cherty, in others of a felspathic nature, including thin veins of serpentine.
It is a remarkable fact, that all the many small islands, lying far from any continent, in the Pacific, Indian, and Atlantic Oceans, with the exception of the Seychelles and this little point of rock, are, I believe, composed either of coral or of erupted
The volcanic nature of these oceanic islands is evidently an extension of that law, and the effect of those same causes, whether chemical or mechanical, from which it results that a vast majority of the volcanoes now in action stand either near sea-coasts
The rocks of St. Paul appear from a distance of a brilliantly white colour.
This is partly owing to the dung of a vast multitude of seafowl, and partly to a coating of a hard glossy substance with a pearly lustre, which is intimately united to the surface of the rocks.
This, when examined with a lens, is found to consist of numerous exceedingly thin layers, its total thickness being about the tenth of an inch.
It contains much animal matter, and its origin, no doubt, is due to the action of the rain or spray on the birds' dung.
Below some small masses of guano at Ascension, and on the Abrolhos Islets, I found certain stalactitic branching bodies, formed apparently in the same manner as the thin white coating on these rocks.
The branching bodies so closely resembled in general appearance certain nulliporae (a family of hard calcareous sea-plants), that in lately looking hastily over my collection I did not perceive the difference.
The globular extremities of the branches are of a pearly texture, like the enamel of teeth, but so hard as just to scratch plate-glass.
I may here mention, that on a part of the coast of Ascension, where there is a vast accumulation of shelly sand, an incrustation is deposited on the tidal rocks by the water of the sea, resembling, as represented in the woodcut, certain cryptogamic plants
The surface of the fronds is beautifully glossy; and those parts formed where fully exposed to the light are of a jet black colour, but those shaded under ledges are only grey.
I have shown specimens of this incrustation to several geologists, and they all thought that they were of volcanic or igneous origin!
In its hardness and translucency--in its polish, equal to that of the finest oliva-shell--in the bad smell given out, and loss of colour under the blowpipe--it shows a close similarity with living sea-shells.
Moreover, in sea-shells, it is known that the parts habitually covered and shaded by the mantle of the animal, are of a paler colour than those fully exposed to the light, just as is the case with this incrustation.
When we remember that lime, either as a phosphate or carbonate, enters into the composition of the hard parts, such as bones and shells, of all living animals, it is an interesting physiological fact [6] to find substances harder than the enamel of teeth,
We found on St. Paul's only two kinds of birds--the booby and the noddy.
The former is a species of gannet, and the latter a tern.
Both are of a tame and stupid disposition, and are so unaccustomed to visitors, that I could have killed any number of them with my geological hammer.
The booby lays her eggs on the bare rock; but the tern makes a very simple nest with sea-weed.
By the side of many of these nests a small flying-fish was placed; which I suppose, had been brought by the male bird for its partner.
It was amusing to watch how quickly a large and active crab (Graspus), which inhabits the crevices of the rock, stole the fish from the side of the nest, as soon as we had disturbed the parent birds.
Sir W. Symonds, one of the few persons who have landed here, informs me that he saw the crabs dragging even the young birds out of their nests, and devouring them.
Not a single plant, not even a lichen, grows on this islet; yet it is inhabited by several insects and spiders.
The following list completes, I believe, the terrestrial fauna: a fly (Olfersia) living on the booby, and a tick which must have come here as a parasite on the birds; a small brown moth, belonging to a genus that feeds on feathers; a beetle (Quedius) and a
The often repeated description of the stately palm and other noble tropical plants, then birds, and lastly man, taking possession of the coral islets as soon as formed, in the Pacific, is probably not correct; I fear it destroys the poetry of this story,
The smallest rock in the tropical seas, by giving a foundation for the growth of innumerable kinds of sea-weed and compound animals, supports likewise a large number of fish.
The sharks and the seamen in the boats maintained a constant struggle which should secure the greater share of the prey caught by the fishing-lines.
I have heard that a rock near the Bermudas, lying many miles out at sea, and at a considerable depth, was first discovered by the circumstance of fish having been observed in the neighbourhood.
FERNANDO NORONHA, Feb.
20th.
--As far as I was enabled to observe, during the few hours we stayed at this place, the constitution of the island is volcanic, but probably not of a recent date.
The most remarkable feature is a conical hill, about one thousand feet high, the upper part of which is exceedingly steep, and on one side overhangs its base.
The rock is phonolite, and is divided into irregular columns.
On viewing one of these isolated masses, at first one is inclined to believe that it has been suddenly pushed up in a semi-fluid state.
At St. Helena, however, I ascertained that some pinnacles, of a nearly similar figure and constitution, had been formed by the injection of melted rock into yielding strata, which thus had formed the moulds for these gigantic obelisks.
The whole island is covered with wood; but from the dryness of the climate there is no appearance of luxuriance.
Half-way up the mountain, some great masses of the columnar rock, shaded by laurel-like trees, and ornamented by others covered with fine pink flowers but without a single leaf, gave a pleasing effect to the nearer parts of the scenery.
BAHIA, OR SAN SALVADOR.
BRAZIL, Feb.
29th.
--The day has passed delightfully.
Delight itself, however, is a weak term to express the feelings of a naturalist who, for the first time, has wandered by himself in a Brazilian forest.
The elegance of the grasses, the novelty of the parasitical plants, the beauty of the flowers, the glossy green of the foliage, but above all the general luxuriance of the vegetation, filled me with admiration.
A most paradoxical mixture of sound and silence pervades the shady parts of the wood.
The noise from the insects is so loud, that it may be heard even in a vessel anchored several hundred yards from the shore; yet within the recesses of the forest a universal silence appears to reign.
To a person fond of natural history, such a day as this brings with it a deeper pleasure than he can ever hope to experience again.
After wandering about for some hours, I returned to the landing-place; but, before reaching it, I was overtaken by a tropical storm.
I tried to find shelter under a tree, which was so thick that it would never have been penetrated by common English rain; but here, in a couple of minutes, a little torrent flowed down the trunk.
It is to this violence of the rain that we must attribute the verdure at the bottom of the thickest woods: if the showers were like those of a colder climate, the greater part would be absorbed or evaporated before it reached the ground.
I will not at present attempt to describe the gaudy scenery of this noble bay, because, in our homeward voyage, we called here a second time, and I shall then have occasion to remark on it.
Along the whole coast of Brazil, for a length of at least 2000 miles, and certainly for a considerable space inland, wherever solid rock occurs, it belongs to a granitic formation.
The circumstance of this enormous area being constituted of materials which most geologists believe to have been crystallized when heated under pressure, gives rise to many curious reflections.
Was this effect produced beneath the depths of a profound ocean?
or did a covering of strata formerly extend over it, which has since been removed?
Can we believe that any power, acting for a time short of infinity, could have denuded the granite over so many thousand square leagues?
On a point not far from the city, where a rivulet entered the sea, I observed a fact connected with a subject discussed by Humboldt.
[7] At the cataracts of the great rivers Orinoco, Nile, and Congo, the syenitic rocks are coated by a black substance, appearing as if they had been polished with plumbago.
The layer is of extreme thinness; and on analysis by Berzelius it was found to consist of the oxides of manganese and iron.
In the Orinoco it occurs on the rocks periodically washed by the floods, and in those parts alone where the stream is rapid; or, as the Indians say, "the rocks are black where the waters are white".
Here the coating is of a rich brown instead of a black colour, and seems to be composed of ferruginous matter alone.
Hand specimens fail to give a just idea of these brown burnished stones which glitter in the sun's rays.
They occur only within the limits of the tidal waves; and as the rivulet slowly trickles down, the surf must supply the polishing power of the cataracts in the great rivers.
In like manner, the rise and fall of the tide probably answer to the periodical inundations; and thus the same effects are produced under apparently different but really similar circumstances.
The origin, however, of these coatings of metallic oxides, which seem as if cemented to the rocks, is not understood; and no reason, I believe, can be assigned for their thickness remaining the same.
One day I was amused by watching the habits of the Diodon antennatus, which was caught swimming near the shore.
This fish, with its flabby skin, is well known to possess the singular power of distending itself into a nearly spherical form.
After having been taken out of water for a short time, and then again immersed in it, a considerable quantity both of water and air is absorbed by the mouth, and perhaps likewise by the branchial orifices.
This process is effected by two methods: the air is swallowed, and is then forced into the cavity of the body, its return being prevented by a muscular contraction which is externally visible: but the water enters in a gentle stream through the mouth,
The skin about the abdomen is much looser than that on the back; hence, during the inflation, the lower surface becomes far more distended than the upper; and the fish, in consequence, floats with its back downwards.
Cuvier doubts whether the Diodon in this position is able to swim; but not only can it thus move forward in a straight line, but it can turn round to either side.
This latter movement is effected solely by the aid of the pectoral fins; the tail being collapsed, and not used.
From the body being buoyed up with so much air, the branchial openings are out of water, but a stream drawn in by the mouth constantly flows through them.
The fish, having remained in this distended state for a short time, generally expelled the air and water with considerable force from the branchial apertures and mouth.
It could emit, at will, a certain portion of the water, and it appears, therefore, probable that this fluid is taken in partly for the sake of regulating its specific gravity.
This Diodon possessed several means of defence.
It could give a severe bite, and could eject water from its mouth to some distance, at the same time making a curious noise by the movement of its jaws.
By the inflation of its body, the papillae, with which the skin is covered, become erect and pointed.
But the most curious circumstance is, that it secretes from the skin of its belly, when handled, a most beautiful carmine-red fibrous matter, which stains ivory and paper in so permanent a manner that the tint is retained with all its brightness to the
I have heard from Dr. Allan of Forres, that he has frequently found a Diodon, floating alive and distended, in the stomach of the shark, and that on several occasions he has known it eat its way, not only through the coats of the stomach, but through the
Who would ever have imagined that a little soft fish could have destroyed the great and savage shark?
March 18th.
--We sailed from Bahia.
A few days afterwards, when not far distant from the Abrolhos Islets, my attention was called to a reddish-brown appearance in the sea.
The whole surface of the water, as it appeared under a weak lens, seemed as if covered by chopped bits of hay, with their ends jagged.
These are minute cylindrical confervae, in bundles or rafts of from twenty to sixty in each.
Mr. Berkeley informs me that they are the same species (Trichodesmium erythraeum) with that found over large spaces in the Red Sea, and whence its name of Red Sea is derived.
[8] Their numbers must be infinite: the ship passed through several bands of them, one of which was about ten yards wide, and, judging from the mud-like colour of the water, at least two and a half miles long.
In almost every long voyage some account is given of these confervae.
They appear especially common in the sea near Australia; and off Cape Leeuwin I found an allied but smaller and apparently different species.
Captain Cook, in his third voyage, remarks, that the sailors gave to this appearance the name of sea-sawdust.
Near Keeling Atoll, in the Indian Ocean, I observed many little masses of confervae a few inches square, consisting of long cylindrical threads of excessive thinness, so as to be barely visible to the naked eye, mingled with other rather larger bodies,
Two of these are shown in the woodcut united together.
They vary in length from .
04 to .
06, and even to .
08 of an inch in length; and in diameter from .
006 to .
008 of an inch.
Near one extremity of the cylindrical part, a green septum, formed of granular matter, and thickest in the middle, may generally be seen.
This, I believe, is the bottom of a most delicate, colourless sac, composed of a pulpy substance, which lines the exterior case, but does not extend within the extreme conical points.
In some specimens, small but perfect spheres of brownish granular matter supplied the places of the septa; and I observed the curious process by which they were produced.
The pulpy matter of the internal coating suddenly grouped itself into lines, some of which assumed a form radiating from a common centre; it then continued, with an irregular and rapid movement, to contract itself, so that in the course of a second the
The formation of the granular sphere was hastened by any accidental injury.
I may add, that frequently a pair of these bodies were attached to each other, as represented above, cone beside cone, at that end where the septum occurs.
I will add here a few other observations connected with the discoloration of the sea from organic causes.
On the coast of Chile, a few leagues north of Concepcion, the Beagle one day passed through great bands of muddy water, exactly like that of a swollen river; and again, a degree south of Valparaiso, when fifty miles from the land, the same appearance was
Some of the water placed in a glass was of a pale reddish tint; and, examined under a microscope, was seen to swarm with minute animalcula darting about, and often exploding.
Their shape is oval, and contracted in the middle by a ring of vibrating curved ciliae.
It was, however, very difficult to examine them with care, for almost the instant motion ceased, even while crossing the field of vision, their bodies burst.
Sometimes both ends burst at once, sometimes only one, and a quantity of coarse, brownish, granular matter was ejected.
The animal an instant before bursting expanded to half again its natural size; and the explosion took place about fifteen seconds after the rapid progressive motion had ceased: in a few cases it was preceded for a short interval by a rotatory movement on
About two minutes after any number were isolated in a drop of water, they thus perished.
The animals move with the narrow apex forwards, by the aid of their vibratory ciliae, and generally by rapid starts.
They are exceedingly minute, and quite invisible to the naked eye, only covering a space equal to the square of the thousandth of an inch.
Their numbers were infinite; for the smallest drop of water which I could remove contained very many.
In one day we passed through two spaces of water thus stained, one of which alone must have extended over several square miles.
What incalculable numbers of these microscopical animals!
The colour of the water, as seen at some distance, was like that of a river which has flowed through a red clay district, but under the shade of the vessel's side it was quite as dark as chocolate.
The line where the red and blue water joined was distinctly defined.
The weather for some days previously had been calm, and the ocean abounded, to an unusual degree, with living creatures.
[9] In the sea around Tierra del Fuego, and at no great distance from the land, I have seen narrow lines of water of a bright red colour, from the number of crustacea, which somewhat resemble in form large prawns.
The sealers call them whale-food.
Whether whales feed on them I do not know; but terns, cormorants, and immense herds of great unwieldy seals derive, on some parts of the coast, their chief sustenance from these swimming crabs.
Seamen invariably attribute the discoloration of the water to spawn; but I found this to be the case only on one occasion.
At the distance of several leagues from the Archipelago of the Galapagos, the ship sailed through three strips of a dark yellowish, or mud-like water; these strips were some miles long, but only a few yards wide, and they were separated from the
The colour was caused by little gelatinous balls, about the fifth of an inch in diameter, in which numerous minute spherical ovules were imbedded: they were of two distinct kinds, one being of a reddish colour and of a different shape from the other.
I cannot form a conjecture as to what two kinds of animals these belonged.
Captain Colnett remarks, that this appearance is very common among the Galapagos Islands, and that the directions of the bands indicate that of the currents; in the described case, however, the line was caused by the wind.
The only other appearance which I have to notice, is a thin oily coat on the water which displays iridescent colours.
I saw a considerable tract of the ocean thus covered on the coast of Brazil; the seamen attributed it to the putrefying carcase of some whale, which probably was floating at no great distance.
I do not here mention the minute gelatinous particles, hereafter to be referred to, which are frequently dispersed throughout the water, for they are not sufficiently abundant to create any change of colour.
There are two circumstances in the above accounts which appear remarkable: first, how do the various bodies which form the bands with defined edges keep together?
In the case of the prawn-like crabs, their movements were as co-instantaneous as in a regiment of soldiers; but this cannot happen from anything like voluntary action with the ovules, or the confervae, nor is it probable among the infusoria.
Secondly, what causes the length and narrowness of the bands?
The appearance so much resembles that which may be seen in every torrent, where the stream uncoils into long streaks the froth collected in the eddies, that I must attribute the effect to a similar action either of the currents of the air or sea.
Under this supposition we must believe that the various organized bodies are produced in certain favourable places, and are thence removed by the set of either wind or water.
I confess, however, there is a very great difficulty in imagining any one spot to be the birthplace of the millions of millions of animalcula and confervae: for whence come the germs at such points?
--the parent bodies having been distributed by the winds and waves over the immense ocean.
But on no other hypothesis can I understand their linear grouping.
I may add that Scoresby remarks that green water abounding with pelagic animals is invariably found in a certain part of the Arctic Sea.
[1] I state this on the authority of Dr. E. Dieffenbach, in his German translation of the first edition of this Journal.
[2] The Cape de Verd Islands were discovered in 1449.
There was a tombstone of a bishop with the date of 1571; and a crest of a hand and dagger, dated 1497.
[3] I must take this opportunity of acknowledging the great kindness with which this illustrious naturalist has examined many of my specimens.
I have sent (June, 1845) a full account of the falling of this dust to the Geological Society.
[4] So named according to Patrick Symes's nomenclature.
[5] See Encyclop.
of Anat.
and Physiol.
, article Cephalopoda [6] Mr. Horner and Sir David Brewster have described (Philosophical Transactions, 1836, p.
65) a singular "artificial substance resembling shell".
It is deposited in fine, transparent, highly polished, brown-coloured laminae, possessing peculiar optical properties, on the inside of a vessel, in which cloth, first prepared with glue and then with lime, is made to revolve rapidly in water.
It is much softer, more transparent, and contains more animal matter, than the natural incrustation at Ascension; but we here again see the strong tendency which carbonate of lime and animal matter evince to form a solid substance allied to shell.
[7] Pers.
Narr.
, vol.
v.
, pt.
1.
, p.
18.
[8] M. Montagne, in Comptes Rendus, etc.
, Juillet, 1844; and Annal.
des Scienc.
Nat.
, Dec.
1844 [9] M. Lesson (Voyage de la Coquille, tom.
i.
, p.
255) mentions red water off Lima, apparently produced by the same cause.
Peron, the distinguished naturalist, in the Voyage aux Terres Australes, gives no less than twelve references to voyagers who have alluded to the discoloured waters of the sea (vol.
ii.
p.
239).
To the references given by Peron may be added, Humboldt's Pers.
Narr.
, vol.
vi.
p.
804; Flinder's Voyage, vol.
i.
p.
92; Labillardiere, vol.
i.
p.
287; Ulloa's Voyage; Voyage of the Astrolabe and of the Coquille; Captain King's Survey of Australia, etc.
CHAPTER II RIO DE JANEIRO Rio de Janeiro--Excursion north of Cape Frio--Great Evaporation--Slavery--Botofogo Bay--Terrestrial Planariae--Clouds on the Corcovado--Heavy Rain--Musical Frogs--Phosphorescent Insects--Elater, springing powers of--Blue
APRIL 4th to July 5th, 1832.
--A few days after our arrival I became acquainted with an Englishman who was going to visit his estate, situated rather more than a hundred miles from the capital, to the northward of Cape Frio.
I gladly accepted his kind offer of allowing me to accompany him.
April 8th.
--Our party amounted to seven.
The first stage was very interesting.
The day was powerfully hot, and as we passed through the woods, everything was motionless, excepting the large and brilliant butterflies, which lazily fluttered about.
The view seen when crossing the hills behind Praia Grande was most beautiful; the colours were intense, and the prevailing tint a dark blue; the sky and the calm waters of the bay vied with each other in splendour.
After passing through some cultivated country, we entered a forest, which in the grandeur of all its parts could not be exceeded.
We arrived by midday at Ithacaia; this small village is situated on a plain, and round the central house are the huts of the negroes.
These, from their regular form and position, reminded me of the drawings of the Hottentot habitations in Southern Africa.
As the moon rose early, we determined to start the same evening for our sleeping-place at the Lagoa Marica.
As it was growing dark we passed under one of the massive, bare, and steep hills of granite which are so common in this country.
This spot is notorious from having been, for a long time, the residence of some runaway slaves, who, by cultivating a little ground near the top, contrived to eke out a subsistence.
At length they were discovered, and a party of soldiers being sent, the whole were seized with the exception of one old woman, who, sooner than again be led into slavery, dashed herself to pieces from the summit of the mountain.
In a Roman matron this would have been called the noble love of freedom: in a poor negress it is mere brutal obstinacy.
We continued riding for some hours.
For the few last miles the road was intricate, and it passed through a desert waste of marshes and lagoons.
The scene by the dimmed light of the moon was most desolate.
A few fireflies flitted by us; and the solitary snipe, as it rose, uttered its plaintive cry.
The distant and sullen roar of the sea scarcely broke the stillness of the night.
April 9th.
--We left our miserable sleeping-place before sunrise.
The road passed through a narrow sandy plain, lying between the sea and the interior salt lagoons.
The number of beautiful fishing birds, such as egrets and cranes, and the succulent plants assuming most fantastical forms, gave to the scene an interest which it would not otherwise have possessed.
The few stunted trees were loaded with parasitical plants, among which the beauty and delicious fragrance of some of the orchideae were most to be admired.
As the sun rose, the day became extremely hot, and the reflection of the light and heat from the white sand was very distressing.
We dined at Mandetiba; the thermometer in the shade being 84 degs.
The beautiful view of the distant wooded hills, reflected in the perfectly calm water of an extensive lagoon, quite refreshed us.
As the venda [1] here was a very good one, and I have the pleasant, but rare remembrance, of an excellent dinner, I will be grateful and presently describe it, as the type of its class.
These houses are often large, and are built of thick upright posts, with boughs interwoven, and afterwards plastered.
They seldom have floors, and never glazed windows; but are generally pretty well roofed.
Universally the front part is open, forming a kind of verandah, in which tables and benches are placed.
The bed-rooms join on each side, and here the passenger may sleep as comfortably as he can, on a wooden platform, covered by a thin straw mat.
The venda stands in a courtyard, where the horses are fed.
On first arriving it was our custom to unsaddle the horses and give them their Indian corn; then, with a low bow, to ask the senhor to do us the favour to give up something to eat.
"Anything you choose, sir," was his usual answer.
For the few first times, vainly I thanked providence for having guided us to so good a man.
The conversation proceeding, the case universally became deplorable.
"Any fish can you do us the favour of giving "?
--"Oh!
no, sir".
--"Any soup"?
--"No, sir".
--"Any bread"?
--"Oh!
no, sir".
--"Any dried meat"?
--"Oh!
no, sir".
If we were lucky, by waiting a couple of hours, we obtained fowls, rice, and farinha.
It not unfrequently happened, that we were obliged to kill, with stones, the poultry for our own supper.
When, thoroughly exhausted by fatigue and hunger, we timorously hinted that we should be glad of our meal, the pompous, and (though true) most unsatisfactory answer was, "It will be ready when it is ready".
If we had dared to remonstrate any further, we should have been told to proceed on our journey, as being too impertinent.
The hosts are most ungracious and disagreeable in their manners; their houses and their persons are often filthily dirty; the want of the accommodation of forks, knives, and spoons is common; and I am sure no cottage or hovel in England could be found in a
At Campos Novos, however, we fared sumptuously; having rice and fowls, biscuit, wine, and spirits, for dinner; coffee in the evening, and fish with coffee for breakfast.
All this, with good food for the horses, only cost 2s.
6d.
per head.
Yet the host of this venda, being asked if he knew anything of a whip which one of the party had lost, gruffly answered, "How should I know?
why did you not take care of it?
--I suppose the dogs have eaten it".
Leaving Mandetiba, we continued to pass through an intricate wilderness of lakes; in some of which were fresh, in others salt water shells.
Of the former kinds, I found a Limnaea in great numbers in a lake, into which, the inhabitants assured me that the sea enters once a year, and sometimes oftener, and makes the water quite salt.
I have no doubt many interesting facts, in relation to marine and fresh water animals, might be observed in this chain of lagoons, which skirt the coast of Brazil.
M. Gay [2] has stated that he found in the neighbourhood of Rio, shells of the marine genera solen and mytilus, and fresh water ampullariae, living together in brackish water.
I also frequently observed in the lagoon near the Botanic Garden, where the water is only a little less salt than in the sea, a species of hydrophilus, very similar to a water-beetle common in the ditches of England: in the same lake the only shell
Leaving the coast for a time, we again entered the forest.
The trees were very lofty, and remarkable, compared with those of Europe, from the whiteness of their trunks.
I see by my note-book, "wonderful and beautiful, flowering parasites," invariably struck me as the most novel object in these grand scenes.
Travelling onwards we passed through tracts of pasturage, much injured by the enormous conical ants' nests, which were nearly twelve feet high.
They gave to the plain exactly the appearance of the mud volcanos at Jorullo, as figured by Humboldt.
We arrived at Engenhodo after it was dark, having been ten hours on horseback.
I never ceased, during the whole journey, to be surprised at the amount of labour which the horses were capable of enduring; they appeared also to recover from any injury much sooner than those of our English breed.
The Vampire bat is often the cause of much trouble, by biting the horses on their withers.
The injury is generally not so much owing to the loss of blood, as to the inflammation which the pressure of the saddle afterwards produces.
The whole circumstance has lately been doubted in England; I was therefore fortunate in being present when one (Desmodus d'orbignyi, Wat.
) was actually caught on a horse's back.
We were bivouacking late one evening near Coquimbo, in Chile, when my servant, noticing that one of the horses was very restive, went to see what was the matter, and fancying he could distinguish something, suddenly put his hand on the beast's withers, and
In the morning the spot where the bite had been inflicted was easily distinguished from being slightly swollen and bloody.
The third day afterwards we rode the horse, without any ill effects.
April 13th.
--After three days' travelling we arrived at Socego, the estate of Senhor Manuel Figuireda, a relation of one of our party.
The house was simple, and, though like a barn in form, was well suited to the climate.
In the sitting-room gilded chairs and sofas were oddly contrasted with the whitewashed walls, thatched roof, and windows without glass.
The house, together with the granaries, the stables, and workshops for the blacks, who had been taught various trades, formed a rude kind of quadrangle; in the centre of which a large pile of coffee was drying.
These buildings stand on a little hill, overlooking the cultivated ground, and surrounded on every side by a wall of dark green luxuriant forest.
The chief produce of this part of the country is coffee.
Each tree is supposed to yield annually, on an average, two pounds; but some give as much as eight.
Mandioca or cassada is likewise cultivated in great quantity.
Every part of this plant is useful; the leaves and stalks are eaten by the horses, and the roots are ground into a pulp, which, when pressed dry and baked, forms the farinha, the principal article of sustenance in the Brazils.
It is a curious, though well-known fact, that the juice of this most nutritious plant is highly poisonous.
A few years ago a cow died at this Fazenda, in consequence of having drunk some of it.
Senhor Figuireda told me that he had planted, the year before, one bag of feijao or beans, and three of rice; the former of which produced eighty, and the latter three hundred and twenty fold.
The pasturage supports a fine stock of cattle, and the woods are so full of game that a deer had been killed on each of the three previous days.
This profusion of food showed itself at dinner, where, if the tables did not groan, the guests surely did; for each person is expected to eat of every dish.
One day, having, as I thought, nicely calculated so that nothing should go away untasted, to my utter dismay a roast turkey and a pig appeared in all their substantial reality.
During the meals, it was the employment of a man to drive out of the room sundry old hounds, and dozens of little black children, which crawled in together, at every opportunity.
As long as the idea of slavery could be banished, there was something exceedingly fascinating in this simple and patriarchal style of living: it was such a perfect retirement and independence from the rest of the world.
As soon as any stranger is seen arriving, a large bell is set tolling, and generally some small cannon are fired.
The event is thus announced to the rocks and woods, but to nothing else.
One morning I walked out an hour before daylight to admire the solemn stillness of the scene; at last, the silence was broken by the morning hymn, raised on high by the whole body of the blacks; and in this manner their daily work is generally begun.
On such fazendas as these, I have no doubt the slaves pass happy and contented lives.
On Saturday and Sunday they work for themselves, and in this fertile climate the labour of two days is sufficient to support a man and his family for the whole week.
April 14th.
--Leaving Socego, we rode to another estate on the Rio Macae, which was the last patch of cultivated ground in that direction.
The estate was two and a half miles long, and the owner had forgotten how many broad.
Only a very small piece had been cleared, yet almost every acre was capable of yielding all the various rich productions of a tropical land.
Considering the enormous area of Brazil, the proportion of cultivated ground can scarcely be considered as anything, compared to that which is left in the state of nature: at some future age, how vast a population it will support!
During the second day's journey we found the road so shut up, that it was necessary that a man should go ahead with a sword to cut away the creepers.
The forest abounded with beautiful objects; among which the tree ferns, though not large, were, from their bright green foliage, and the elegant curvature of their fronds, most worthy of admiration.
In the evening it rained very heavily, and although the thermometer stood at 65 degs.
, I felt very cold.
As soon as the rain ceased, it was curious to observe the extraordinary evaporation which commenced over the whole extent of the forest.
At the height of a hundred feet the hills were buried in a dense white vapour, which rose like columns of smoke from the most thickly wooded parts, and especially from the valleys.
I observed this phenomenon on several occasions.
I suppose it is owing to the large surface of foliage, previously heated by the sun's rays.
While staying at this estate, I was very nearly being an eye-witness to one of those atrocious acts which can only take place in a slave country.
Owing to a quarrel and a lawsuit, the owner was on the point of taking all the women and children from the male slaves, and selling them separately at the public auction at Rio.
Interest, and not any feeling of compassion, prevented this act.
Indeed, I do not believe the inhumanity of separating thirty families, who had lived together for many years, even occurred to the owner.
Yet I will pledge myself, that in humanity and good feeling he was superior to the common run of men.
It may be said there exists no limit to the blindness of interest and selfish habit.
I may mention one very trifling anecdote, which at the time struck me more forcibly than any story of cruelty.
I was crossing a ferry with a negro, who was uncommonly stupid.
In endeavouring to make him understand, I talked loud, and made signs, in doing which I passed my hand near his face.
He, I suppose, thought I was in a passion, and was going to strike him; for instantly, with a frightened look and half-shut eyes, he dropped his hands.
I shall never forget my feelings of surprise, disgust, and shame, at seeing a great powerful man afraid even to ward off a blow, directed, as he thought, at his face.
This man had been trained to a degradation lower than the slavery of the most helpless animal.
April 18th.
--In returning we spent two days at Socego, and I employed them in collecting insects in the forest.
The greater number of trees, although so lofty, are not more than three or four feet in circumference.
There are, of course, a few of much greater dimensions.
Senhor Manuel was then making a canoe 70 feet in length from a solid trunk, which had originally been 110 feet long, and of great thickness.
The contrast of palm trees, growing amidst the common branching kinds, never fails to give the scene an intertropical character.
Here the woods were ornamented by the Cabbage Palm--one of the most beautiful of its family.
With a stem so narrow that it might be clasped with the two hands, it waves its elegant head at the height of forty or fifty feet above the ground.
The woody creepers, themselves covered by other creepers, were of great thickness: some which I measured were two feet in circumference.
Many of the older trees presented a very curious appearance from the tresses of a liana hanging from their boughs, and resembling bundles of hay.
If the eye was turned from the world of foliage above, to the ground beneath, it was attracted by the extreme elegance of the leaves of the ferns and mimosae.
The latter, in some parts, covered the surface with a brushwood only a few inches high.
In walking across these thick beds of mimosae, a broad track was marked by the change of shade, produced by the drooping of their sensitive petioles.
It is easy to specify the individual objects of admiration in these grand scenes; but it is not possible to give an adequate idea of the higher feelings of wonder, astonishment, and devotion, which fill and elevate the mind.
April 19th.
--Leaving Socego, during the two first days, we retraced our steps.
It was very wearisome work, as the road generally ran across a glaring hot sandy plain, not far from the coast.
I noticed that each time the horse put its foot on the fine siliceous sand, a gentle chirping noise was produced.
On the third day we took a different line, and passed through the gay little village of Madre de Deos.
This is one of the principal lines of road in Brazil; yet it was in so bad a state that no wheeled vehicle, excepting the clumsy bullock-wagon, could pass along.
In our whole journey we did not cross a single bridge built of stone; and those made of logs of wood were frequently so much out of repair, that it was necessary to go on one side to avoid them.
All distances are inaccurately known.
The road is often marked by crosses, in the place of milestones, to signify where human blood has been spilled.
On the evening of the 23rd we arrived at Rio, having finished our pleasant little excursion.
During the remainder of my stay at Rio, I resided in a cottage at Botofogo Bay.
It was impossible to wish for anything more delightful than thus to spend some weeks in so magnificent a country.
In England any person fond of natural history enjoys in his walks a great advantage, by always having something to attract his attention; but in these fertile climates, teeming with life, the attractions are so numerous, that he is scarcely able to walk at
The few observations which I was enabled to make were almost exclusively confined to the invertebrate animals.
The existence of a division of the genus Planaria, which inhabits the dry land, interested me much.
These animals are of so simple a structure, that Cuvier has arranged them with the intestinal worms, though never found within the bodies of other animals.
Numerous species inhabit both salt and fresh water; but those to which I allude were found, even in the drier parts of the forest, beneath logs of rotten wood, on which I believe they feed.
In general form they resemble little slugs, but are very much narrower in proportion, and several of the species are beautifully coloured with longitudinal stripes.
Their structure is very simple: near the middle of the under or crawling surface there are two small transverse slits, from the anterior one of which a funnel-shaped and highly irritable mouth can be protruded.
For some time after the rest of the animal was completely dead from the effects of salt water or any other cause, this organ still retained its vitality.
I found no less than twelve different species of terrestrial Planariae in different parts of the southern hemisphere.
[3] Some specimens which I obtained at Van Dieman's Land, I kept alive for nearly two months, feeding them on rotten wood.
Having cut one of them transversely into two nearly equal parts, in the course of a fortnight both had the shape of perfect animals.
I had, however, so divided the body, that one of the halves contained both the inferior orifices, and the other, in consequence, none.
In the course of twenty-five days from the operation, the more perfect half could not have been distinguished from any other specimen.
The other had increased much in size; and towards its posterior end, a clear space was formed in the parenchymatous mass, in which a rudimentary cup-shaped mouth could clearly be distinguished; on the under surface, however, no corresponding slit was yet
If the increased heat of the weather, as we approached the equator, had not destroyed all the individuals, there can be no doubt that this last step would have completed its structure.
Although so well-known an experiment, it was interesting to watch the gradual production of every essential organ, out of the simple extremity of another animal.
It is extremely difficult to preserve these Planariae; as soon as the cessation of life allows the ordinary laws of change to act, their entire bodies become soft and fluid, with a rapidity which I have never seen equalled.
I first visited the forest in which these Planariae were found, in company with an old Portuguese priest who took me out to hunt with him.
The sport consisted in turning into the cover a few dogs, and then patiently waiting to fire at any animal which might appear.
We were accompanied by the son of a neighbouring farmer--a good specimen of a wild Brazilian youth.
He was dressed in a tattered old shirt and trousers, and had his head uncovered: he carried an old-fashioned gun and a large knife.
The habit of carrying the knife is universal; and in traversing a thick wood it is almost necessary, on account of the creeping plants.
The frequent occurrence of murder may be partly attributed to this habit.
The Brazilians are so dexterous with the knife, that they can throw it to some distance with precision, and with sufficient force to cause a fatal wound.
I have seen a number of little boys practising this art as a game of play and from their skill in hitting an upright stick, they promised well for more earnest attempts.
My companion, the day before, had shot two large bearded monkeys.
These animals have prehensile tails, the extremity of which, even after death, can support the whole weight of the body.
One of them thus remained fast to a branch, and it was necessary to cut down a large tree to procure it.
This was soon effected, and down came tree and monkey with an awful crash.
Our day's sport, besides the monkey, was confined to sundry small green parrots and a few toucans.
I profited, however, by my acquaintance with the Portuguese padre, for on another occasion he gave me a fine specimen of the Yagouaroundi cat.
Every one has heard of the beauty of the scenery near Botofogo.
The house in which I lived was seated close beneath the well-known mountain of the Corcovado.
It has been remarked, with much truth, that abruptly conical hills are characteristic of the formation which Humboldt designates as gneiss-granite.
Nothing can be more striking than the effect of these huge rounded masses of naked rock rising out of the most luxuriant vegetation.
I was often interested by watching the clouds, which, rolling in from seaward, formed a bank just beneath the highest point of the Corcovado.
This mountain, like most others, when thus partly veiled, appeared to rise to a far prouder elevation than its real height of 2300 feet.
Mr. Daniell has observed, in his meteorological essays, that a cloud sometimes appears fixed on a mountain summit, while the wind continues to blow over it.
The same phenomenon here presented a slightly different appearance.
In this case the cloud was clearly seen to curl over, and rapidly pass by the summit, and yet was neither diminished nor increased in size.
The sun was setting, and a gentle southerly breeze, striking against the southern side of the rock, mingled its current with the colder air above; and the vapour was thus condensed; but as the light wreaths of cloud passed over the ridge, and came within
The climate, during the months of May and June, or the beginning of winter, was delightful.
The mean temperature, from observations taken at nine o'clock, both morning and evening, was only 72 degs.
It often rained heavily, but the drying southerly winds soon again rendered the walks pleasant.
One morning, in the course of six hours, 1.
6 inches of rain fell.
As this storm passed over the forests which surround the Corcovado, the sound produced by the drops pattering on the countless multitude of leaves was very remarkable, it could be heard at the distance of a quarter of a mile, and was like the rushing of a
After the hotter days, it was delicious to sit quietly in the garden and watch the evening pass into night.
Nature, in these climes, chooses her vocalists from more humble performers than in Europe.
A small frog, of the genus Hyla, sits on a blade of grass about an inch above the surface of the water, and sends forth a pleasing chirp: when several are together they sing in harmony on different notes.
I had some difficulty in catching a specimen of this frog.
The genus Hyla has its toes terminated by small suckers; and I found this animal could crawl up a pane of glass, when placed absolutely perpendicular.
Various cicidae and crickets, at the same time, keep up a ceaseless shrill cry, but which, softened by the distance, is not unpleasant.
Every evening after dark this great concert commenced; and often have I sat listening to it, until my attention has been drawn away by some curious passing insect.
At these times the fireflies are seen flitting about from hedge to hedge.
On a dark night the light can be seen at about two hundred paces distant.
It is remarkable that in all the different kinds of glowworms, shining elaters, and various marine animals (such as the crustacea, medusae, nereidae, a coralline of the genus Clytia, and Pyrosma), which I have observed, the light has been of a well-marked
All the fireflies, which I caught here, belonged to the Lampyridae (in which family the English glowworm is included), and the greater number of specimens were of Lampyris occidentalis.
[4] I found that this insect emitted the most brilliant flashes when irritated: in the intervals, the abdominal rings were obscured.
The flash was almost co-instantaneous in the two rings, but it was just perceptible first in the anterior one.
The shining matter was fluid and very adhesive: little spots, where the skin had been torn, continued bright with a slight scintillation, whilst the uninjured parts were obscured.
When the insect was decapitated the rings remained uninterruptedly bright, but not so brilliant as before: local irritation with a needle always increased the vividness of the light.
The rings in one instance retained their luminous property nearly twenty-four hours after the death of the insect.
From these facts it would appear probable, that the animal has only the power of concealing or extinguishing the light for short intervals, and that at other times the display is involuntary.
On the muddy and wet gravel-walks I found the larvae of this lampyris in great numbers: they resembled in general form the female of the English glowworm.
These larvae possessed but feeble luminous powers; very differently from their parents, on the slightest touch they feigned death and ceased to shine; nor did irritation excite any fresh display.
I kept several of them alive for some time: their tails are very singular organs, for they act, by a well-fitted contrivance, as suckers or organs of attachment, and likewise as reservoirs for saliva, or some such fluid.
I repeatedly fed them on raw meat; and I invariably observed, that every now and then the extremity of the tail was applied to the mouth, and a drop of fluid exuded on the meat, which was then in the act of being consumed.
The tail, notwithstanding so much practice, does not seem to be able to find its way to the mouth; at least the neck was always touched first, and apparently as a guide.
When we were at Bahia, an elater or beetle (Pyrophorus luminosus, Illig.
) seemed the most common luminous insect.
The light in this case was also rendered more brilliant by irritation.
I amused myself one day by observing the springing powers of this insect, which have not, as it appears to me, been properly described.
[5] The elater, when placed on its back and preparing to spring, moved its head and thorax backwards, so that the pectoral spine was drawn out, and rested on the edge of its sheath.
The same backward movement being continued, the spine, by the full action of the muscles, was bent like a spring; and the insect at this moment rested on the extremity of its head and wing-cases.
The effort being suddenly relaxed, the head and thorax flew up, and in consequence, the base of the wing-cases struck the supporting surface with such force, that the insect by the reaction was jerked upwards to the height of one or two inches.
The projecting points of the thorax, and the sheath of the spine, served to steady the whole body during the spring.
In the descriptions which I have read, sufficient stress does not appear to have been laid on the elasticity of the spine: so sudden a spring could not be the result of simple muscular contraction, without the aid of some mechanical contrivance.
On several occasions I enjoyed some short but most pleasant excursions in the neighbouring country.
One day I went to the Botanic Garden, where many plants, well known for their great utility, might be seen growing.
The leaves of the camphor, pepper, cinnamon, and clove trees were delightfully aromatic; and the bread-fruit, the jaca, and the mango, vied with each other in the magnificence of their foliage.
The landscape in the neighbourhood of Bahia almost takes its character from the two latter trees.
Before seeing them, I had no idea that any trees could cast so black a shade on the ground.
Both of them bear to the evergreen vegetation of these climates the same kind of relation which laurels and hollies in England do to the lighter green of the deciduous trees.
It may be observed, that the houses within the tropics are surrounded by the most beautiful forms of vegetation, because many of them are at the same time most useful to man.
Who can doubt that these qualities are united in the banana, the cocoa-nut, the many kinds of palm, the orange, and the bread-fruit tree?
During this day I was particularly struck with a remark of Humboldt's, who often alludes to "the thin vapour which, without changing the transparency of the air, renders its tints more harmonious, and softens its effects".
This is an appearance which I have never observed in the temperate zones.
The atmosphere, seen through a short space of half or three-quarters of a mile, was perfectly lucid, but at a greater distance all colours were blended into a most beautiful haze, of a pale French grey, mingled with a little blue.
The condition of the atmosphere between the morning and about noon, when the effect was most evident, had undergone little change, excepting in its dryness.
In the interval, the difference between the dew point and temperature had increased from 7.
5 to 17 degs.
On another occasion I started early and walked to the Gavia, or topsail mountain.
The air was delightfully cool and fragrant; and the drops of dew still glittered on the leaves of the large liliaceous plants, which shaded the streamlets of clear water.
Sitting down on a block of granite, it was delightful to watch the various insects and birds as they flew past.
The humming-bird seems particularly fond of such shady retired spots.
Whenever I saw these little creatures buzzing round a flower, with their wings vibrating so rapidly as to be scarcely visible, I was reminded of the sphinx moths: their movements and habits are indeed in many respects very similar.
Following a pathway, I entered a noble forest, and from a height of five or six hundred feet, one of those splendid views was presented, which are so common on every side of Rio.
At this elevation the landscape attains its most brilliant tint; and every form, every shade, so completely surpasses in magnificence all that the European has ever beheld in his own country, that he knows not how to express his feelings.
The general effect frequently recalled to my mind the gayest scenery of the Opera-house or the great theatres.
I never returned from these excursions empty-handed.
This day I found a specimen of a curious fungus, called Hymenophallus.
Most people know the English Phallus, which in autumn taints the air with its odious smell: this, however, as the entomologist is aware, is, to some of our beetles a delightful fragrance.
So was it here; for a Strongylus, attracted by the odour, alighted on the fungus as I carried it in my hand.
We here see in two distant countries a similar relation between plants and insects of the same families, though the species of both are different.
When man is the agent in introducing into a country a new species, this relation is often broken: as one instance of this I may mention, that the leaves of the cabbages and lettuces, which in England afford food to such a multitude of slugs and
During our stay at Brazil I made a large collection of insects.
A few general observations on the comparative importance of the different orders may be interesting to the English entomologist.
The large and brilliantly coloured Lepidoptera bespeak the zone they inhabit, far more plainly than any other race of animals.
I allude only to the butterflies; for the moths, contrary to what might have been expected from the rankness of the vegetation, certainly appeared in much fewer numbers than in our own temperate regions.
I was much surprised at the habits of Papilio feronia.
This butterfly is not uncommon, and generally frequents the orange-groves.
Although a high flier, yet it very frequently alights on the trunks of trees.
On these occasions its head is invariably placed downwards; and its wings are expanded in a horizontal plane, instead of being folded vertically, as is commonly the case.
This is the only butterfly which I have ever seen, that uses its legs for running.
Not being aware of this fact, the insect, more than once, as I cautiously approached with my forceps, shuffled on one side just as the instrument was on the point of closing, and thus escaped.
But a far more singular fact is the power which this species possesses of making a noise.
[6] Several times when a pair, probably male and female, were chasing each other in an irregular course, they passed within a few yards of me; and I distinctly heard a clicking noise, similar to that produced by a toothed wheel passing under a spring
The noise was continued at short intervals, and could be distinguished at about twenty yards' distance: I am certain there is no error in the observation.
I was disappointed in the general aspect of the Coleoptera.
The number of minute and obscurely coloured beetles is exceedingly great.
[7] The cabinets of Europe can, as yet, boast only of the larger species from tropical climates.
It is sufficient to disturb the composure of an entomologist's mind, to look forward to the future dimensions of a complete catalogue.
The carnivorous beetles, or Carabidae, appear in extremely few numbers within the tropics: this is the more remarkable when compared to the case of the carnivorous quadrupeds, which are so abundant in hot countries.
I was struck with this observation both on entering Brazil, and when I saw the many elegant and active forms of the Harpalidae re-appearing on the temperate plains of La Plata.
Do the very numerous spiders and rapacious Hymenoptera supply the place of the carnivorous beetles?
The carrion-feeders and Brachelytra are very uncommon; on the other hand, the Rhyncophora and Chrysomelidae, all of which depend on the vegetable world for subsistence, are present in astonishing numbers.
I do not here refer to the number of different species, but to that of the individual insects; for on this it is that the most striking character in the entomology of different countries depends.
The orders Orthoptera and Hemiptera are particularly numerous; as likewise is the stinging division of the Hymenoptera the bees, perhaps, being excepted.
A person, on first entering a tropical forest, is astonished at the labours of the ants: well-beaten paths branch off in every direction, on which an army of never-failing foragers may be seen, some going forth, and others returning, burdened with pieces
A small dark-coloured ant sometimes migrates in countless numbers.
One day, at Bahia, my attention was drawn by observing many spiders, cockroaches, and other insects, and some lizards, rushing in the greatest agitation across a bare piece of ground.
A little way behind, every stalk and leaf was blackened by a small ant.
The swarm having crossed the bare space, divided itself, and descended an old wall.
By this means many insects were fairly enclosed; and the efforts which the poor little creatures made to extricate themselves from such a death were wonderful.
When the ants came to the road they changed their course, and in narrow files reascended the wall.
Having placed a small stone so as to intercept one of the lines, the whole body attacked it, and then immediately retired.
Shortly afterwards another body came to the charge, and again having failed to make any impression, this line of march was entirely given up.
By going an inch round, the file might have avoided the stone, and this doubtless would have happened, if it had been originally there: but having been attacked, the lion-hearted little warriors scorned the idea of yielding.
Certain wasp-like insects, which construct in the corners of the verandahs clay cells for their larvae, are very numerous in the neighbourhood of Rio.
These cells they stuff full of half-dead spiders and caterpillars, which they seem wonderfully to know how to sting to that degree as to leave them paralysed but alive, until their eggs are hatched; and the larvae feed on the horrid mass of powerless,
I was much interested one day by watching a deadly contest between a Pepsis and a large spider of the genus Lycosa.
The wasp made a sudden dash at its prey, and then flew away: the spider was evidently wounded, for, trying to escape, it rolled down a little slope, but had still strength sufficient to crawl into a thick tuft of grass.
The wasp soon returned, and seemed surprised at not immediately finding its victim.
It then commenced as regular a hunt as ever hound did after fox; making short semicircular casts, and all the time rapidly vibrating its wings and antennae.
The spider, though well concealed, was soon discovered, and the wasp, evidently still afraid of its adversary's jaws, after much manoeuvring, inflicted two stings on the under side of its thorax.
At last, carefully examining with its antennae the now motionless spider, it proceeded to drag away the body.
But I stopped both tyrant and prey.
[9] The number of spiders, in proportion to other insects, is here compared with England very much larger; perhaps more so than with any other division of the articulate animals.
The variety of species among the jumping spiders appears almost infinite.
The genus, or rather family, of Epeira, is here characterized by many singular forms; some species have pointed coriaceous shells, others enlarged and spiny tibiae.
Every path in the forest is barricaded with the strong yellow web of a species, belonging to the same division with the Epeira clavipes of Fabricius, which was formerly said by Sloane to make, in the West Indies, webs so strong as to catch birds.
A small and pretty kind of spider, with very long fore-legs, and which appears to belong to an undescribed genus, lives as a parasite on almost every one of these webs.
I suppose it is too insignificant to be noticed by the great Epeira, and is therefore allowed to prey on the minute insects, which, adhering to the lines, would otherwise be wasted.
When frightened, this little spider either feigns death by extending its front legs, or suddenly drops from the web.
A large Epeira of the same division with Epeira tuberculata and conica is extremely common, especially in dry situations.
Its web, which is generally placed among the great leaves of the common agave, is sometimes strengthened near the centre by a pair or even four zigzag ribbons, which connect two adjoining rays.
When any large insect, as a grasshopper or wasp, is caught, the spider, by a dexterous movement, makes it revolve very rapidly, and at the same time emitting a band of threads from its spinners, soon envelops its prey in a case like the cocoon of a
The spider now examines the powerless victim, and gives the fatal bite on the hinder part of its thorax; then retreating, patiently waits till the poison has taken effect.
The virulence of this poison may be judged of from the fact that in half a minute I opened the mesh, and found a large wasp quite lifeless.
This Epeira always stands with its head downwards near the centre of the web.
When disturbed, it acts differently according to circumstances: if there is a thicket below, it suddenly falls down; and I have distinctly seen the thread from the spinners lengthened by the animal while yet stationary, as preparatory to its fall.
If the ground is clear beneath, the Epeira seldom falls, but moves quickly through a central passage from one to the other side.
When still further disturbed, it practises a most curious manoeuvre: standing in the middle, it violently jerks the web, which it attached to elastic twigs, till at last the whole acquires such a rapid vibratory movement, that even the outline of the
It is well known that most of the British spiders, when a large insect is caught in their webs, endeavour to cut the lines and liberate their prey, to save their nets from being entirely spoiled.
I once, however, saw in a hothouse in Shropshire a large female wasp caught in the irregular web of a quite small spider; and this spider, instead of cutting the web, most perseveringly continued to entangle the body, and especially the wings, of its prey.
The wasp at first aimed in vain repeated thrusts with its sting at its little antagonist.
Pitying the wasp, after allowing it to struggle for more than an hour, I killed it and put it back into the web.
The spider soon returned; and an hour afterwards I was much surprised to find it with its jaws buried in the orifice, through which the sting is protruded by the living wasp.
I drove the spider away two or three times, but for the next twenty-four hours I always found it again sucking at the same place.
The spider became much distended by the juices of its prey, which was many times larger than itself.
I may here just mention, that I found, near St. Fe Bajada, many large black spiders, with ruby-coloured marks on their backs, having gregarious habits.
The webs were placed vertically, as is invariably the case with the genus Epeira: they were separated from each other by a space of about two feet, but were all attached to certain common lines, which were of great length, and extended to all parts of the
In this manner the tops of some large bushes were encompassed by the united nets.
Azara [10] has described a gregarious spider in Paraguay, which Walckanaer thinks must be a Theridion, but probably it is an Epeira, and perhaps even the same species with mine.
I cannot, however, recollect seeing a central nest as large as a hat, in which, during autumn, when the spiders die, Azara says the eggs are deposited.
As all the spiders which I saw were of the same size, they must have been nearly of the same age.
This gregarious habit, in so typical a genus as Epeira, among insects, which are so bloodthirsty and solitary that even the two sexes attack each other, is a very singular fact.
In a lofty valley of the Cordillera, near Mendoza, I found another spider with a singularly-formed web.
Strong lines radiated in a vertical plane from a common centre, where the insect had its station; but only two of the rays were connected by a symmetrical mesh-work; so that the net, instead of being, as is generally the case, circular, consisted of a
All the webs were similarly constructed.
[1] Venda, the Portuguese name for an inn.
[2] Annales des Sciences Naturelles for 1833.
[3] I have described and named these species in the Annals of Nat.
Hist.
, vol.
xiv.
p.
241.
[4] I am greatly indebted to Mr. Waterhouse for his kindness in naming for me this and many other insects, and giving me much valuable assistance.
[5] Kirby's Entomology, vol.
ii.
p.
317.
[6] Mr. Doubleday has lately described (before the Entomological Society, March 3rd, 1845) a peculiar structure in the wings of this butterfly, which seems to be the means of its making its noise.
He says, "It is remarkable for having a sort of drum at the base of the fore wings, between the costal nervure and the subcostal.
These two nervures, moreover, have a peculiar screw-like diaphragm or vessel in the interior".
I find in Langsdorff's travels (in the years 1803-7, p.
74) it is said, that in the island of St. Catherine's on the coast of Brazil, a butterfly called Februa Hoffmanseggi, makes a noise, when flying away, like a rattle.
[7] I may mention, as a common instance of one day's (June 23rd) collecting, when I was not attending particularly to the Coleoptera, that I caught sixty-eight species of that order.
Among these, there were only two of the Carabidae, four Brachelytra, fifteen Rhyncophora, and fourteen of the Chrysomelidae.
Thirty-seven species of Arachnidae, which I brought home, will be sufficient to prove that I was not paying overmuch attention to the generally favoured order of Coleoptera.
[8] In a MS.
in the British Museum by Mr. Abbott, who made his observations in Georgia; see Mr. A. White's paper in the "Annals of Nat.
Hist.
," vol.
vii.
p.
472.
Lieut.
Hutton has described a sphex with similar habits in India, in the "Journal of the Asiatic Society," vol.
i.
p.
555.
[9] Don Felix Azara (vol.
i.
p.
175), mentioning a hymenopterous insect, probably of the same genus, says he saw it dragging a dead spider through tall grass, in a straight line to its nest, which was one hundred and sixty-three paces distant.
He adds that the wasp, in order to find the road, every now and then made "demi-tours d'environ trois palmes".
[10] Azara's Voyage, vol.
i.
p.
213 CHAPTER III MALDONADO Monte Video--Excursion to R. Polanco--Lazo and Bolas--Partridges--Absence of Trees--Deer--Capybara, or River Hog--Tucutuco--Molothrus, cuckoo-like habits--Tyrant-flycatcher--Mocking-bird--Carrion Hawks--Tubes formed by
July 5th, 1832--In the morning we got under way, and stood out of the splendid harbour of Rio de Janeiro.
In our passage to the Plata, we saw nothing particular, excepting on one day a great shoal of porpoises, many hundreds in number.
The whole sea was in places furrowed by them; and a most extraordinary spectacle was presented, as hundreds, proceeding together by jumps, in which their whole bodies were exposed, thus cut the water.
When the ship was running nine knots an hour, these animals could cross and recross the bows with the greatest of ease, and then dash away right ahead.
As soon as we entered the estuary of the Plata, the weather was very unsettled.
One dark night we were surrounded by numerous seals and penguins, which made such strange noises, that the officer on watch reported he could hear the cattle bellowing on shore.
On a second night we witnessed a splendid scene of natural fireworks; the mast-head and yard-arm-ends shone with St. Elmo's light; and the form of the vane could almost be traced, as if it had been rubbed with phosphorus.
The sea was so highly luminous, that the tracks of the penguins were marked by a fiery wake, and the darkness of the sky was momentarily illuminated by the most vivid lightning.
When within the mouth of the river, I was interested by observing how slowly the waters of the sea and river mixed.
The latter, muddy and discoloured, from its less specific gravity, floated on the surface of the salt water.
This was curiously exhibited in the wake of the vessel, where a line of blue water was seen mingling in little eddies, with the adjoining fluid.
July 26th.
--We anchored at Monte Video.
The Beagle was employed in surveying the extreme southern and eastern coasts of America, south of the Plata, during the two succeeding years.
To prevent useless repetitions, I will extract those parts of my journal which refer to the same districts without always attending to the order in which we visited them.
MALDONADO is situated on the northern bank of the Plata, and not very far from the mouth of the estuary.
It is a most quiet, forlorn, little town; built, as is universally the case in these countries, with the streets running at right angles to each other, and having in the middle a large plaza or square, which, from its size, renders the scantiness of the
It possesses scarcely any trade; the exports being confined to a few hides and living cattle.
The inhabitants are chiefly landowners, together with a few shopkeepers and the necessary tradesmen, such as blacksmiths and carpenters, who do nearly all the business for a circuit of fifty miles round.
The town is separated from the river by a band of sand-hillocks, about a mile broad: it is surrounded, on all other sides, by an open slightly-undulating country, covered by one uniform layer of fine green turf, on which countless herds of cattle, sheep,
There is very little land cultivated even close to the town.
A few hedges, made of cacti and agave, mark out where some wheat or Indian corn has been planted.
The features of the country are very similar along the whole northern bank of the Plata.
The only difference is, that here the granitic hills are a little bolder.
The scenery is very uninteresting; there is scarcely a house, an enclosed piece of ground, or even a tree, to give it an air of cheerfulness Yet, after being imprisoned for some time in a ship, there is a charm in the unconfined feeling of walking over
Moreover, if your view is limited to a small space, many objects possess beauty.
Some of the smaller birds are brilliantly coloured; and the bright green sward, browsed short by the cattle, is ornamented by dwarf flowers, among which a plant, looking like the daisy, claimed the place of an old friend.
What would a florist say to whole tracts, so thickly covered by the Verbena melindres, as, even at a distance, to appear of the most gaudy scarlet?
I stayed ten weeks at Maldonado, in which time a nearly perfect collection of the animals, birds, and reptiles, was procured.
Before making any observations respecting them, I will give an account of a little excursion I made as far as the river Polanco, which is about seventy miles distant, in a northerly direction.
I may mention, as a proof how cheap everything is in this country, that I paid only two dollars a day, or eight shillings, for two men, together with a troop of about a dozen riding-horses.
My companions were well armed with pistols and sabres; a precaution which I thought rather unnecessary but the first piece of news we heard was, that, the day before, a traveller from Monte Video had been found dead on the road, with his throat cut.
This happened close to a cross, the record of a former murder.
On the first night we slept at a retired little country-house; and there I soon found out that I possessed two or three articles, especially a pocket compass, which created unbounded astonishment.
In every house I was asked to show the compass, and by its aid, together with a map, to point out the direction of various places.
It excited the liveliest admiration that I, a perfect stranger, should know the road (for direction and road are synonymous in this open country) to places where I had never been.
At one house a young woman, who was ill in bed, sent to entreat me to come and show her the compass.
If their surprise was great, mine was greater, to find such ignorance among people who possessed their thousands of cattle, and "estancias" of great extent.
It can only be accounted for by the circumstance that this retired part of the country is seldom visited by foreigners.
I was asked whether the earth or sun moved; whether it was hotter or colder to the north; where Spain was, and many other such questions.
The greater number of the inhabitants had an indistinct idea that England, London, and North America, were different names for the same place; but the better informed well knew that London and North America were separate countries close together, and that
I carried with me some promethean matches, which I ignited by biting; it was thought so wonderful that a man should strike fire with his teeth, that it was usual to collect the whole family to see it: I was once offered a dollar for a single one.
Washing my face in the morning caused much speculation at the village of Las Minas; a superior tradesman closely cross-questioned me about so singular a practice; and likewise why on board we wore our beards; for he had heard from my guide that we did so.
He eyed me with much suspicion; perhaps he had heard of ablutions in the Mahomedan religion, and knowing me to be a heretick, probably he came to the conclusion that all hereticks were Turks.
It is the general custom in this country to ask for a night's lodging at the first convenient house.
The astonishment at the compass, and my other feats of jugglery, was to a certain degree advantageous, as with that, and the long stories my guides told of my breaking stones, knowing venomous from harmless snakes, collecting insects, etc.
, I repaid them for their hospitality.
I am writing as if I had been among the inhabitants of central Africa: Banda Oriental would not be flattered by the comparison; but such were my feelings at the time.
The next day we rode to the village of Las Minas.
The country was rather more hilly, but otherwise continued the same; an inhabitant of the Pampas no doubt would have considered it as truly Alpine.
The country is so thinly inhabited, that during the whole day we scarcely met a single person.
Las Minas is much smaller even than Maldonado.
It is seated on a little plain, and is surrounded by low rocky mountains.
It is of the usual symmetrical form, and with its whitewashed church standing in the centre, had rather a pretty appearance.
The outskirting houses rose out of the plain like isolated beings, without the accompaniment of gardens or courtyards.
This is generally the case in the country, and all the houses have, in consequence an uncomfortable aspect.
At night we stopped at a pulperia, or drinking-shop.
During the evening a great number of Gauchos came in to drink spirits and smoke cigars: their appearance is very striking; they are generally tall and handsome, but with a proud and dissolute expression of countenance.
They frequently wear their moustaches and long black hair curling down their backs.
With their brightly coloured garments, great spurs clanking about their heels, and knives stuck as daggers (and often so used) at their waists, they look a very different race of men from what might be expected from their name of Gauchos, or simple
Their politeness is excessive; they never drink their spirits without expecting you to taste it; but whilst making their exceedingly graceful bow, they seem quite as ready, if occasion offered, to cut your throat.
On the third day we pursued rather an irregular course, as I was employed in examining some beds of marble.
On the fine plains of turf we saw many ostriches (Struthio rhea).
Some of the flocks contained as many as twenty or thirty birds.
These, when standing on any little eminence, and seen against the clear sky, presented a very noble appearance.
I never met with such tame ostriches in any other part of the country: it was easy to gallop up within a short distance of them; but then, expanding their wings, they made all sail right before the wind, and soon left the horse astern.
At night we came to the house of Don Juan Fuentes, a rich landed proprietor, but not personally known to either of my companions.
On approaching the house of a stranger, it is usual to follow several little points of etiquette: riding up slowly to the door, the salutation of Ave Maria is given, and until somebody comes out and asks you to alight, it is not customary even to get off
Having entered the house, some general conversation is kept up for a few minutes, till permission is asked to pass the night there.
This is granted as a matter of course.
The stranger then takes his meals with the family, and a room is assigned him, where with the horsecloths belonging to his recado (or saddle of the Pampas) he makes his bed.
It is curious how similar circumstances produce such similar results in manners.
At the Cape of Good Hope the same hospitality, and very nearly the same points of etiquette, are universally observed.
The difference, however, between the character of the Spaniard and that of the Dutch boer is shown, by the former never asking his guest a single question beyond the strictest rule of politeness, whilst the honest Dutchman demands where he has been, where
Shortly after our arrival at Don Juan's, one of the largest herds of cattle was driven in towards the house, and three beasts were picked out to be slaughtered for the supply of the establishment.
These half-wild cattle are very active; and knowing full well the fatal lazo, they led the horses a long and laborious chase.
After witnessing the rude wealth displayed in the number of cattle, men, and horses, Don Juan's miserable house was quite curious.
The floor consisted of hardened mud, and the windows were without glass; the sitting-room boasted only of a few of the roughest chairs and stools, with a couple of tables.
The supper, although several strangers were present, consisted of two huge piles, one of roast beef, the other of boiled, with some pieces of pumpkin: besides this latter there was no other vegetable, and not even a morsel of bread.
For drinking, a large earthenware jug of water served the whole party.
Yet this man was the owner of several square miles of land, of which nearly every acre would produce corn, and, with a little trouble, all the common vegetables.
The evening was spent in smoking, with a little impromptu singing, accompanied by the guitar.
The signoritas all sat together in one corner of the room, and did not sup with the men.
So many works have been written about these countries, that it is almost superfluous to describe either the lazo or the bolas.
The lazo consists of a very strong, but thin, well-plaited rope, made of raw hide.
One end is attached to the broad surcingle, which fastens together the complicated gear of the recado, or saddle used in the Pampas; the other is terminated by a small ring of iron or brass, by which a noose can be formed.
The Gaucho, when he is going to use the lazo, keeps a small coil in his bridle-hand, and in the other holds the running noose which is made very large, generally having a diameter of about eight feet.
This he whirls round his head, and by the dexterous movement of his wrist keeps the noose open; then, throwing it, he causes it to fall on any particular spot he chooses.
The lazo, when not used, is tied up in a small coil to the after part of the recado.
The bolas, or balls, are of two kinds: the simplest, which is chiefly used for catching ostriches, consists of two round stones, covered with leather, and united by a thin plaited thong, about eight feet long.
The other kind differs only in having three balls united by the thongs to a common centre.
The Gaucho holds the smallest of the three in his hand, and whirls the other two round and round his head; then, taking aim, sends them like chain shot revolving through the air.
The balls no sooner strike any object, than, winding round it, they cross each other, and become firmly hitched.
The size and weight of the balls vary, according to the purpose for which they are made: when of stone, although not larger than an apple, they are sent with such force as sometimes to break the leg even of a horse.
I have seen the balls made of wood, and as large as a turnip, for the sake of catching these animals without injuring them.
The balls are sometimes made of iron, and these can be hurled to the greatest distance.
The main difficulty in using either lazo or bolas is to ride so well as to be able at full speed, and while suddenly turning about, to whirl them so steadily round the head, as to take aim: on foot any person would soon learn the art.
One day, as I was amusing myself by galloping and whirling the balls round my head, by accident the free one struck a bush, and its revolving motion being thus destroyed, it immediately fell to the ground, and, like magic, caught one hind leg of my horse;
Luckily he was an old practised animal, and knew what it meant; otherwise he would probably have kicked till he had thrown himself down.
The Gauchos roared with laughter; they cried out that they had seen every sort of animal caught, but had never before seen a man caught by himself.
During the two succeeding days, I reached the furthest point which I was anxious to examine.
The country wore the same aspect, till at last the fine green turf became more wearisome than a dusty turnpike road.
We everywhere saw great numbers of partridges (Nothura major).
These birds do not go in coveys, nor do they conceal themselves like the English kind.
It appears a very silly bird.
A man on horseback by riding round and round in a circle, or rather in a spire, so as to approach closer each time, may knock on the head as many as he pleases.
The more common method is to catch them with a running noose, or little lazo, made of the stem of an ostrich's feather, fastened to the end of a long stick.
A boy on a quiet old horse will frequently thus catch thirty or forty in a day.
In Arctic North America [1] the Indians catch the Varying Hare by walking spirally round and round it, when on its form: the middle of the day is reckoned the best time, when the sun is high, and the shadow of the hunter not very long.
On our return to Maldonado, we followed rather a different line of road.
Near Pan de Azucar, a landmark well known to all those who have sailed up the Plata, I stayed a day at the house of a most hospitable old Spaniard.
Early in the morning we ascended the Sierra de las Animas.
By the aid of the rising sun the scenery was almost picturesque.
To the westward the view extended over an immense level plain as far as the Mount, at Monte Video, and to the eastward, over the mammillated country of Maldonado.
On the summit of the mountain there were several small heaps of stones, which evidently had lain there for many years.
My companion assured me that they were the work of the Indians in the old time.
The heaps were similar, but on a much smaller scale, to those so commonly found on the mountains of Wales.
The desire to signalize any event, on the highest point of the neighbouring land, seems an universal passion with mankind.
At the present day, not a single Indian, either civilized or wild, exists in this part of the province; nor am I aware that the former inhabitants have left behind them any more permanent records than these insignificant piles on the summit of the Sierra
The general, and almost entire absence of trees in Banda Oriental is remarkable.
Some of the rocky hills are partly covered by thickets, and on the banks of the larger streams, especially to the north of Las Minas, willow-trees are not uncommon.
Near the Arroyo Tapes I heard of a wood of palms; and one of these trees, of considerable size, I saw near the Pan de Azucar, in lat.
35 degs.
These, and the trees planted by the Spaniards, offer the only exceptions to the general scarcity of wood.
Among the introduced kinds may be enumerated poplars, olives, peach, and other fruit trees: the peaches succeed so well, that they afford the main supply of firewood to the city of Buenos Ayres.
Extremely level countries, such as the Pampas, seldom appear favourable to the growth of trees.
This may possibly be attributed either to the force of the winds, or the kind of drainage.
In the nature of the land, however, around Maldonado, no such reason is apparent; the rocky mountains afford protected situations; enjoying various kinds of soil; streamlets of water are common at the bottoms of nearly every valley; and the clayey nature
It has been inferred with much probability, that the presence of woodland is generally determined [2] by the annual amount of moisture; yet in this province abundant and heavy rain falls during the winter; and the summer, though dry, is not so in any
[3] We see nearly the whole of Australia covered by lofty trees, yet that country possesses a far more arid climate.
Hence we must look to some other and unknown cause.
Confining our view to South America, we should certainly be tempted to believe that trees flourished only under a very humid climate; for the limit of the forest-land follows, in a most remarkable manner, that of the damp winds.
In the southern part of the continent, where the western gales, charged with moisture from the Pacific, prevail, every island on the broken west coast, from lat.
38 degs.
to the extreme point of Tierra del Fuego, is densely covered by impenetrable forests.
On the eastern side of the Cordillera, over the same extent of latitude, where a blue sky and a fine climate prove that the atmosphere has been deprived of its moisture by passing over the mountains, the arid plains of Patagonia support a most scanty
In the more northern parts of the continent, within the limits of the constant south-eastern trade-wind, the eastern side is ornamented by magnificent forests; whilst the western coast, from lat.
4 degs.
S. to lat.
32 degs.
S., may be described as a desert; on this western coast, northward of lat.
4 degs.
S., where the trade-wind loses its regularity, and heavy torrents of rain fall periodically, the shores of the Pacific, so utterly desert in Peru, assume near Cape Blanco the character of luxuriance so celebrated at Guyaquil and Panama.
Hence in the southern and northern parts of the continent, the forest and desert lands occupy reversed positions with respect to the Cordillera, and these positions are apparently determined by the direction of the prevalent winds.
In the middle of the continent there is a broad intermediate band, including central Chile and the provinces of La Plata, where the rain-bringing winds have not to pass over lofty mountains, and where the land is neither a desert nor covered by forests.
But even the rule, if confined to South America, of trees flourishing only in a climate rendered humid by rain-bearing winds, has a strongly marked exception in the case of the Falkland Islands.
These islands, situated in the same latitude with Tierra del Fuego and only between two and three hundred miles distant from it, having a nearly similar climate, with a geological formation almost identical, with favourable situations and the same kind of
In this case, both the direction of the heavy gales of wind and of the currents of the sea are favourable to the transport of seeds from Tierra del Fuego, as is shown by the canoes and trunks of trees drifted from that country, and frequently thrown on the
Hence perhaps it is, that there are many plants in common to the two countries but with respect to the trees of Tierra del Fuego, even attempts made to transplant them have failed.
During our stay at Maldonado I collected several quadrupeds, eighty kinds of birds, and many reptiles, including nine species of snakes.
Of the indigenous mammalia, the only one now left of any size, which is common, is the Cervus campestris.
This deer is exceedingly abundant, often in small herds, throughout the countries bordering the Plata and in Northern Patagonia.
If a person crawling close along the ground, slowly advances towards a herd, the deer frequently, out of curiosity, approach to reconnoitre him.
I have by this means, killed from one spot, three out of the same herd.
Although so tame and inquisitive, yet when approached on horseback, they are exceedingly wary.
In this country nobody goes on foot, and the deer knows man as its enemy only when he is mounted and armed with the bolas.
At Bahia Blanca, a recent establishment in Northern Patagonia, I was surprised to find how little the deer cared for the noise of a gun: one day I fired ten times from within eighty yards at one animal; and it was much more startled at the ball cutting up
My powder being exhausted, I was obliged to get up (to my shame as a sportsman be it spoken, though well able to kill birds on the wing) and halloo till the deer ran away.
The most curious fact with respect to this animal, is the overpoweringly strong and offensive odour which proceeds from the buck.
It is quite indescribable: several times whilst skinning the specimen which is now mounted at the Zoological Museum, I was almost overcome by nausea.
I tied up the skin in a silk pocket-handkerchief, and so carried it home: this handkerchief, after being well washed, I continually used, and it was of course as repeatedly washed; yet every time, for a space of one year and seven months, when first
This appears an astonishing instance of the permanence of some matter, which nevertheless in its nature must be most subtile and volatile.
Frequently, when passing at the distance of half a mile to leeward of a herd, I have perceived the whole air tainted with the effluvium.
I believe the smell from the buck is most powerful at the period when its horns are perfect, or free from the hairy skin.
When in this state the meat is, of course, quite uneatable; but the Gauchos assert, that if buried for some time in fresh earth, the taint is removed.
I have somewhere read that the islanders in the north of Scotland treat the rank carcasses of the fish-eating birds in the same manner.
The order Rodentia is here very numerous in species: of mice alone I obtained no less than eight kinds.
[4] The largest gnawing animal in the world, the Hydrochaerus capybara (the water-hog), is here also common.
One which I shot at Monte Video weighed ninety-eight pounds: its length from the end of the snout to the stump-like tail, was three feet two inches; and its girth three feet eight.
These great Rodents occasionally frequent the islands in the mouth of the Plata, where the water is quite salt, but are far more abundant on the borders of fresh-water lakes and rivers.
Near Maldonado three or four generally live together.
In the daytime they either lie among the aquatic plants, or openly feed on the turf plain.
[5] When viewed at a distance, from their manner of walking and colour they resemble pigs: but when seated on their haunches, and attentively watching any object with one eye, they reassume the appearance of their congeners, cavies and rabbits.
Both the front and side view of their head has quite a ludicrous aspect, from the great depth of their jaw.
These animals, at Maldonado, were very tame; by cautiously walking, I approached within three yards of four old ones.
This tameness may probably be accounted for, by the Jaguar having been banished for some years, and by the Gaucho not thinking it worth his while to hunt them.
As I approached nearer and nearer they frequently made their peculiar noise, which is a low abrupt grunt, not having much actual sound, but rather arising from the sudden expulsion of air: the only noise I know at all like it, is the first hoarse bark of a
Having watched the four from almost within arm's length (and they me) for several minutes, they rushed into the water at full gallop with the greatest impetuosity, and emitted at the same time their bark.
After diving a short distance they came again to the surface, but only just showed the upper part of their heads.
When the female is swimming in the water, and has young ones, they are said to sit on her back.
These animals are easily killed in numbers; but their skins are of trifling value, and the meat is very indifferent.
On the islands in the Rio Parana they are exceedingly abundant, and afford the ordinary prey to the Jaguar.
The Tucutuco (Ctenomys Brasiliensis) is a curious small animal, which may be briefly described as a Gnawer, with the habits of a mole.
It is extremely numerous in some parts of the country, but it is difficult to be procured, and never, I believe, comes out of the ground.
It throws up at the mouth of its burrows hillocks of earth like those of the mole, but smaller.
Considerable tracts of country are so completely undermined by these animals, that horses in passing over, sink above their fetlocks.
The tucutucos appear, to a certain degree, to be gregarious: the man who procured the specimens for me had caught six together, and he said this was a common occurrence.
They are nocturnal in their habits; and their principal food is the roots of plants, which are the object of their extensive and superficial burrows.
This animal is universally known by a very peculiar noise which it makes when beneath the ground.
A person, the first time he hears it, is much surprised; for it is not easy to tell whence it comes, nor is it possible to guess what kind of creature utters it.
The noise consists in a short, but not rough, nasal grunt, which is monotonously repeated about four times in quick succession: [6] the name Tucutuco is given in imitation of the sound.
Where this animal is abundant, it may be heard at all times of the day, and sometimes directly beneath one's feet.
When kept in a room, the tucutucos move both slowly and clumsily, which appears owing to the outward action of their hind legs; and they are quite incapable, from the socket of the thigh-bone not having a certain ligament, of jumping even the smallest
They are very stupid in making any attempt to escape; when angry or frightened they utter the tucutuco.
Of those I kept alive several, even the first day, became quite tame, not attempting to bite or to run away; others were a little wilder.
The man who caught them asserted that very many are invariably found blind.
A specimen which I preserved in spirits was in this state; Mr. Reid considers it to be the effect of inflammation in the nictitating membrane.
When the animal was alive I placed my finger within half an inch of its head, and not the slightest notice was taken: it made its way, however, about the room nearly as well as the others.
Considering the strictly subterranean habits of the tucutuco, the blindness, though so common, cannot be a very serious evil; yet it appears strange that any animal should possess an organ frequently subject to be injured.
Lamarck would have been delighted with this fact, had he known it, when speculating [7] (probably with more truth than usual with him) on the gradually _acquired_ blindness of the Asphalax, a Gnawer living under ground, and of the Proteus, a reptile living
In the common mole the eye is extraordinarily small but perfect, though many anatomists doubt whether it is connected with the true optic nerve; its vision must certainly be imperfect, though probably useful to the animal when it leaves its burrow.
In the tucutuco, which I believe never comes to the surface of the ground, the eye is rather larger, but often rendered blind and useless, though without apparently causing any inconvenience to the animal; no doubt Lamarck would have said that the tucutuco
Birds of many kinds are extremely abundant on the undulating, grassy plains around Maldonado.
There are several species of a family allied in structure and manners to our Starling: one of these (Molothrus niger) is remarkable from its habits.
Several may often be seen standing together on the back of a cow or horse; and while perched on a hedge, pluming themselves in the sun, they sometimes attempt to sing, or rather to hiss; the noise being very peculiar, resembling that of bubbles of air
According to Azara, this bird, like the cuckoo, deposits its eggs in other birds' nests.
I was several times told by the country people that there certainly is some bird having this habit; and my assistant in collecting, who is a very accurate person, found a nest of the sparrow of this country (Zonotrichia matutina), with one egg in it larger
In North America there is another species of Molothrus (M.
pecoris), which has a similar cuckoo-like habit, and which is most closely allied in every respect to the species from the Plata, even in such trifling peculiarities as standing on the backs of cattle; it differs only in being a little smaller, and in its
This close agreement in structure and habits, in representative species coming from opposite quarters of a great continent, always strikes one as interesting, though of common occurrence.
Mr. Swainson has well remarked, [8] that with the exception of the Molothrus pecoris, to which must be added the M. niger, the cuckoos are the only birds which can be called truly parasitical; namely, such as "fasten themselves, as it were, on another
It is remarkable that some of the species, but not all, both of the Cuckoo and Molothrus, should agree in this one strange habit of their parasitical propagation, whilst opposed to each other in almost every other habit: the molothrus, like our starling,
In structure also these two genera are widely removed from each other.
Many theories, even phrenological theories, have been advanced to explain the origin of the cuckoo laying its eggs in other birds' nests.
M. Prevost alone, I think, has thrown light by his observations [9] on this puzzle: he finds that the female cuckoo, which, according to most observers, lays at least from four to six eggs, must pair with the male each time after laying only one or two
Now, if the cuckoo was obliged to sit on her own eggs, she would either have to sit on all together, and therefore leave those first laid so long, that they probably would become addled; or she would have to hatch separately each egg, or two eggs, as soon
Hence we can perceive in the fact of the cuckoo pairing several times, and laying her eggs at intervals, the cause of her depositing her eggs in other birds' nests, and leaving them to the care of foster-parents.
I am strongly inclined to believe that this view is correct, from having been independently led (as we shall hereafter see) to an analogous conclusion with regard to the South American ostrich, the females of which are parasitical, if I may so express it,
I will mention only two other birds, which are very common, and render themselves prominent from their habits.
The Saurophagus sulphuratus is typical of the great American tribe of tyrant-flycatchers.
In its structure it closely approaches the true shrikes, but in its habits may be compared to many birds.
I have frequently observed it, hunting a field, hovering over one spot like a hawk, and then proceeding on to another.
When seen thus suspended in the air, it might very readily at a short distance be mistaken for one of the Rapacious order; its stoop, however, is very inferior in force and rapidity to that of a hawk.
At other times the Saurophagus haunts the neighbourhood of water, and there, like a kingfisher, remaining stationary, it catches any small fish which may come near the margin.
These birds are not unfrequently kept either in cages or in courtyards, with their wings cut.
They soon become tame, and are very amusing from their cunning odd manners, which were described to me as being similar to those of the common magpie.
Their flight is undulatory, for the weight of the head and bill appears too great for the body.
In the evening the Saurophagus takes its stand on a bush, often by the roadside, and continually repeats without a change a shrill and rather agreeable cry, which somewhat resembles articulate words: the Spaniards say it is like the words "Bien te veo" (I
A mocking-bird (Mimus orpheus), called by the inhabitants Calandria, is remarkable, from possessing a song far superior to that of any other bird in the country: indeed, it is nearly the only bird in South America which I have observed to take its stand
The song may be compared to that of the Sedge warbler, but is more powerful; some harsh notes and some very high ones, being mingled with a pleasant warbling.
It is heard only during the spring.
At other times its cry is harsh and far from harmonious.
Near Maldonado these birds were tame and bold; they constantly attended the country houses in numbers, to pick the meat which was hung up on the posts or walls: if any other small bird joined the feast, the Calandria soon chased it away.
On the wide uninhabited plains of Patagonia another closely allied species, O. Patagonica of d'Orbigny, which frequents the valleys clothed with spiny bushes, is a wilder bird, and has a slightly different tone of voice.
It appears to me a curious circumstance, as showing the fine shades of difference in habits, that judging from this latter respect alone, when I first saw this second species, I thought it was different from the Maldonado kind.
Having afterwards procured a specimen, and comparing the two without particular care, they appeared so very similar, that I changed my opinion; but now Mr. Gould says that they are certainly distinct; a conclusion in conformity with the trifling difference
The number, tameness, and disgusting habits of the carrion-feeding hawks of South America make them pre-eminently striking to any one accustomed only to the birds of Northern Europe.
In this list may be included four species of the Caracara or Polyborus, the Turkey buzzard, the Gallinazo, and the Condor.
The Caracaras are, from their structure, placed among the eagles: we shall soon see how ill they become so high a rank.
In their habits they well supply the place of our carrion-crows, magpies, and ravens; a tribe of birds widely distributed over the rest of the world, but entirely absent in South America.
To begin with the Polyborus Brasiliensis: this is a common bird, and has a wide geographical range; it is most numerous on the grassy savannahs of La Plata (where it goes by the name of Carrancha), and is far from unfrequent throughout the sterile plains
In the desert between the rivers Negro and Colorado, numbers constantly attend the line of road to devour the carcasses of the exhausted animals which chance to perish from fatigue and thirst.
Although thus common in these dry and open countries, and likewise on the arid shores of the Pacific, it is nevertheless found inhabiting the damp impervious forests of West Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego.
The Carranchas, together with the Chimango, constantly attend in numbers the estancias and slaughtering-houses.
If an animal dies on the plain the Gallinazo commences the feast, and then the two species of Polyborus pick the bones clean.
These birds, although thus commonly feeding together, are far from being friends.
When the Carrancha is quietly seated on the branch of a tree or on the ground, the Chimango often continues for a long time flying backwards and forwards, up and down, in a semicircle, trying each time at the bottom of the curve to strike its larger
The Carrancha takes little notice, except by bobbing its head.
Although the Carranchas frequently assemble in numbers, they are not gregarious; for in desert places they may be seen solitary, or more commonly by pairs.
The Carranchas are said to be very crafty, and to steal great numbers of eggs.
They attempt, also, together with the Chimango, to pick off the scabs from the sore backs of horses and mules.
The poor animal, on the one hand, with its ears down and its back arched; and, on the other, the hovering bird, eyeing at the distance of a yard the disgusting morsel, form a picture, which has been described by Captain Head with his own peculiar spirit
These false eagles most rarely kill any living bird or animal; and their vulture-like, necrophagous habits are very evident to any one who has fallen asleep on the desolate plains of Patagonia, for when he wakes, he will see, on each surrounding hillock,
If a party of men go out hunting with dogs and horses, they will be accompanied, during the day, by several of these attendants.
After feeding, the uncovered craw protrudes; at such times, and indeed generally, the Carrancha is an inactive, tame, and cowardly bird.
Its flight is heavy and slow, like that of an English rook.
It seldom soars; but I have twice seen one at a great height gliding through the air with much ease.
It runs (in contradistinction to hopping), but not quite so quickly as some of its congeners.
At times the Carrancha is noisy, but is not generally so: its cry is loud, very harsh and peculiar, and may be likened to the sound of the Spanish guttural g, followed by a rough double r r; when uttering this cry it elevates its head higher and higher,
This fact, which has been doubted, is quite true; I have seen them several times with their heads backwards in a completely inverted position.
To these observations I may add, on the high authority of Azara, that the Carrancha feeds on worms, shells, slugs, grasshoppers, and frogs; that it destroys young lambs by tearing the umbilical cord; and that it pursues the Gallinazo, till that bird is
Lastly, Azara states that several Carranchas, five or six together, will unite in chase of large birds, even such as herons.
All these facts show that it is a bird of very versatile habits and considerable ingenuity.
The Polyborus Chimango is considerably smaller than the last species.
It is truly omnivorous, and will eat even bread; and I was assured that it materially injures the potato crops in Chiloe, by stocking up the roots when first planted.
Of all the carrion-feeders it is generally the last which leaves the skeleton of a dead animal, and may often be seen within the ribs of a cow or horse, like a bird in a cage.
Another species is the Polyborus Novae Zelandiae, which is exceedingly common in the Falkland Islands.
These birds in many respects resemble in their habits the Carranchas.
They live on the flesh of dead animals and on marine productions; and on the Ramirez rocks their whole sustenance must depend on the sea.
They are extraordinarily tame and fearless, and haunt the neighborhood of houses for offal.
If a hunting party kills an animal, a number soon collect and patiently await, standing on the ground on all sides.
After eating, their uncovered craws are largely protruded, giving them a disgusting appearance.
They readily attack wounded birds: a cormorant in this state having taken to the shore, was immediately seized on by several, and its death hastened by their blows.
The Beagle was at the Falklands only during the summer, but the officers of the Adventure, who were there in the winter, mention many extraordinary instances of the boldness and rapacity of these birds.
They actually pounced on a dog that was lying fast asleep close by one of the party; and the sportsmen had difficulty in preventing the wounded geese from being seized before their eyes.
It is said that several together (in this respect resembling the Carranchas) wait at the mouth of a rabbit-hole, and together seize on the animal when it comes out.
They were constantly flying on board the vessel when in the harbour; and it was necessary to keep a good look out to prevent the leather being torn from the rigging, and the meat or game from the stern.
These birds are very mischievous and inquisitive; they will pick up almost anything from the ground; a large black glazed hat was carried nearly a mile, as was a pair of the heavy balls used in catching cattle.
Mr. Usborne experienced during the survey a more severe loss, in their stealing a small Kater's compass in a red morocco leather case, which was never recovered.
These birds are, moreover, quarrelsome and very passionate; tearing up the grass with their bills from rage.
They are not truly gregarious; they do not soar, and their flight is heavy and clumsy; on the ground they run extremely fast, very much like pheasants.
They are noisy, uttering several harsh cries, one of which is like that of the English rook, hence the sealers always call them rooks.
It is a curious circumstance that, when crying out, they throw their heads upwards and backwards, after the same manner as the Carrancha.
They build in the rocky cliffs of the sea-coast, but only on the small adjoining islets, and not on the two main islands: this is a singular precaution in so tame and fearless a bird.
The sealers say that the flesh of these birds, when cooked, is quite white, and very good eating; but bold must the man be who attempts such a meal.
We have now only to mention the turkey-buzzard (Vultur aura), and the Gallinazo.
The former is found wherever the country is moderately damp, from Cape Horn to North America.
Differently from the Polyborus Brasiliensis and Chimango, it has found its way to the Falkland Islands.
The turkey-buzzard is a solitary bird, or at most goes in pairs.
It may at once be recognised from a long distance, by its lofty, soaring, and most elegant flight.
It is well known to be a true carrion-feeder.
On the west coast of Patagonia, among the thickly-wooded islets and broken land, it lives exclusively on what the sea throws up, and on the carcasses of dead seals.
Wherever these animals are congregated on the rocks, there the vultures may be seen.
The Gallinazo (Cathartes atratus) has a different range from the last species, as it never occurs southward of lat.
41 degs.
Azara states that there exists a tradition that these birds, at the time of the conquest, were not found near Monte Video, but that they subsequently followed the inhabitants from more northern districts.
At the present day they are numerous in the valley of the Colorado, which is three hundred miles due south of Monte Video.
It seems probable that this additional migration has happened since the time of Azara.
The Gallinazo generally prefers a humid climate, or rather the neighbourhood of fresh water; hence it is extremely abundant in Brazil and La Plata, while it is never found on the desert and arid plains of Northern Patagonia, excepting near some stream.
These birds frequent the whole Pampas to the foot of the Cordillera, but I never saw or heard of one in Chile; in Peru they are preserved as scavengers.
These vultures certainly may be called gregarious, for they seem to have pleasure in society, and are not solely brought together by the attraction of a common prey.
On a fine day a flock may often be observed at a great height, each bird wheeling round and round without closing its wings, in the most graceful evolutions.
This is clearly performed for the mere pleasure of the exercise, or perhaps is connected with their matrimonial alliances.
I have now mentioned all the carrion-feeders, excepting the condor, an account of which will be more appropriately introduced when we visit a country more congenial to its habits than the plains of La Plata.
In a broad band of sand-hillocks which separate the Laguna del Potrero from the shores of the Plata, at the distance of a few miles from Maldonado, I found a group of those vitrified, siliceous tubes, which are formed by lightning entering loose sand.
These tubes resemble in every particular those from Drigg in Cumberland, described in the Geological Transactions.
[10] The sand-hillocks of Maldonado not being protected by vegetation, are constantly changing their position.
From this cause the tubes projected above the surface, and numerous fragments lying near, showed that they had formerly been buried to a greater depth.
Four sets entered the sand perpendicularly: by working with my hands I traced one of them two feet deep; and some fragments which evidently had belonged to the same tube, when added to the other part, measured five feet three inches.
The diameter of the whole tube was nearly equal, and therefore we must suppose that originally it extended to a much greater depth.
These dimensions are however small, compared to those of the tubes from Drigg, one of which was traced to a depth of not less than thirty feet.
The internal surface is completely vitrified, glossy, and smooth.
A small fragment examined under the microscope appeared, from the number of minute entangled air or perhaps steam bubbles, like an assay fused before the blowpipe.
The sand is entirely, or in greater part, siliceous; but some points are of a black colour, and from their glossy surface possess a metallic lustre.
The thickness of the wall of the tube varies from a thirtieth to a twentieth of an inch, and occasionally even equals a tenth.
On the outside the grains of sand are rounded, and have a slightly glazed appearance: I could not distinguish any signs of crystallization.
In a similar manner to that described in the Geological Transactions, the tubes are generally compressed, and have deep longitudinal furrows, so as closely to resemble a shrivelled vegetable stalk, or the bark of the elm or cork tree.
Their circumference is about two inches, but in some fragments, which are cylindrical and without any furrows, it is as much as four inches.
The compression from the surrounding loose sand, acting while the tube was still softened from the effects of the intense heat, has evidently caused the creases or furrows.
Judging from the uncompressed fragments, the measure or bore of the lightning (if such a term may be used) must have been about one inch and a quarter.
At Paris, M. Hachette and M. Beudant [11] succeeded in making tubes, in most respects similar to these fulgurites, by passing very strong shocks of galvanism through finely-powdered glass: when salt was added, so as to increase its fusibility, the tubes
They failed both with powdered felspar and quartz.
One tube, formed with pounded glass, was very nearly an inch long, namely .
982, and had an internal diameter of .
019 of an inch.
When we hear that the strongest battery in Paris was used, and that its power on a substance of such easy fusibility as glass was to form tubes so diminutive, we must feel greatly astonished at the force of a shock of lightning, which, striking the sand in
The tubes, as I have already remarked, enter the sand nearly in a vertical direction.
One, however, which was less regular than the others, deviated from a right line, at the most considerable bend, to the amount of thirty-three degrees.
From this same tube, two small branches, about a foot apart, were sent off; one pointed downwards, and the other upwards.
This latter case is remarkable, as the electric fluid must have turned back at the acute angle of 26 degs.
, to the line of its main course.
Besides the four tubes which I found vertical, and traced beneath the surface, there were several other groups of fragments, the original sites of which without doubt were near.
All occurred in a level area of shifting sand, sixty yards by twenty, situated among some high sand-hillocks, and at the distance of about half a mile from a chain of hills four or five hundred feet in height.
The most remarkable circumstance, as it appears to me, in this case as well as in that of Drigg, and in one described by M. Ribbentrop in Germany, is the number of tubes found within such limited spaces.
At Drigg, within an area of fifteen yards, three were observed, and the same number occurred in Germany.
In the case which I have described, certainly more than four existed within the space of the sixty by twenty yards.
As it does not appear probable that the tubes are produced by successive distinct shocks, we must believe that the lightning, shortly before entering the ground, divides itself into separate branches.
The neighbourhood of the Rio Plata seems peculiarly subject to electric phenomena.
In the year 1793, [12] one of the most destructive thunderstorms perhaps on record happened at Buenos Ayres: thirty-seven places within the city were struck by lightning, and nineteen people killed.
From facts stated in several books of travels, I am inclined to suspect that thunderstorms are very common near the mouths of great rivers.
Is it not possible that the mixture of large bodies of fresh and salt water may disturb the electrical equilibrium?
Even during our occasional visits to this part of South America, we heard of a ship, two churches, and a house having been struck.
Both the church and the house I saw shortly afterwards: the house belonged to Mr. Hood, the consul-general at Monte Video.
Some of the effects were curious: the paper, for nearly a foot on each side of the line where the bell-wires had run, was blackened.
The metal had been fused, and although the room was about fifteen feet high, the globules, dropping on the chairs and furniture, had drilled in them a chain of minute holes.
A part of the wall was shattered, as if by gunpowder, and the fragments had been blown off with force sufficient to dent the wall on the opposite side of the room.
The frame of a looking-glass was blackened, and the gilding must have been volatilized, for a smelling-bottle, which stood on the chimney-piece, was coated with bright metallic particles, which adhered as firmly as if they had been enamelled.
[1] Hearne's Journey, p.
383.
[2] Maclaren, art.
"America," Encyclop.
Brittann.
[3] Azara says, "Je crois que la quantite annuelle des pluies est, dans toutes ces contrees, plus considerable qu'en Espagne".
--Vol.
i.
p.
36.
[4] In South America I collected altogether twenty-seven species of mice, and thirteen more are known from the works of Azara and other authors.
Those collected by myself have been named and described by Mr. Waterhouse at the meetings of the Zoological Society.
I must be allowed to take this opportunity of returning my cordial thanks to Mr. Waterhouse, and to the other gentleman attached to that Society, for their kind and most liberal assistance on all occasions.
[5] In the stomach and duodenum of a capybara which I opened I found a very large quantity of a thin yellowish fluid, in which scarcely a fibre could be distinguished.
Mr. Owen informs me that a part of the oesophagus is so constructed that nothing much larger than a crowquill can be passed down.
Certainly the broad teeth and strong jaws of this animal are well fitted to grind into pulp the aquatic plants on which it feeds.
[6] At the R. Negro, in Northern Patagonia, there is an animal of the same habits, and probably a closely allied species, but which I never saw.
Its noise is different from that of the Maldonado kind; it is repeated only twice instead of three or four times, and is more distinct and sonorous; when heard from a distance it so closely resembles the sound made in cutting down a small tree with an axe,
[7] Philosoph.
Zoolog.
, tom.
i.
p.
242.
[8] Magazine of Zoology and Botany, vol.
i.
p.
217.
[9] Read before the Academy of Sciences in Paris.
L'Institut, 1834, p.
418.
[10] Geolog.
Transact.
vol.
ii.
p.
528.
In the Philosoph.
Transact.
(1790, p.
294) Dr. Priestly has described some imperfect siliceous tubes and a melted pebble of quartz, found in digging into the ground, under a tree, where a man had been killed by lightning.
[11] Annals de Chimie et de Physique, tom.
xxxvii.
p.
319.
[12] Azara's Voyage, vol.
i.
p.
36.
CHAPTER IV RIO NEGRO TO BAHIA BLANCA Rio Negro--Estancias attacked by the Indians--Salt-Lakes--Flamingoes--R.
Negro to R. Colorado--Sacred Tree--Patagonian Hare--Indian Families--General Rosas--Proceed to Bahia Blanca--Sand Dunes--Negro Lieutenant--Bahia Blanca--Saline Incrustations--Punta Alta--Zorillo.
JULY 24th, 1833.
--The Beagle sailed from Maldonado, and on August the 3rd she arrived off the mouth of the Rio Negro.
This is the principal river on the whole line of coast between the Strait of Magellan and the Plata.
It enters the sea about three hundred miles south of the estuary of the Plata.
About fifty years ago, under the old Spanish government, a small colony was established here; and it is still the most southern position (lat.
41 degs.
) on this eastern coast of America inhabited by civilized man.
The country near the mouth of the river is wretched in the extreme: on the south side a long line of perpendicular cliffs commences, which exposes a section of the geological nature of the country.
The strata are of sandstone, and one layer was remarkable from being composed of a firmly-cemented conglomerate of pumice pebbles, which must have travelled more than four hundred miles, from the Andes.
The surface is everywhere covered up by a thick bed of gravel, which extends far and wide over the open plain.
Water is extremely scarce, and, where found, is almost invariably brackish.
The vegetation is scanty; and although there are bushes of many kinds, all are armed with formidable thorns, which seem to warn the stranger not to enter on these inhospitable regions.
The settlement is situated eighteen miles up the river.
The road follows the foot of the sloping cliff, which forms the northern boundary of the great valley, in which the Rio Negro flows.
On the way we passed the ruins of some fine "estancias," which a few years since had been destroyed by the Indians.
They withstood several attacks.
A man present at one gave me a very lively description of what took place.
The inhabitants had sufficient notice to drive all the cattle and horses into the "corral" [1] which surrounded the house, and likewise to mount some small cannon.
The Indians were Araucanians from the south of Chile; several hundreds in number, and highly disciplined.
They first appeared in two bodies on a neighbouring hill; having there dismounted, and taken off their fur mantles, they advanced naked to the charge.
The only weapon of an Indian is a very long bamboo or chuzo, ornamented with ostrich feathers, and pointed by a sharp spearhead.
My informer seemed to remember with the greatest horror the quivering of these chuzos as they approached near.
When close, the cacique Pincheira hailed the besieged to give up their arms, or he would cut all their throats.
As this would probably have been the result of their entrance under any circumstances, the answer was given by a volley of musketry.
The Indians, with great steadiness, came to the very fence of the corral: but to their surprise they found the posts fastened together by iron nails instead of leather thongs, and, of course, in vain attempted to cut them with their knives.
This saved the lives of the Christians: many of the wounded Indians were carried away by their companions, and at last, one of the under caciques being wounded, the bugle sounded a retreat.
They retired to their horses, and seemed to hold a council of war.
This was an awful pause for the Spaniards, as all their ammunition, with the exception of a few cartridges, was expended.
In an instant the Indians mounted their horses, and galloped out of sight.
Another attack was still more quickly repulsed.
A cool Frenchman managed the gun; he stopped till the Indians approached close, and then raked their line with grape-shot: he thus laid thirty-nine of them on the ground; and, of course, such a blow immediately routed the whole party.
The town is indifferently called El Carmen or Patagones.
It is built on the face of a cliff which fronts the river, and many of the houses are excavated even in the sandstone.
The river is about two or three hundred yards wide, and is deep and rapid.
The many islands, with their willow-trees, and the flat headlands, seen one behind the other on the northern boundary of the broad green valley, form, by the aid of a bright sun, a view almost picturesque.
The number of inhabitants does not exceed a few hundreds.
These Spanish colonies do not, like our British ones, carry within themselves the elements of growth.
Many Indians of pure blood reside here: the tribe of the Cacique Lucanee constantly have their Toldos [2] on the outskirts of the town.
The local government partly supplies them with provisions, by giving them all the old worn-out horses, and they earn a little by making horse-rugs and other articles of riding-gear.
These Indians are considered civilized; but what their character may have gained by a lesser degree of ferocity, is almost counterbalanced by their entire immorality.
Some of the younger men are, however, improving; they are willing to labour, and a short time since a party went on a sealing-voyage, and behaved very well.
They were now enjoying the fruits of their labour, by being dressed in very gay, clean clothes, and by being very idle.
The taste they showed in their dress was admirable; if you could have turned one of these young Indians into a statue of bronze, his drapery would have been perfectly graceful.
One day I rode to a large salt-lake, or Salina, which is distant fifteen miles from the town.
During the winter it consists of a shallow lake of brine, which in summer is converted into a field of snow-white salt.
The layer near the margin is from four to five inches thick, but towards the centre its thickness increases.
This lake was two and a half miles long, and one broad.
Others occur in the neighbourhood many times larger, and with a floor of salt, two and three feet in thickness, even when under water during the winter.
One of these brilliantly white and level expanses in the midst of the brown and desolate plain, offers an extraordinary spectacle.
A large quantity of salt is annually drawn from the salina: and great piles, some hundred tons in weight, were lying ready for exportation.
The season for working the salinas forms the harvest of Patagones; for on it the prosperity of the place depends.
Nearly the whole population encamps on the bank of the river, and the people are employed in drawing out the salt in bullock-waggons, This salt is crystallized in great cubes, and is remarkably pure: Mr. Trenham Reeks has kindly analyzed some for me, and
26 of gypsum and 0.
22 of earthy matter.
It is a singular fact, that it does not serve so well for preserving meat as sea-salt from the Cape de Verd islands; and a merchant at Buenos Ayres told me that he considered it as fifty per cent.
less valuable.
Hence the Cape de Verd salt is constantly imported, and is mixed with that from these salinas.
The purity of the Patagonian salt, or absence from it of those other saline bodies found in all sea-water, is the only assignable cause for this inferiority: a conclusion which no one, I think, would have suspected, but which is supported by the fact
The border of this lake is formed of mud: and in this numerous large crystals of gypsum, some of which are three inches long, lie embedded; whilst on the surface others of sulphate of soda lie scattered about.
The Gauchos call the former the "Padre del sal," and the latter the "Madre;" they state that these progenitive salts always occur on the borders of the salinas, when the water begins to evaporate.
The mud is black, and has a fetid odour.
I could not at first imagine the cause of this, but I afterwards perceived that the froth which the wind drifted on shore was coloured green, as if by confervae; I attempted to carry home some of this green matter, but from an accident failed.
Parts of the lake seen from a short distance appeared of a reddish colour, and this perhaps was owing to some infusorial animalcula.
The mud in many places was thrown up by numbers of some kind of worm, or annelidous animal.
How surprising it is that any creatures should be able to exist in brine, and that they should be crawling among crystals of sulphate of soda and lime!
And what becomes of these worms when, during the long summer, the surface is hardened into a solid layer of salt?
Flamingoes in considerable numbers inhabit this lake, and breed here, throughout Patagonia, in Northern Chile, and at the Galapagos Islands, I met with these birds wherever there were lakes of brine.
I saw them here wading about in search of food--probably for the worms which burrow in the mud; and these latter probably feed on infusoria or confervae.
Thus we have a little living world within itself adapted to these inland lakes of brine.
A minute crustaceous animal (Cancer salinus) is said [4] to live in countless numbers in the brine-pans at Lymington: but only in those in which the fluid has attained, from evaporation, considerable strength--namely, about a quarter of a pound of salt to
Well may we affirm that every part of the world is habitable!
Whether lakes of brine, or those subterranean ones hidden beneath volcanic mountains--warm mineral springs--the wide expanse and depths of the ocean--the upper regions of the atmosphere, and even the surface of perpetual snow--all support organic beings.
To the northward of the Rio Negro, between it and the inhabited country near Buenos Ayres, the Spaniards have only one small settlement, recently established at Bahia Blanca.
The distance in a straight line to Buenos Ayres is very nearly five hundred British miles.
The wandering tribes of horse Indians, which have always occupied the greater part of this country, having of late much harassed the outlying estancias, the government at Buenos Ayres equipped some time since an army under the command of General Rosas for
The troops were now encamped on the banks of the Colorado; a river lying about eighty miles northward of the Rio Negro.
When General Rosas left Buenos Ayres he struck in a direct line across the unexplored plains: and as the country was thus pretty well cleared of Indians, he left behind him, at wide intervals, a small party of soldiers with a troop of horses (a posta), so
As the Beagle intended to call at Bahia Blanca, I determined to proceed there by land; and ultimately I extended my plan to travel the whole way by the postas to Buenos Ayres.
August 11th.
--Mr. Harris, an Englishman residing at Patagones, a guide, and five Gauchos who were proceeding to the army on business, were my companions on the journey.
The Colorado, as I have already said, is nearly eighty miles distant: and as we travelled slowly, we were two days and a half on the road.
The whole line of country deserves scarcely a better name than that of a desert.
Water is found only in two small wells; it is called fresh; but even at this time of the year, during the rainy season, it was quite brackish.
In the summer this must be a distressing passage; for now it was sufficiently desolate.
The valley of the Rio Negro, broad as it is, has merely been excavated out of the sandstone plain; for immediately above the bank on which the town stands, a level country commences, which is interrupted only by a few trifling valleys and depressions.
Everywhere the landscape wears the same sterile aspect; a dry gravelly soil supports tufts of brown withered grass, and low scattered bushes, armed with thorns.
Shortly after passing the first spring we came in sight of a famous tree, which the Indians reverence as the altar of Walleechu.
It is situated on a high part of the plain; and hence is a landmark visible at a great distance.
As soon as a tribe of Indians come in sight of it, they offer their adorations by loud shouts.
The tree itself is low, much branched, and thorny: just above the root it has a diameter of about three feet.
It stands by itself without any neighbour, and was indeed the first tree we saw; afterwards we met with a few others of the same kind, but they were far from common.
Being winter the tree had no leaves, but in their place numberless threads, by which the various offerings, such as cigars, bread, meat, pieces of cloth, etc.
, had been suspended.
Poor Indians, not having anything better, only pull a thread out of their ponchos, and fasten it to the tree.
Richer Indians are accustomed to pour spirits and mate into a certain hole, and likewise to smoke upwards, thinking thus to afford all possible gratification to Walleechu.
To complete the scene, the tree was surrounded by the bleached bones of horses which had been slaughtered as sacrifices.
All Indians of every age and sex make their offerings; they then think that their horses will not tire, and that they themselves shall be prosperous.
The Gaucho who told me this, said that in the time of peace he had witnessed this scene, and that he and others used to wait till the Indians had passed by, for the sake of stealing from Walleechu the offerings.
The Gauchos think that the Indians consider the tree as the god itself, but it seems for more probable that they regard it as the altar.
The only cause which I can imagine for this choice, is its being a landmark in a dangerous passage.
The Sierra de la Ventana is visible at an immense distance; and a Gaucho told me that he was once riding with an Indian a few miles to the north of the Rio Colorado when the Indian commenced making the same loud noise which is usual at the first sight of
Upon being asked the reason of this, the Indian said in broken Spanish, "First see the Sierra".
About two leagues beyond this curious tree we halted for the night: at this instant an unfortunate cow was spied by the lynx-eyed Gauchos, who set off in full chase, and in a few minutes dragged her in with their lazos, and slaughtered her.
We here had the four necessaries of life "en el campo,"--pasture for the horses, water (only a muddy puddle), meat and firewood.
The Gauchos were in high spirits at finding all these luxuries; and we soon set to work at the poor cow.
This was the first night which I passed under the open sky, with the gear of the recado for my bed.
There is high enjoyment in the independence of the Gaucho life--to be able at any moment to pull up your horse, and say, "Here we will pass the night".
The death-like stillness of the plain, the dogs keeping watch, the gipsy-group of Gauchos making their beds round the fire, have left in my mind a strongly-marked picture of this first night, which will never be forgotten.
The next day the country continued similar to that above described.
It is inhabited by few birds or animals of any kind.
Occasionally a deer, or a Guanaco (wild Llama) may be seen; but the Agouti (Cavia Patagonica) is the commonest quadruped.
This animal here represents our hares.
It differs, however, from that genus in many essential respects; for instance, it has only three toes behind.
It is also nearly twice the size, weighing from twenty to twenty-five pounds.
The Agouti is a true friend of the desert; it is a common feature of the landscape to see two or three hopping quickly one after the other in a straight line across these wild plains.
They are found as far north as the Sierra Tapalguen (lat.
37 degs.
30'), where the plain rather suddenly becomes greener and more humid; and their southern limit is between Port Desire and St. Julian, where there is no change in the nature of the country.
It is a singular fact, that although the Agouti is not now found as far south as Port St. Julian, yet that Captain Wood, in his voyage in 1670, talks of them as being numerous there.
What cause can have altered, in a wide, uninhabited, and rarely-visited country, the range of an animal like this?
It appears also, from the number shot by Captain Wood in one day at Port Desire, that they must have been considerably more abundant there formerly than at present.
Where the Bizcacha lives and makes its burrows, the Agouti uses them; but where, as at Bahia Blanca, the Bizcacha is not found, the Agouti burrows for itself.
The same thing occurs with the little owl of the Pampas (Athene cunicularia), which has so often been described as standing like a sentinel at the mouth of the burrows; for in Banda Oriental, owing to the absence of the Bizcacha, it is obliged to hollow
The next morning, as we approached the Rio Colorado, the appearance of the country changed; we soon came on a plain covered with turf, which, from its flowers, tall clover, and little owls, resembled the Pampas.
We passed also a muddy swamp of considerable extent, which in summer dries, and becomes incrusted with various salts; and hence is called a salitral.
It was covered by low succulent plants, of the same kind with those growing on the sea-shore.
The Colorado, at the pass where we crossed it, is only about sixty yards wide; generally it must be nearly double that width.
Its course is very tortuous, being marked by willow-trees and beds of reeds: in a direct line the distance to the mouth of the river is said to be nine leagues, but by water twenty-five.
We were delayed crossing in the canoe by some immense troops of mares, which were swimming the river in order to follow a division of troops into the interior.
A more ludicrous spectacle I never beheld than the hundreds and hundreds of heads, all directed one way, with pointed ears and distended snorting nostrils, appearing just above the water like a great shoal of some amphibious animal.
Mare's flesh is the only food which the soldiers have when on an expedition.
This gives them a great facility of movement; for the distance to which horses can be driven over these plains is quite surprising: I have been assured that an unloaded horse can travel a hundred miles a day for many days successively.
The encampment of General Rosas was close to the river.
It consisted of a square formed by waggons, artillery, straw huts, etc.
The soldiers were nearly all cavalry; and I should think such a villainous, banditti-like army was never before collected together.
The greater number of men were of a mixed breed, between Negro, Indian, and Spaniard.
I know not the reason, but men of such origin seldom have a good expression of countenance.
I called on the Secretary to show my passport.
He began to cross-question me in the most dignified and mysterious manner.
By good luck I had a letter of recommendation from the government of Buenos Ayres [5] to the commandant of Patagones.
This was taken to General Rosas, who sent me a very obliging message; and the Secretary returned all smiles and graciousness.
We took up our residence in the _rancho_, or hovel, of a curious old Spaniard, who had served with Napoleon in the expedition against Russia.
We stayed two days at the Colorado; I had little to do, for the surrounding country was a swamp, which in summer (December), when the snow melts on the Cordillera, is over-flowed by the river.
My chief amusement was watching the Indian families as they came to buy little articles at the rancho where we stayed.
It was supposed that General Rosas had about six hundred Indian allies.
The men were a tall, fine race, yet it was afterwards easy to see in the Fuegian savage the same countenance rendered hideous by cold, want of food, and less civilization.
Some authors, in defining the primary races of mankind, have separated these Indians into two classes; but this is certainly incorrect.
Among the young women or chinas, some deserve to be called even beautiful.
Their hair was coarse, but bright and black; and they wore it in two plaits hanging down to the waist.
They had a high colour, and eyes that glistened with brilliancy; their legs, feet, and arms were small and elegantly formed; their ankles, and sometimes their wrists, were ornamented by broad bracelets of blue beads.
Nothing could be more interesting than some of the family groups.
A mother with one or two daughters would often come to our rancho, mounted on the same horse.
They ride like men, but with their knees tucked up much higher.
This habit, perhaps, arises from their being accustomed, when travelling, to ride the loaded horses.
The duty of the women is to load and unload the horses; to make the tents for the night; in short to be, like the wives of all savages, useful slaves.
The men fight, hunt, take care of the horses, and make the riding gear.
One of their chief indoor occupations is to knock two stones together till they become round, in order to make the bolas.
With this important weapon the Indian catches his game, and also his horse, which roams free over the plain.
In fighting, his first attempt is to throw down the horse of his adversary with the bolas, and when entangled by the fall to kill him with the chuzo.
If the balls only catch the neck or body of an animal, they are often carried away and lost.
As the making the stones round is the labour of two days, the manufacture of the balls is a very common employment.
Several of the men and women had their faces painted red, but I never saw the horizontal bands which are so common among the Fuegians.
Their chief pride consists in having everything made of silver; I have seen a cacique with his spurs, stirrups, handle of his knife, and bridle made of this metal: the head-stall and reins being of wire, were not thicker than whipcord; and to see a fiery
General Rosas intimated a wish to see me; a circumstance which I was afterwards very glad of.
He is a man of an extraordinary character, and has a most predominant influence in the country, which it seems he will use to its prosperity and advancement.
[6] He is said to be the owner of seventy-four square leagues of land, and to have about three hundred thousand head of cattle.
His estates are admirably managed, and are far more productive of corn than those of others.
He first gained his celebrity by his laws for his own estancias, and by disciplining several hundred men, so as to resist with success the attacks of the Indians.
There are many stories current about the rigid manner in which his laws were enforced.
One of these was, that no man, on penalty of being put into the stocks, should carry his knife on a Sunday: this being the principal day for gambling and drinking, many quarrels arose, which from the general manner of fighting with the knife often proved
One Sunday the Governor came in great form to pay the estancia a visit, and General Rosas, in his hurry, walked out to receive him with his knife, as usual, stuck in his belt.
The steward touched his arm, and reminded him of the law; upon which turning to the Governor, he said he was extremely sorry, but that he must go into the stocks, and that till let out, he possessed no power even in his own house.
After a little time the steward was persuaded to open the stocks, and to let him out, but no sooner was this done, than he turned to the steward and said, "You now have broken the laws, so you must take my place in the stocks".
Such actions as these delighted the Gauchos, who all possess high notions of their own equality and dignity.
General Rosas is also a perfect horseman--an accomplishment of no small consequence In a country where an assembled army elected its general by the following trial: A troop of unbroken horses being driven into a corral, were let out through a gateway,
The person who succeeded was accordingly elected; and doubtless made a fit general for such an army.
This extraordinary feat has also been performed by Rosas.
By these means, and by conforming to the dress and habits of the Gauchos, he has obtained an unbounded popularity in the country, and in consequence a despotic power.
I was assured by an English merchant, that a man who had murdered another, when arrested and questioned concerning his motive, answered, "He spoke disrespectfully of General Rosas, so I killed him".
At the end of a week the murderer was at liberty.
This doubtless was the act of the general's party, and not of the general himself.
In conversation he is enthusiastic, sensible, and very grave.
His gravity is carried to a high pitch: I heard one of his mad buffoons (for he keeps two, like the barons of old) relate the following anecdote.
"I wanted very much to hear a certain piece of music, so I went to the general two or three times to ask him; he said to me, 'Go about your business, for I am engaged.
' I went a second time; he said, 'If you come again I will punish you.
' A third time I asked, and he laughed.
I rushed out of the tent, but it was too late--he ordered two soldiers to catch and stake me.
I begged by all the saints in heaven he would let me off; but it would not do,--when the general laughs he spares neither mad man nor sound".
The poor flighty gentleman looked quite dolorous, at the very recollection of the staking.
This is a very severe punishment; four posts are driven into the ground, and the man is extended by his arms and legs horizontally, and there left to stretch for several hours.
The idea is evidently taken from the usual method of drying hides.
My interview passed away, without a smile, and I obtained a passport and order for the government post-horses, and this he gave me in the most obliging and ready manner.
In the morning we started for Bahia Blanca, which we reached in two days.
Leaving the regular encampment, we passed by the toldos of the Indians.
These are round like ovens, and covered with hides; by the mouth of each, a tapering chuzo was stuck in the ground.
The toldos were divided into separate groups, which belong to the different caciques' tribes, and the groups were again divided into smaller ones, according to the relationship of the owners.
For several miles we travelled along the valley of the Colorado.
The alluvial plains on the side appeared fertile, and it is supposed that they are well adapted to the growth of corn.
Turning northward from the river, we soon entered on a country, differing from the plains south of the river.
The land still continued dry and sterile: but it supported many different kinds of plants, and the grass, though brown and withered, was more abundant, as the thorny bushes were less so.
These latter in a short space entirely disappeared, and the plains were left without a thicket to cover their nakedness.
This change in the vegetation marks the commencement of the grand calcareo argillaceous deposit, which forms the wide extent of the Pampas, and covers the granitic rocks of Banda Oriental.
From the Strait of Magellan to the Colorado, a distance of about eight hundred miles, the face of the country is everywhere composed of shingle: the pebbles are chiefly of porphyry, and probably owe their origin to the rocks of the Cordillera.
North of the Colorado this bed thins out, and the pebbles become exceedingly small, and here the characteristic vegetation of Patagonia ceases.
Having ridden about twenty-five miles, we came to a broad belt of sand-dunes, which stretches, as far as the eye can reach, to the east and west.
The sand-hillocks resting on the clay, allow small pools of water to collect, and thus afford in this dry country an invaluable supply of fresh water.
The great advantage arising from depressions and elevations of the soil, is not often brought home to the mind.
The two miserable springs in the long passage between the Rio Negro and Colorado were caused by trifling inequalities in the plain, without them not a drop of water would have been found.
The belt of sand-dunes is about eight miles wide; at some former period, it probably formed the margin of a grand estuary, where the Colorado now flows.
In this district, where absolute proofs of the recent elevation of the land occur, such speculations can hardly be neglected by any one, although merely considering the physical geography of the country.
Having crossed the sandy tract, we arrived in the evening at one of the post-houses; and, as the fresh horses were grazing at a distance we determined to pass the night there.
The house was situated at the base of a ridge between one and two hundred feet high--a most remarkable feature in this country.
This posta was commanded by a negro lieutenant, born in Africa: to his credit be it said, there was not a ranche between the Colorado and Buenos Ayres in nearly such neat order as his.
He had a little room for strangers, and a small corral for the horses, all made of sticks and reeds; he had also dug a ditch round his house as a defence in case of being attacked.
This would, however, have been of little avail, if the Indians had come; but his chief comfort seemed to rest in the thought of selling his life dearly.
A short time before, a body of Indians had travelled past in the night; if they had been aware of the posta, our black friend and his four soldiers would assuredly have been slaughtered.
I did not anywhere meet a more civil and obliging man than this negro; it was therefore the more painful to see that he would not sit down and eat with us.
In the morning we sent for the horses very early, and started for another exhilarating gallop.
We passed the Cabeza del Buey, an old name given to the head of a large marsh, which extends from Bahia Blanca.
Here we changed horses, and passed through some leagues of swamps and saline marshes.
Changing horses for the last time, we again began wading through the mud.
My animal fell and I was well soused in black mire--a very disagreeable accident when one does not possess a change of clothes.
Some miles from the fort we met a man, who told us that a great gun had been fired, which is a signal that Indians are near.
We immediately left the road, and followed the edge of a marsh, which when chased offers the best mode of escape.
We were glad to arrive within the walls, when we found all the alarm was about nothing, for the Indians turned out to be friendly ones, who wished to join General Rosas.
Bahia Blanca scarcely deserves the name of a village.
A few houses and the barracks for the troops are enclosed by a deep ditch and fortified wall.
The settlement is only of recent standing (since 1828); and its growth has been one of trouble.
The government of Buenos Ayres unjustly occupied it by force, instead of following the wise example of the Spanish Viceroys, who purchased the land near the older settlement of the Rio Negro, from the Indians.
Hence the need of the fortifications; hence the few houses and little cultivated land without the limits of the walls; even the cattle are not safe from the attacks of the Indians beyond the boundaries of the plain, on which the fortress stands.
The part of the harbour where the Beagle intended to anchor being distant twenty-five miles, I obtained from the Commandant a guide and horses, to take me to see whether she had arrived.
Leaving the plain of green turf, which extended along the course of a little brook, we soon entered on a wide level waste consisting either of sand, saline marshes, or bare mud.
Some parts were clothed by low thickets, and others with those succulent plants, which luxuriate only where salt abounds.
Bad as the country was, ostriches, deer, agoutis, and armadilloes, were abundant.
My guide told me, that two months before he had a most narrow escape of his life: he was out hunting with two other men, at no great distance from this part of the country, when they were suddenly met by a party of Indians, who giving chase, soon overtook
His own horse's legs were also caught by the bolas, but he jumped off, and with his knife cut them free: while doing this he was obliged to dodge round his horse, and received two severe wounds from their chuzos.
Springing on the saddle, he managed, by a most wonderful exertion, just to keep ahead of the long spears of his pursuers, who followed him to within sight of the fort.
From that time there was an order that no one should stray far from the settlement.
I did not know of this when I started, and was surprised to observe how earnestly my guide watched a deer, which appeared to have been frightened from a distant quarter.
We found the Beagle had not arrived, and consequently set out on our return, but the horses soon tiring, we were obliged to bivouac on the plain.
In the morning we had caught an armadillo, which although a most excellent dish when roasted in its shell, did not make a very substantial breakfast and dinner for two hungry men.
The ground at the place where we stopped for the night, was incrusted with a layer of sulphate of soda, and hence, of course, was without water.
Yet many of the smaller rodents managed to exist even here, and the tucutuco was making its odd little grunt beneath my head, during half the night.
Our horses were very poor ones, and in the morning they were soon exhausted from not having had anything to drink, so that we were obliged to walk.
About noon the dogs killed a kid, which we roasted.
I ate some of it, but it made me intolerably thirsty.
This was the more distressing as the road, from some recent rain, was full of little puddles of clear water, yet not a drop was drinkable.
I had scarcely been twenty hours without water, and only part of the time under a hot sun, yet the thirst rendered me very weak.
How people survive two or three days under such circumstances, I cannot imagine: at the same time, I must confess that my guide did not suffer at all, and was astonished that one day's deprivation should be so troublesome to me.
I have several times alluded to the surface of the ground being incrusted with salt.
This phenomenon is quite different from that of the salinas, and more extraordinary.
In many parts of South America, wherever the climate is moderately dry, these incrustations occur; but I have nowhere seen them so abundant as near Bahia Blanca.
The salt here, and in other parts of Patagonia, consists chiefly of sulphate of soda with some common salt.
As long as the ground remains moist in the salitrales (as the Spaniards improperly call them, mistaking this substance for saltpeter), nothing is to be seen but an extensive plain composed of a black, muddy soil, supporting scattered tufts of succulent
On returning through one of these tracts, after a week's hot weather, one is surprised to see square miles of the plain white, as if from a slight fall of snow, here and there heaped up by the wind into little drifts.
This latter appearance is chiefly caused by the salts being drawn up, during the slow evaporation of the moisture, round blades of dead grass, stumps of wood, and pieces of broken earth, instead of being crystallized at the bottoms of the puddles of water.
The salitrales occur either on level tracts elevated only a few feet above the level of the sea, or on alluvial land bordering rivers.
M. Parchappe [7] found that the saline incrustation on the plain, at the distance of some miles from the sea, consisted chiefly of sulphate of soda, with only seven per cent.
of common salt; whilst nearer to the coast, the common salt increased to 37 parts in a hundred.
This circumstance would tempt one to believe that the sulphate of soda is generated in the soil, from the muriate, left on the surface during the slow and recent elevation of this dry country.
The whole phenomenon is well worthy the attention of naturalists.
Have the succulent, salt-loving plants, which are well known to contain much soda, the power of decomposing the muriate?
Does the black fetid mud, abounding with organic matter, yield the sulphur and ultimately the sulphuric acid?
Two days afterwards I again rode to the harbour: when not far from our destination, my companion, the same man as before, spied three people hunting on horseback.
He immediately dismounted, and watching them intently, said, "They don't ride like Christians, and nobody can leave the fort".
The three hunters joined company, and likewise dismounted from their horses.
At last one mounted again and rode over the hill out of sight.
My companion said, "We must now get on our horses: load your pistol;" and he looked to his own sword.
I asked, "Are they Indians"?
--"Quien sabe?
(who knows?
) if there are no more than three, it does not signify".
It then struck me, that the one man had gone over the hill to fetch the rest of his tribe.
I suggested this; but all the answer I could extort was, "Quien sabe"?
His head and eye never for a minute ceased scanning slowly the distant horizon.
I thought his uncommon coolness too good a joke, and asked him why he did not return home.
I was startled when he answered, "We are returning, but in a line so as to pass near a swamp, into which we can gallop the horses as far as they can go, and then trust to our own legs; so that there is no danger".
I did not feel quite so confident of this, and wanted to increase our pace.
He said, "No, not until they do".
When any little inequality concealed us, we galloped; but when in sight, continued walking.
At last we reached a valley, and turning to the left, galloped quickly to the foot of a hill; he gave me his horse to hold, made the dogs lie down, and then crawled on his hands and knees to reconnoitre.
He remained in this position for some time, and at last, bursting out in laughter, exclaimed, "Mugeres"!
(women!
).
He knew them to be the wife and sister-in-law of the major's son, hunting for ostrich's eggs.
I have described this man's conduct, because he acted under the full impression that they were Indians.
As soon, however, as the absurd mistake was found out, he gave me a hundred reasons why they could not have been Indians; but all these were forgotten at the time.
We then rode on in peace and quietness to a low point called Punta Alta, whence we could see nearly the whole of the great harbour of Bahia Blanca.
The wide expanse of water is choked up by numerous great mud-banks, which the inhabitants call Cangrejales, or _crabberies_, from the number of small crabs.
The mud is so soft that it is impossible to walk over them, even for the shortest distance.
Many of the banks have their surfaces covered with long rushes, the tops of which alone are visible at high water.
On one occasion, when in a boat, we were so entangled by these shallows that we could hardly find our way.
Nothing was visible but the flat beds of mud; the day was not very clear, and there was much refraction, or as the sailors expressed it, "things loomed high".
The only object within our view which was not level was the horizon; rushes looked like bushes unsupported in the air, and water like mud-banks, and mud-banks like water.
We passed the night in Punta Alta, and I employed myself in searching for fossil bones; this point being a perfect catacomb for monsters of extinct races.
The evening was perfectly calm and clear; the extreme monotony of the view gave it an interest even in the midst of mud-banks and gulls sand-hillocks and solitary vultures.
In riding back in the morning we came across a very fresh track of a Puma, but did not succeed in finding it.
We saw also a couple of Zorillos, or skunks,--odious animals, which are far from uncommon.
In general appearance, the Zorillo resembles a polecat, but it is rather larger, and much thicker in proportion.
Conscious of its power, it roams by day about the open plain, and fears neither dog nor man.
If a dog is urged to the attack, its courage is instantly checked by a few drops of the fetid oil, which brings on violent sickness and running at the nose.
Whatever is once polluted by it, is for ever useless.
Azara says the smell can be perceived at a league distant; more than once, when entering the harbour of Monte Video, the wind being off shore, we have perceived the odour on board the Beagle.
Certain it is, that every animal most willingly makes room for the Zorillo.
[1] The corral is an enclosure made of tall and strong stakes.
Every estancia, or farming estate, has one attached to it.
[2] The hovels of the Indians are thus called.
[3] Report of the Agricult.
Chem.
Assoc.
in the Agricult.
Gazette, 1845, p.
93.
[4] Linnaean Trans.
, vol.
xi.
p.
205.
It is remarkable how all the circumstances connected with the salt-lakes in Siberia and Patagonia are similar.
Siberia, like Patagonia, appears to have been recently elevated above the waters of the sea.
In both countries the salt-lakes occupy shallow depressions in the plains; in both the mud on the borders is black and fetid; beneath the crust of common salt, sulphate of soda or of magnesium occurs, imperfectly crystallized; and in both, the muddy sand
The Siberian salt-lakes are inhabited by small crustaceous animals; and flamingoes (Edin.
New Philos.
Jour.
, Jan 1830) likewise frequent them.
As these circumstances, apparently so trifling, occur in two distant continents, we may feel sure that they are the necessary results of a common cause--See Pallas's Travels, 1793 to 1794, pp.
129 - 134.
[5] I am bound to express in the strongest terms, my obligation to the government of Buenos Ayres for the obliging manner in which passports to all parts of the country were given me, as naturalist of the Beagle.
[6] This prophecy has turned out entirely and miserably wrong.
1845.
[7] Voyage dans l'Amerique Merid.
par M. A. d'Orbigny.
Part.
Hist.
tom.
i.
p.
664.
CHAPTER V BAHIA BLANCA Bahia Blanca--Geology--Numerous gigantic Quadrupeds--Recent Extinction--Longevity of species--Large Animals do not require a luxuriant vegetation--Southern Africa--Siberian Fossils--Two Species of Ostrich--Habits of
The Beagle arrived here on the 24th of August, and a week afterwards sailed for the Plata.
With Captain Fitz Roy's consent I was left behind, to travel by land to Buenos Ayres.
I will here add some observations, which were made during this visit and on a previous occasion, when the Beagle was employed in surveying the harbour.
The plain, at the distance of a few miles from the coast, belongs to the great Pampean formation, which consists in part of a reddish clay, and in part of a highly calcareous marly rock.
Nearer the coast there are some plains formed from the wreck of the upper plain, and from mud, gravel, and sand thrown up by the sea during the slow elevation of the land, of which elevation we have evidence in upraised beds of recent shells, and in
At Punta Alta we have a section of one of these later-formed little plains, which is highly interesting from the number and extraordinary character of the remains of gigantic land-animals embedded in it.
These have been fully described by Professor Owen, in the Zoology of the voyage of the Beagle, and are deposited in the College of Surgeons.
I will here give only a brief outline of their nature.
First, parts of three heads and other bones of the Megatherium, the huge dimensions of which are expressed by its name.
Secondly, the Megalonyx, a great allied animal.
Thirdly, the Scelidotherium, also an allied animal, of which I obtained a nearly perfect skeleton.
It must have been as large as a rhinoceros: in the structure of its head it comes according to Mr. Owen, nearest to the Cape Anteater, but in some other respects it approaches to the armadilloes.
Fourthly, the Mylodon Darwinii, a closely related genus of little inferior size.
Fifthly, another gigantic edental quadruped.
Sixthly, a large animal, with an osseous coat in compartments, very like that of an armadillo.
Seventhly, an extinct kind of horse, to which I shall have again to refer.
Eighthly, a tooth of a Pachydermatous animal, probably the same with the Macrauchenia, a huge beast with a long neck like a camel, which I shall also refer to again.
Lastly, the Toxodon, perhaps one of the strangest animals ever discovered: in size it equalled an elephant or megatherium, but the structure of its teeth, as Mr. Owen states, proves indisputably that it was intimately related to the Gnawers, the order
How wonderfully are the different Orders, at the present time so well separated, blended together in different points of the structure of the Toxodon!
The remains of these nine great quadrupeds, and many detached bones, were found embedded on the beach, within the space of about 200 yards square.
It is a remarkable circumstance that so many different species should be found together; and it proves how numerous in kind the ancient inhabitants of this country must have been.
At the distance of about thirty miles from Punta Alta, in a cliff of red earth, I found several fragments of bones, some of large size.
Among them were the teeth of a gnawer, equalling in size and closely resembling those of the Capybara, whose habits have been described; and therefore, probably, an aquatic animal.
There was also part of the head of a Ctenomys; the species being different from the Tucutuco, but with a close general resemblance.
The red earth, like that of the Pampas, in which these remains were embedded, contains, according to Professor Ehrenberg, eight fresh-water and one salt-water infusorial animalcule; therefore, probably, it was an estuary deposit.
The remains at Punta Alta were embedded in stratified gravel and reddish mud, just such as the sea might now wash up on a shallow bank.
They were associated with twenty-three species of shells, of which thirteen are recent and four others very closely related to recent forms.
[1] From the bones of the Scelidotherium, including even the knee-cap, being intombed in their proper relative positions, and from the osseous armour of the great armadillo-like animal being so well preserved, together with the bones of one of its legs, we
[2] Hence we have good evidence that the above enumerated gigantic quadrupeds, more different from those of the present day than the oldest of the tertiary quadrupeds of Europe, lived whilst the sea was peopled with most of its present inhabitants; and we
[3] The great size of the bones of the Megatheroid animals, including the Megatherium, Megalonyx, Scelidotherium, and Mylodon, is truly wonderful.
The habits of life of these animals were a complete puzzle to naturalists, until Professor Owen [4] solved the problem with remarkable ingenuity.
The teeth indicate, by their simple structure, that these Megatheroid animals lived on vegetable food, and probably on the leaves and small twigs of trees; their ponderous forms and great strong curved claws seem so little adapted for locomotion, that some
It was a bold, not to say preposterous, idea to conceive even antediluvian trees, with branches strong enough to bear animals as large as elephants.
Professor Owen, with far more probability, believes that, instead of climbing on the trees, they pulled the branches down to them, and tore up the smaller ones by the roots, and so fed on the leaves.
The colossal breadth and weight of their hinder quarters, which can hardly be imagined without having been seen, become on this view, of obvious service, instead of being an incumbrance: their apparent clumsiness disappears.
With their great tails and their huge heels firmly fixed like a tripod on the ground, they could freely exert the full force of their most powerful arms and great claws.
Strongly rooted, indeed, must that tree have been, which could have resisted such force!
The Mylodon, moreover, was furnished with a long extensile tongue like that of the giraffe, which, by one of those beautiful provisions of nature, thus reaches with the aid of its long neck its leafy food.
I may remark, that in Abyssinia the elephant, according to Bruce, when it cannot reach with its proboscis the branches, deeply scores with its tusks the trunk of the tree, up and down and all round, till it is sufficiently weakened to be broken down.
The beds including the above fossil remains, stand only from fifteen to twenty feet above the level of high-water; and hence the elevation of the land has been small (without there has been an intercalated period of subsidence, of which we have no
What, it may naturally be asked, was the character of the vegetation at that period; was the country as wretchedly sterile as it now is?
As so many of the co-embedded shells are the same with those now living in the bay, I was at first inclined to think that the former vegetation was probably similar to the existing one; but this would have been an erroneous inference for some of these same
Nevertheless, from the following considerations, I do not believe that the simple fact of many gigantic quadrupeds having lived on the plains round Bahia Blanca, is any sure guide that they formerly were clothed with a luxuriant vegetation: I have no doubt
That large animals require a luxuriant vegetation, has been a general assumption which has passed from one work to another; but I do not hesitate to say that it is completely false, and that it has vitiated the reasoning of geologists on some points of
The prejudice has probably been derived from India, and the Indian islands, where troops of elephants, noble forests, and impenetrable jungles, are associated together in every one's mind.
If, however, we refer to any work of travels through the southern parts of Africa, we shall find allusions in almost every page either to the desert character of the country, or to the numbers of large animals inhabiting it.
The same thing is rendered evident by the many engravings which have been published of various parts of the interior.
When the Beagle was at Cape Town, I made an excursion of some days' length into the country, which at least was sufficient to render that which I had read more fully intelligible.
Dr. Andrew Smith, who, at the head of his adventurous party, has lately succeeded in passing the Tropic of Capricorn, informs me that, taking into consideration the whole of the southern part of Africa, there can be no doubt of its being a sterile country.
On the southern and south-eastern coasts there are some fine forests, but with these exceptions, the traveller may pass for days together through open plains, covered by a poor and scanty vegetation.
It is difficult to convey any accurate idea of degrees of comparative fertility; but it may be safely said that the amount of vegetation supported at any one time [5] by Great Britain, exceeds, perhaps even tenfold, the quantity on an equal area, in the
The fact that bullock-waggons can travel in any direction, excepting near the coast, without more than occasionally half an hour's delay in cutting down bushes, gives, perhaps, a more definite notion of the scantiness of the vegetation.
Now, if we look to the animals inhabiting these wide plains, we shall find their numbers extraordinarily great, and their bulk immense.
We must enumerate the elephant, three species of rhinoceros, and probably, according to Dr. Smith, two others, the hippopotamus, the giraffe, the bos caffer--as large as a full-grown bull, and the elan--but little less, two zebras, and the quaccha, two
It may be supposed that although the species are numerous, the individuals of each kind are few.
By the kindness of Dr. Smith, I am enabled to show that the case is very different.
He informs me, that in lat.
24 degs.
, in one day's march with the bullock-waggons, he saw, without wandering to any great distance on either side, between one hundred and one hundred and fifty rhinoceroses, which belonged to three species: the same day he saw several herds of giraffes,
At the distance of a little more than one hour's march from their place of encampment on the previous night, his party actually killed at one spot eight hippopotamuses, and saw many more.
In this same river there were likewise crocodiles.
Of course it was a case quite extraordinary, to see so many great animals crowded together, but it evidently proves that they must exist in great numbers.
Dr. Smith describes the country passed through that day, as "being thinly covered with grass, and bushes about four feet high, and still more thinly with mimosa-trees".
The waggons were not prevented travelling in a nearly straight line.
Besides these large animals, every one the least acquainted with the natural history of the Cape, has read of the herds of antelopes, which can be compared only with the flocks of migratory birds.
The numbers indeed of the lion, panther, and hyaena, and the multitude of birds of prey, plainly speak of the abundance of the smaller quadrupeds: one evening seven lions were counted at the same time prowling round Dr. Smith's encampment.
As this able naturalist remarked to me, the carnage each day in Southern Africa must indeed be terrific!
I confess it is truly surprising how such a number of animals can find support in a country producing so little food.
The larger quadrupeds no doubt roam over wide tracts in search of it; and their food chiefly consists of underwood, which probably contains much nutriment in a small bulk.
Dr. Smith also informs me that the vegetation has a rapid growth; no sooner is a part consumed, than its place is supplied by a fresh stock.
There can be no doubt, however, that our ideas respecting the apparent amount of food necessary for the support of large quadrupeds are much exaggerated: it should have been remembered that the camel, an animal of no mean bulk, has always been considered
The belief that where large quadrupeds exist, the vegetation must necessarily be luxuriant, is the more remarkable, because the converse is far from true.
Mr. Burchell observed to me that when entering Brazil, nothing struck him more forcibly than the splendour of the South American vegetation contrasted with that of South Africa, together with the absence of all large quadrupeds.
In his Travels, [6] he has suggested that the comparison of the respective weights (if there were sufficient data) of an equal number of the largest herbivorous quadrupeds of each country would be extremely curious.
If we take on the one side, the elephant, [7] hippopotamus, giraffe, bos caffer, elan, certainly three, and probably five species of rhinoceros; and on the American side, two tapirs, the guanaco, three deer, the vicuna, peccari, capybara (after which we
After the above facts, we are compelled to conclude, against anterior probability, [8] that among the mammalia there exists no close relation between the bulk of the species, and the _quantity_ of the vegetation, in the countries which they inhabit.
With regard to the number of large quadrupeds, there certainly exists no quarter of the globe which will bear comparison with Southern Africa.
After the different statements which have been given, the extremely desert character of that region will not be disputed.
In the European division of the world, we must look back to the tertiary epochs, to find a condition of things among the mammalia, resembling that now existing at the Cape of Good Hope.
Those tertiary epochs, which we are apt to consider as abounding to an astonishing degree with large animals, because we find the remains of many ages accumulated at certain spots, could hardly boast of more large quadrupeds than Southern Africa does at
If we speculate on the condition of the vegetation during these epochs we are at least bound so far to consider existing analogies, as not to urge as absolutely necessary a luxuriant vegetation, when we see a state of things so totally different at the
We know [9] that the extreme regions of North America, many degrees beyond the limit where the ground at the depth of a few feet remains perpetually congealed, are covered by forests of large and tall trees.
In a like manner, in Siberia, we have woods of birch, fir, aspen, and larch, growing in a latitude [10] (64 degs.
) where the mean temperature of the air falls below the freezing point, and where the earth is so completely frozen, that the carcass of an animal embedded in it is perfectly preserved.
With these facts we must grant, as far as _quantity alone_ of vegetation is concerned, that the great quadrupeds of the later tertiary epochs might, in most parts of Northern Europe and Asia, have lived on the spots where their remains are now found.
I do not here speak of the kind of vegetation necessary for their support; because, as there is evidence of physical changes, and as the animals have become extinct, so may we suppose that the species of plants have likewise been changed.
These remarks, I may be permitted to add, directly bear on the case of the Siberian animals preserved in ice.
The firm conviction of the necessity of a vegetation possessing a character of tropical luxuriance, to support such large animals, and the impossibility of reconciling this with the proximity of perpetual congelation, was one chief cause of the several
I am far from supposing that the climate has not changed since the period when those animals lived, which now lie buried in the ice.
At present I only wish to show, that as far as _quantity_ of food _alone_ is concerned, the ancient rhinoceroses might have roamed over the _steppes_ of central Siberia (the northern parts probably being under water) even in their present condition, as
I will now give an account of the habits of some of the more interesting birds which are common on the wild plains of Northern Patagonia: and first for the largest, or South American ostrich.
The ordinary habits of the ostrich are familiar to every one.
They live on vegetable matter, such as roots and grass; but at Bahia Blanca I have repeatedly seen three or four come down at low water to the extensive mud-banks which are then dry, for the sake, as the Gauchos say, of feeding on small fish.
Although the ostrich in its habits is so shy, wary, and solitary, and although so fleet in its pace, it is caught without much difficulty by the Indian or Gaucho armed with the bolas.
When several horsemen appear in a semicircle, it becomes confounded, and does not know which way to escape.
They generally prefer running against the wind; yet at the first start they expand their wings, and like a vessel make all sail.
On one fine hot day I saw several ostriches enter a bed of tall rushes, where they squatted concealed, till quite closely approached.
It is not generally known that ostriches readily take to the water.
Mr. King informs me that at the Bay of San Blas, and at Port Valdes in Patagonia, he saw these birds swimming several times from island to island.
They ran into the water both when driven down to a point, and likewise of their own accord when not frightened: the distance crossed was about two hundred yards.
When swimming, very little of their bodies appear above water; their necks are extended a little forward, and their progress is slow.
On two occasions I saw some ostriches swimming across the Santa Cruz river, where its course was about four hundred yards wide, and the stream rapid.
Captain Sturt, [11] when descending the Murrumbidgee, in Australia, saw two emus in the act of swimming.
The inhabitants of the country readily distinguish, even at a distance, the cock bird from the hen.
The former is larger and darker-coloured, [12] and has a bigger head.
The ostrich, I believe the cock, emits a singular, deep-toned, hissing note: when first I heard it, standing in the midst of some sand-hillocks, I thought it was made by some wild beast, for it is a sound that one cannot tell whence it comes, or from how
When we were at Bahia Blanca in the months of September and October, the eggs, in extraordinary numbers, were found all over the country.
They lie either scattered and single, in which case they are never hatched, and are called by the Spaniards huachos; or they are collected together into a shallow excavation, which forms the nest.
Out of the four nests which I saw, three contained twenty-two eggs each, and the fourth twenty-seven.
In one day's hunting on horseback sixty-four eggs were found; forty-four of these were in two nests, and the remaining twenty, scattered huachos.
The Gauchos unanimously affirm, and there is no reason to doubt their statement, that the male bird alone hatches the eggs, and for some time afterwards accompanies the young.
The cock when on the nest lies very close; I have myself almost ridden over one.
It is asserted that at such times they are occasionally fierce, and even dangerous, and that they have been known to attack a man on horseback, trying to kick and leap on him.
My informer pointed out to me an old man, whom he had seen much terrified by one chasing him.
I observe in Burchell's travels in South Africa, that he remarks, "Having killed a male ostrich, and the feathers being dirty, it was said by the Hottentots to be a nest bird".
I understand that the male emu in the Zoological Gardens takes charge of the nest: this habit, therefore, is common to the family.
The Gauchos unanimously affirm that several females lay in one nest.
I have been positively told that four or five hen birds have been watched to go in the middle of the day, one after the other, to the same nest.
I may add, also, that it is believed in Africa, that two or more females lay in one nest.
[13] Although this habit at first appears very strange, I think the cause may be explained in a simple manner.
The number of eggs in the nest varies from twenty to forty, and even to fifty; and according to Azara, some times to seventy or eighty.
Now, although it is most probable, from the number of eggs found in one district being so extraordinarily great in proportion to the parent birds, and likewise from the state of the ovarium of the hen, that she may in the course of the season lay a large
Azara states, [14] that a female in a state of domestication laid seventeen eggs, each at the interval of three days one from another.
If the hen was obliged to hatch her own eggs, before the last was laid the first probably would be addled; but if each laid a few eggs at successive periods, in different nests, and several hens, as is stated to be the case, combined together, then the
If the number of eggs in one of these nests is, as I believe, not greater on an average than the number laid by one female in the season, then there must be as many nests as females, and each cock bird will have its fair share of the labour of incubation;
[15] I have before mentioned the great numbers of huachos, or deserted eggs; so that in one day's hunting twenty were found in this state.
It appears odd that so many should be wasted.
Does it not arise from the difficulty of several females associating together, and finding a male ready to undertake the office of incubation?
It is evident that there must at first be some degree of association between at least two females; otherwise the eggs would remain scattered over the wide plain, at distances far too great to allow of the male collecting them into one nest: some authors
This can hardly be the case in America, because the huachos, although often found addled and putrid, are generally whole.
When at the Rio Negro in Northern Patagonia, I repeatedly heard the Gauchos talking of a very rare bird which they called Avestruz Petise.
They described it as being less than the common ostrich (which is there abundant), but with a very close general resemblance.
They said its colour was dark and mottled, and that its legs were shorter, and feathered lower down than those of the common ostrich.
It is more easily caught by the bolas than the other species.
The few inhabitants who had seen both kinds, affirmed they could distinguish them apart from a long distance.
The eggs of the small species appeared, however, more generally known; and it was remarked, with surprise, that they were very little less than those of the Rhea, but of a slightly different form, and with a tinge of pale blue.
This species occurs most rarely on the plains bordering the Rio Negro; but about a degree and a half further south they are tolerably abundant.
When at Port Desire, in Patagonia (lat.
48 degs.
), Mr. Martens shot an ostrich; and I looked at it, forgetting at the moment, in the most unaccountable manner, the whole subject of the Petises, and thought it was a not full-grown bird of the common sort.
It was cooked and eaten before my memory returned.
Fortunately the head, neck, legs, wings, many of the larger feathers, and a large part of the skin, had been preserved; and from these a very nearly perfect specimen has been put together, and is now exhibited in the museum of the Zoological Society.
Mr. Gould, in describing this new species, has done me the honour of calling it after my name.
Among the Patagonian Indians in the Strait of Magellan, we found a half Indian, who had lived some years with the tribe, but had been born in the northern provinces.
I asked him if he had ever heard of the Avestruz Petise?
He answered by saying, "Why, there are none others in these southern countries".
He informed me that the number of eggs in the nest of the petise is considerably less than in that of the other kind, namely, not more than fifteen on an average, but he asserted that more than one female deposited them.
At Santa Cruz we saw several of these birds.
They were excessively wary: I think they could see a person approaching when too far off to be distinguished themselves.
In ascending the river few were seen; but in our quiet and rapid descent, many, in pairs and by fours or fives, were observed.
It was remarked that this bird did not expand its wings, when first starting at full speed, after the manner of the northern kind.
In conclusion I may observe, that the Struthio rhea inhabits the country of La Plata as far as a little south of the Rio Negro in lat.
41 degs.
, and that the Struthio Darwinii takes its place in Southern Patagonia; the part about the Rio Negro being neutral territory.
M. A. d'Orbigny, [16] when at the Rio Negro, made great exertions to procure this bird, but never had the good fortune to succeed.
Dobrizhoffer [17] long ago was aware of there being two kinds of ostriches, he says, "You must know, moreover, that Emus differ in size and habits in different tracts of land; for those that inhabit the plains of Buenos Ayres and Tucuman are larger, and
A very singular little bird, Tinochorus rumicivorus, is here common: in its habits and general appearance, it nearly equally partakes of the characters, different as they are, of the quail and snipe.
The Tinochorus is found in the whole of southern South America, wherever there are sterile plains, or open dry pasture land.
It frequents in pairs or small flocks the most desolate places, where scarcely another living creature can exist.
Upon being approached they squat close, and then are very difficult to be distinguished from the ground.
When feeding they walk rather slowly, with their legs wide apart.
They dust themselves in roads and sandy places, and frequent particular spots, where they may be found day after day: like partridges, they take wing in a flock.
In all these respects, in the muscular gizzard adapted for vegetable food, in the arched beak and fleshy nostrils, short legs and form of foot, the Tinochorus has a close affinity with quails.
But as soon as the bird is seen flying, its whole appearance changes; the long pointed wings, so different from those in the gallinaceous order, the irregular manner of flight, and plaintive cry uttered at the moment of rising, recall the idea of a snipe.
The sportsmen of the Beagle unanimously called it the short-billed snipe.
To this genus, or rather to the family of the Waders, its skeleton shows that it is really related.
The Tinochorus is closely related to some other South American birds.
Two species of the genus Attagis are in almost every respect ptarmigans in their habits; one lives in Tierra del Fuego, above the limits of the forest land; and the other just beneath the snow-line on the Cordillera of Central Chile.
A bird of another closely allied genus, Chionis alba, is an inhabitant of the antarctic regions; it feeds on sea-weed and shells on the tidal rocks.
Although not web footed, from some unaccountable habit, it is frequently met with far out at sea.
This small family of birds is one of those which, from its varied relations to other families, although at present offering only difficulties to the systematic naturalist, ultimately may assist in revealing the grand scheme, common to the present and past
The genus Furnarius contains several species, all small birds, living on the ground, and inhabiting open dry countries.
In structure they cannot be compared to any European form.
Ornithologists have generally included them among the creepers, although opposed to that family in every habit.
The best known species is the common oven-bird of La Plata, the Casara or housemaker of the Spaniards.
The nest, whence it takes its name, is placed in the most exposed situations, as on the top of a post, a bare rock, or on a cactus.
It is composed of mud and bits of straw, and has strong thick walls: in shape it precisely resembles an oven, or depressed beehive.
The opening is large and arched, and directly in front, within the nest, there is a partition, which reaches nearly to the roof, thus forming a passage or antechamber to the true nest.
Another and smaller species of Furnarius (F.
cunicularius), resembles the oven-bird in the general reddish tint of its plumage, in a peculiar shrill reiterated cry, and in an odd manner of running by starts.
From its affinity, the Spaniards call it Casarita (or little housebuilder), although its nidification is quite different.
The Casarita builds its nest at the bottom of a narrow cylindrical hole, which is said to extend horizontally to nearly six feet under ground.
Several of the country people told me, that when boys, they had attempted to dig out the nest, but had scarcely ever succeeded in getting to the end of the passage.
The bird chooses any low bank of firm sandy soil by the side of a road or stream.
Here (at Bahia Blanca) the walls round the houses are built of hardened mud, and I noticed that one, which enclosed a courtyard where I lodged, was bored through by round holes in a score of places.
On asking the owner the cause of this he bitterly complained of the little casarita, several of which I afterwards observed at work.
It is rather curious to find how incapable these birds must be of acquiring any notion of thickness, for although they were constantly flitting over the low wall, they continued vainly to bore through it, thinking it an excellent bank for their nests.
I do not doubt that each bird, as often as it came to daylight on the opposite side, was greatly surprised at the marvellous fact.
I have already mentioned nearly all the mammalia common in this country.
Of armadilloes three species occur namely, the Dasypus minutus or _pichy_, the D. villosus or _peludo_, and the _apar_.
The first extends ten degrees further south than any other kind; a fourth species, the _Mulita_, does not come as far south as Bahia Blanca.
The four species have nearly similar habits; the _peludo_, however, is nocturnal, while the others wander by day over the open plains, feeding on beetles, larvae, roots, and even small snakes.
The _apar_, commonly called _mataco_, is remarkable by having only three moveable bands; the rest of its tesselated covering being nearly inflexible.
It has the power of rolling itself into a perfect sphere, like one kind of English woodlouse.
In this state it is safe from the attack of dogs; for the dog not being able to take the whole in its mouth, tries to bite one side, and the ball slips away.
The smooth hard covering of the _mataco_ offers a better defence than the sharp spines of the hedgehog.
The _pichy_ prefers a very dry soil; and the sand-dunes near the coast, where for many months it can never taste water, is its favourite resort: it often tries to escape notice, by squatting close to the ground.
In the course of a day's ride, near Bahia Blanca, several were generally met with.
The instant one was perceived, it was necessary, in order to catch it, almost to tumble off one's horse; for in soft soil the animal burrowed so quickly, that its hinder quarters would almost disappear before one could alight.
It seems almost a pity to kill such nice little animals, for as a Gaucho said, while sharpening his knife on the back of one, "Son tan mansos" (they are so quiet).
Of reptiles there are many kinds: one snake (a Trigonocephalus, or Cophias [18]), from the size of the poison channel in its fangs, must be very deadly.
Cuvier, in opposition to some other naturalists, makes this a sub-genus of the rattlesnake, and intermediate between it and the viper.
In confirmation of this opinion, I observed a fact, which appears to me very curious and instructive, as showing how every character, even though it may be in some degree independent of structure, has a tendency to vary by slow degrees.
The extremity of the tail of this snake is terminated by a point, which is very slightly enlarged; and as the animal glides along, it constantly vibrates the last inch; and this part striking against the dry grass and brushwood, produces a rattling noise,
As often as the animal was irritated or surprised, its tail was shaken; and the vibrations were extremely rapid.
Even as long as the body retained its irritability, a tendency to this habitual movement was evident.
This Trigonocephalus has, therefore, in some respects the structure of a viper, with the habits of a rattlesnake: the noise, however, being produced by a simpler device.
The expression of this snake's face was hideous and fierce; the pupil consisted of a vertical slit in a mottled and coppery iris; the jaws were broad at the base, and the nose terminated in a triangular projection.
I do not think I ever saw anything more ugly, excepting, perhaps, some of the vampire bats.
I imagine this repulsive aspect originates from the features being placed in positions, with respect to each other, somewhat proportional to those of the human face; and thus we obtain a scale of hideousness.
Amongst the Batrachian reptiles, I found only one little toad (Phryniscus nigricans), which was most singular from its colour.
If we imagine, first, that it had been steeped in the blackest ink, and then, when dry, allowed to crawl over a board, freshly painted with the brightest vermilion, so as to colour the soles of its feet and parts of its stomach, a good idea of its
If it had been an unnamed species, surely it ought to have been called _Diabolicus_, for it is a fit toad to preach in the ear of Eve.
Instead of being nocturnal in its habits, as other toads are, and living in damp obscure recesses, it crawls during the heat of the day about the dry sand-hillocks and arid plains, where not a single drop of water can be found.
It must necessarily depend on the dew for its moisture; and this probably is absorbed by the skin, for it is known, that these reptiles possess great powers of cutaneous absorption.
At Maldonado, I found one in a situation nearly as dry as at Bahia Blanca, and thinking to give it a great treat, carried it to a pool of water; not only was the little animal unable to swim, but I think without help it would soon have been drowned.
Of lizards there were many kinds, but only one (Proctotretus multimaculatus) remarkable from its habits.
It lives on the bare sand near the sea coast, and from its mottled colour, the brownish scales being speckled with white, yellowish red, and dirty blue, can hardly be distinguished from the surrounding surface.
When frightened, it attempts to avoid discovery by feigning death, with outstretched legs, depressed body, and closed eyes: if further molested, it buries itself with great quickness in the loose sand.
This lizard, from its flattened body and short legs, cannot run quickly.
I will here add a few remarks on the hybernation of animals in this part of South America.
When we first arrived at Bahia Blanca, September 7th, 1832, we thought nature had granted scarcely a living creature to this sandy and dry country.
By digging, however, in the ground, several insects, large spiders, and lizards were found in a half-torpid state.
On the 15th, a few animals began to appear, and by the 18th (three days from the equinox), everything announced the commencement of spring.
The plains were ornamented by the flowers of a pink wood-sorrel, wild peas, cenotherae, and geraniums; and the birds began to lay their eggs.
Numerous Lamellicorn and Heteromerous insects, the latter remarkable for their deeply sculptured bodies, were slowly crawling about; while the lizard tribe, the constant inhabitants of a sandy soil, darted about in every direction.
During the first eleven days, whilst nature was dormant, the mean temperature taken from observations made every two hours on board the Beagle, was 51 degs.
; and in the middle of the day the thermometer seldom ranged above 55 degs.
On the eleven succeeding days, in which all living things became so animated, the mean was 58 degs.
, and the range in the middle of the day between 60 and 70 degs.
Here, then, an increase of seven degrees in mean temperature, but a greater one of extreme heat, was sufficient to awake the functions of life.
At Monte Video, from which we had just before sailed, in the twenty-three days included between the 26th of July and the 19th of August, the mean temperature from 276 observations was 58.
4 degs.
; the mean hottest day being 65.
5 degs.
, and the coldest 46 degs.
The lowest point to which the thermometer fell was 41.
5 degs.
, and occasionally in the middle of the day it rose to 69 or 70 degs.
Yet with this high temperature, almost every beetle, several genera of spiders, snails, and land-shells, toads and lizards were all lying torpid beneath stones.
But we have seen that at Bahia Blanca, which is four degrees southward and therefore with a climate only a very little colder, this same temperature with a rather less extreme heat, was sufficient to awake all orders of animated beings.
This shows how nicely the stimulus required to arouse hybernating animals is governed by the usual climate of the district, and not by the absolute heat.
It is well known that within the tropics, the hybernation, or more properly aestivation, of animals is determined not by the temperature, but by the times of drought.
Near Rio de Janeiro, I was at first surprised to observe, that, a few days after some little depressions had been filled with water, they were peopled by numerous full-grown shells and beetles, which must have been lying dormant.
Humboldt has related the strange accident of a hovel having been erected over a spot where a young crocodile lay buried in the hardened mud.
He adds, "The Indians often find enormous boas, which they call Uji or water serpents, in the same lethargic state.
To reanimate them, they must be irritated or wetted with water".
I will only mention one other animal, a zoophyte (I believe Virgularia Patagonica), a kind of sea-pen.
It consists of a thin, straight, fleshy stem, with alternate rows of polypi on each side, and surrounding an elastic stony axis, varying in length from eight inches to two feet.
The stem at one extremity is truncate, but at the other is terminated by a vermiform fleshy appendage.
The stony axis which gives strength to the stem may be traced at this extremity into a mere vessel filled with granular matter.
At low water hundreds of these zoophytes might be seen, projecting like stubble, with the truncate end upwards, a few inches above the surface of the muddy sand.
When touched or pulled they suddenly drew themselves in with force, so as nearly or quite to disappear.
By this action, the highly elastic axis must be bent at the lower extremity, where it is naturally slightly curved; and I imagine it is by this elasticity alone that the zoophyte is enabled to rise again through the mud.
Each polypus, though closely united to its brethren, has a distinct mouth, body, and tentacula.
Of these polypi, in a large specimen, there must be many thousands; yet we see that they act by one movement: they have also one central axis connected with a system of obscure circulation, and the ova are produced in an organ distinct from the separate
[19] Well may one be allowed to ask, what is an individual?
It is always interesting to discover the foundation of the strange tales of the old voyagers; and I have no doubt but that the habits of this Virgularia explain one such case.
Captain Lancaster, in his voyage [20] in 1601, narrates that on the sea-sands of the Island of Sombrero, in the East Indies, he "found a small twig growing up like a young tree, and on offering to pluck it up it shrinks down to the ground, and sinks,
On being plucked up, a great worm is found to be its root, and as the tree groweth in greatness, so doth the worm diminish, and as soon as the worm is entirely turned into a tree it rooteth in the earth, and so becomes great.
This transformation is one of the strangest wonders that I saw in all my travels: for if this tree is plucked up, while young, and the leaves and bark stripped off, it becomes a hard stone when dry, much like white coral: thus is this worm twice
Of these we gathered and brought home many".
During my stay at Bahia Blanca, while waiting for the Beagle, the place was in a constant state of excitement, from rumours of wars and victories, between the troops of Rosas and the wild Indians.
One day an account came that a small party forming one of the postas on the line to Buenos Ayres, had been found all murdered.
The next day three hundred men arrived from the Colorado, under the command of Commandant Miranda.
A large portion of these men were Indians (mansos, or tame), belonging to the tribe of the Cacique Bernantio.
They passed the night here; and it was impossible to conceive anything more wild and savage than the scene of their bivouac.
Some drank till they were intoxicated; others swallowed the steaming blood of the cattle slaughtered for their suppers, and then, being sick from drunkenness, they cast it up again, and were besmeared with filth and gore.
Nam simul expletus dapibus, vinoque sepultus Cervicem inflexam posuit, jacuitque per antrum Immensus, saniem eructans, ac frusta cruenta Per somnum commixta mero.
In the morning they started for the scene of the murder, with orders to follow the "rastro," or track, even if it led them to Chile.
We subsequently heard that the wild Indians had escaped into the great Pampas, and from some cause the track had been missed.
One glance at the rastro tells these people a whole history.
Supposing they examine the track of a thousand horses, they will soon guess the number of mounted ones by seeing how many have cantered; by the depth of the other impressions, whether any horses were loaded with cargoes; by the irregularity of the
They consider a rastro of ten days or a fortnight, quite recent enough to be hunted out.
We also heard that Miranda struck from the west end of the Sierra Ventana, in a direct line to the island of Cholechel, situated seventy leagues up the Rio Negro.
This is a distance of between two and three hundred miles, through a country completely unknown.
What other troops in the world are so independent?
With the sun for their guide, mare's flesh for food, their saddle-cloths for beds,--as long as there is a little water, these men would penetrate to the end of the world.
A few days afterwards I saw another troop of these banditti-like soldiers start on an expedition against a tribe of Indians at the small Salinas, who had been betrayed by a prisoner cacique.
The Spaniard who brought the orders for this expedition was a very intelligent man.
He gave me an account of the last engagement at which he was present.
Some Indians, who had been taken prisoners, gave information of a tribe living north of the Colorado.
Two hundred soldiers were sent; and they first discovered the Indians by a cloud of dust from their horses' feet, as they chanced to be travelling.
The country was mountainous and wild, and it must have been far in the interior, for the Cordillera were in sight.
The Indians, men, women, and children, were about one hundred and ten in number, and they were nearly all taken or killed, for the soldiers sabre every man.
The Indians are now so terrified that they offer no resistance in a body, but each flies, neglecting even his wife and children; but when overtaken, like wild animals, they fight against any number to the last moment.
One dying Indian seized with his teeth the thumb of his adversary, and allowed his own eye to be forced out sooner than relinquish his hold.
Another, who was wounded, feigned death, keeping a knife ready to strike one more fatal blow.
My informer said, when he was pursuing an Indian, the man cried out for mercy, at the same time that he was covertly loosing the bolas from his waist, meaning to whirl it round his head and so strike his pursuer.
"I however struck him with my sabre to the ground, and then got off my horse, and cut his throat with my knife".
This is a dark picture; but how much more shocking is the unquestionable fact, that all the women who appear above twenty years old are massacred in cold blood!
When I exclaimed that this appeared rather inhuman, he answered, "Why, what can be done?
they breed so"!
Every one here is fully convinced that this is the most just war, because it is against barbarians.
Who would believe in this age that such atrocities could be committed in a Christian civilized country?
The children of the Indians are saved, to be sold or given away as servants, or rather slaves for as long a time as the owners can make them believe themselves slaves; but I believe in their treatment there is little to complain of.
In the battle four men ran away together.
They were pursued, one was killed, and the other three were taken alive.
They turned out to be messengers or ambassadors from a large body of Indians, united in the common cause of defence, near the Cordillera.
The tribe to which they had been sent was on the point of holding a grand council, the feast of mare's flesh was ready, and the dance prepared: in the morning the ambassadors were to have returned to the Cordillera.
They were remarkably fine men, very fair, above six feet high, and all under thirty years of age.
The three survivors of course possessed very valuable information and to extort this they were placed in a line.
The two first being questioned, answered, "No se" (I do not know), and were one after the other shot.
The third also said "No se;" adding, "Fire, I am a man, and can die"!
Not one syllable would they breathe to injure the united cause of their country!
The conduct of the above-mentioned cacique was very different; he saved his life by betraying the intended plan of warfare, and the point of union in the Andes.
It was believed that there were already six or seven hundred Indians together, and that in summer their numbers would be doubled.
Ambassadors were to have been sent to the Indians at the small Salinas, near Bahia Blanca, whom I have mentioned that this same cacique had betrayed.
The communication, therefore, between the Indians, extends from the Cordillera to the coast of the Atlantic.
General Rosas's plan is to kill all stragglers, and having driven the remainder to a common point, to attack them in a body, in the summer, with the assistance of the Chilenos.
This operation is to be repeated for three successive years.
I imagine the summer is chosen as the time for the main attack, because the plains are then without water, and the Indians can only travel in particular directions.
The escape of the Indians to the south of the Rio Negro, where in such a vast unknown country they would be safe, is prevented by a treaty with the Tehuelches to this effect;--that Rosas pays them so much to slaughter every Indian who passes to the south
The war is waged chiefly against the Indians near the Cordillera; for many of the tribes on this eastern side are fighting with Rosas.
The general, however, like Lord Chesterfield, thinking that his friends may in a future day become his enemies, always places them in the front ranks, so that their numbers may be thinned.
Since leaving South America we have heard that this war of extermination completely failed.
Among the captive girls taken in the same engagement, there were two very pretty Spanish ones, who had been carried away by the Indians when young, and could now only speak the Indian tongue.
From their account they must have come from Salta, a distance in a straight line of nearly one thousand miles.
This gives one a grand idea of the immense territory over which the Indians roam: yet, great as it is, I think there will not, in another half-century, be a wild Indian northward of the Rio Negro.
The warfare is too bloody to last; the Christians killing every Indian, and the Indians doing the same by the Christians.
It is melancholy to trace how the Indians have given way before the Spanish invaders.
Schirdel [21] says that in 1535, when Buenos Ayres was founded, there were villages containing two and three thousand inhabitants.
Even in Falconer's time (1750) the Indians made inroads as far as Luxan, Areco, and Arrecife, but now they are driven beyond the Salado.
Not only have whole tribes been exterminated, but the remaining Indians have become more barbarous: instead of living in large villages, and being employed in the arts of fishing, as well as of the chase, they now wander about the open plains, without home
I heard also some account of an engagement which took place, a few weeks previously to the one mentioned, at Cholechel.
This is a very important station on account of being a pass for horses; and it was, in consequence, for some time the head-quarters of a division of the army.
When the troops first arrived there they found a tribe of Indians, of whom they killed twenty or thirty.
The cacique escaped in a manner which astonished every one.
The chief Indians always have one or two picked horses, which they keep ready for any urgent occasion.
On one of these, an old white horse, the cacique sprung, taking with him his little son.
The horse had neither saddle nor bridle.
To avoid the shots, the Indian rode in the peculiar method of his nation namely, with an arm round the horse's neck, and one leg only on its back.
Thus hanging on one side, he was seen patting the horse's head, and talking to him.
The pursuers urged every effort in the chase; the Commandant three times changed his horse, but all in vain.
The old Indian father and his son escaped, and were free.
What a fine picture one can form in one's mind,--the naked, bronze-like figure of the old man with his little boy, riding like a Mazeppa on the white horse, thus leaving far behind him the host of his pursuers!
I saw one day a soldier striking fire with a piece of flint, which I immediately recognised as having been a part of the head of an arrow.
He told me it was found near the island of Cholechel, and that they are frequently picked up there.
It was between two and three inches long, and therefore twice as large as those now used in Tierra del Fuego: it was made of opaque cream-coloured flint, but the point and barbs had been intentionally broken off.
It is well known that no Pampas Indians now use bows and arrows.
I believe a small tribe in Banda Oriental must be excepted; but they are widely separated from the Pampas Indians, and border close on those tribes that inhabit the forest, and live on foot.
It appears, therefore, that these arrow-heads are antiquarian [22] relics of the Indians, before the great change in habits consequent on the introduction of the horse into South America.
[1] Since this was written, M. Alcide d'Orbingy has examined these shells, and pronounces them all to be recent.
[2] M. Aug.
Bravard has described, in a Spanish work ('Observaciones Geologicas,' 1857), this district, and he believes that the bones of the extinct mammals were washed out of the underlying Pampean deposit, and subsequently became embedded with the still existing
M. Bravard believes that the whole enormous Pampean deposit is a sub-aerial formation, like sand-dunes: this seems to me to be an untenable doctrine.
[3] Principles of Geology, vol.
iv.
p.
40.
[4] This theory was first developed in the Zoology of the Voyage of the Beagle, and subsequently in Professor Owen's Memoir on Mylodon robustus.
[5] I mean this to exclude the total amount which may have been successively produced and consumed during a given period.
[6] Travels in the Interior of South Africa, vol.
ii.
p.
207 [7] The elephant which was killed at Exeter Change was estimated (being partly weighed) at five tons and a half.
The elephant actress, as I was informed, weighed one ton less; so that we may take five as the average of a full-grown elephant.
I was told at the Surry Gardens, that a hippopotamus which was sent to England cut up into pieces was estimated at three tons and a half; we will call it three.
From these premises we may give three tons and a half to each of the five rhinoceroses; perhaps a ton to the giraffe, and half to the bos caffer as well as to the elan (a large ox weighs from 1200 to 1500 pounds).
This will give an average (from the above estimates) of 2.
7 of a ton for the ten largest herbivorous animals of Southern Africa.
In South America, allowing 1200 pounds for the two tapirs together, 550 for the guanaco and vicuna, 500 for three deer, 300 for the capybara, peccari, and a monkey, we shall have an average of 250 pounds, which I believe is overstating the result.
The ratio will therefore be as 6048 to 250, or 24 to 1, for the ten largest animals from the two continents.
[8] If we suppose the case of the discovery of a skeleton of a Greenland whale in a fossil state, not a single cetaceous animal being known to exist, what naturalist would have ventured conjecture on the possibility of a carcass so gigantic being supported
[9] See Zoological Remarks to Capt.
Back's Expedition, by Dr. Richardson.
He says, "The subsoil north of latitude 56 degs.
is perpetually frozen, the thaw on the coast not penetrating above three feet, and at Bear Lake, in latitude 64 degs.
, not more than twenty inches.
The frozen substratum does not of itself destroy vegetation, for forests flourish on the surface, at a distance from the coast".
[10] See Humboldt, Fragments Asiatiques, p.
386: Barton's Geography of Plants: and Malte Brun.
In the latter work it is said that the limit of the growth of trees in Siberia may be drawn under the parallel of 70 degs.
[11] Sturt's Travels, vol.
ii.
p.
74.
[12] A Gaucho assured me that he had once seen a snow-white or Albino variety, and that it was a most beautiful bird.
[13] Burchell's Travels, vol.
i.
p.
280.
[14] Azara, vol.
iv.
p.
173.
[15] Lichtenstein, however, asserts (Travels, vol.
ii.
p.
25) that the hens begin sitting when they have laid ten or twelve eggs; and that they continue laying, I presume, in another nest.
This appears to me very improbable.
He asserts that four or five hens associate for incubation with one cock, who sits only at night.
[16] When at the Rio Negro, we heard much of the indefatigable labours of this naturalist.
M. Alcide d'Orbigny, during the years 1825 to 1833, traversed several large portions of South America, and has made a collection, and is now publishing the results on a scale of magnificence, which at once places himself in the list of American travellers
[17] Account of the Abipones, A.D. 1749, vol.
i.
(English Translation) p.
314 [18] M. Bibron calls it T. crepitans.
[19] The cavities leading from the fleshy compartments of the extremity, were filled with a yellow pulpy matter, which, examined under a microscope, presented an extraordinary appearance.
The mass consisted of rounded, semi-transparent, irregular grains, aggregated together into particles of various sizes.
All such particles, and the separate grains, possessed the power of rapid movement; generally revolving around different axes, but sometimes progressive.
The movement was visible with a very weak power, but even with the highest its cause could not be perceived.
It was very different from the circulation of the fluid in the elastic bag, containing the thin extremity of the axis.
On other occasions, when dissecting small marine animals beneath the microscope, I have seen particles of pulpy matter, some of large size, as soon as they were disengaged, commence revolving.
I have imagined, I know not with how much truth, that this granulo-pulpy matter was in process of being converted into ova.
Certainly in this zoophyte such appeared to be the case.
[20] Kerr's Collection of Voyages, vol.
viii.
p.
119.
[21] Purchas's Collection of Voyages.
I believe the date was really 1537.
[22] Azara has even doubted whether the Pampas Indians ever used bows.
CHAPTER VI BAHIA BLANCA TO BUENOS AYRES Set out for Buenos Ayres--Rio Sauce--Sierra Ventana--Third Posta--Driving Horses--Bolas--Partridges and Foxes--Features of the Country--Long-legged Plover--Teru-tero--Hail-storm--Natural Enclosures in the Sierra
SEPTEMBER 18th.
--I hired a Gaucho to accompany me on my ride to Buenos Ayres, though with some difficulty, as the father of one man was afraid to let him go, and another, who seemed willing, was described to me as so fearful, that I was afraid to take him, for I was told
The distance to Buenos Ayres is about four hundred miles, and nearly the whole way through an uninhabited country.
We started early in the morning; ascending a few hundred feet from the basin of green turf on which Bahia Blanca stands, we entered on a wide desolate plain.
It consists of a crumbling argillaceo-calcareous rock, which, from the dry nature of the climate, supports only scattered tufts of withered grass, without a single bush or tree to break the monotonous uniformity.
The weather was fine, but the atmosphere remarkably hazy; I thought the appearance foreboded a gale, but the Gauchos said it was owing to the plain, at some great distance in the interior, being on fire.
After a long gallop, having changed horses twice, we reached the Rio Sauce: it is a deep, rapid, little stream, not above twenty-five feet wide.
The second posta on the road to Buenos Ayres stands on its banks, a little above there is a ford for horses, where the water does not reach to the horses' belly; but from that point, in its course to the sea, it is quite impassable, and hence makes a most
Insignificant as this stream is, the Jesuit Falconer, whose information is generally so very correct, figures it as a considerable river, rising at the foot of the Cordillera.
With respect to its source, I do not doubt that this is the case for the Gauchos assured me, that in the middle of the dry summer, this stream, at the same time with the Colorado has periodical floods; which can only originate in the snow melting on the
It is extremely improbable that a stream so small as the Sauce then was, should traverse the entire width of the continent; and indeed, if it were the residue of a large river, its waters, as in other ascertained cases, would be saline.
During the winter we must look to the springs round the Sierra Ventana as the source of its pure and limpid stream.
I suspect the plains of Patagonia like those of Australia, are traversed by many water-courses which only perform their proper parts at certain periods.
Probably this is the case with the water which flows into the head of Port Desire, and likewise with the Rio Chupat, on the banks of which masses of highly cellular scoriae were found by the officers employed in the survey.
As it was early in the afternoon when we arrived, we took fresh horses, and a soldier for a guide, and started for the Sierra de la Ventana.
This mountain is visible from the anchorage at Bahia Blanca; and Capt.
Fitz Roy calculates its height to be 3340 feet--an altitude very remarkable on this eastern side of the continent.
I am not aware that any foreigner, previous to my visit, had ascended this mountain; and indeed very few of the soldiers at Bahia Blanca knew anything about it.
Hence we heard of beds of coal, of gold and silver, of caves, and of forests, all of which inflamed my curiosity, only to disappoint it.
The distance from the posta was about six leagues over a level plain of the same character as before.
The ride was, however, interesting, as the mountain began to show its true form.
When we reached the foot of the main ridge, we had much difficulty in finding any water, and we thought we should have been obliged to have passed the night without any.
At last we discovered some by looking close to the mountain, for at the distance even of a few hundred yards the streamlets were buried and entirely lost in the friable calcareous stone and loose detritus.
I do not think Nature ever made a more solitary, desolate pile of rock;--it well deserves its name of _Hurtado_, or separated.
The mountain is steep, extremely rugged, and broken, and so entirely destitute of trees, and even bushes, that we actually could not make a skewer to stretch out our meat over the fire of thistle-stalks.
[1] The strange aspect of this mountain is contrasted by the sea-like plain, which not only abuts against its steep sides, but likewise separates the parallel ranges.
The uniformity of the colouring gives an extreme quietness to the view,--the whitish grey of the quartz rock, and the light brown of the withered grass of the plain, being unrelieved by any brighter tint.
From custom, one expects to see in the neighbourhood of a lofty and bold mountain, a broken country strewed over with huge fragments.
Here nature shows that the last movement before the bed of the sea is changed into dry land may sometimes be one of tranquillity.
Under these circumstances I was curious to observe how far from the parent rock any pebbles could be found.
On the shores of Bahia Blanca, and near the settlement, there were some of quartz, which certainly must have come from this source: the distance is forty-five miles.
The dew, which in the early part of the night wetted the saddle-cloths under which we slept, was in the morning frozen.
The plain, though appearing horizontal, had insensibly sloped up to a height of between 800 and 900 feet above the sea.
In the morning (9th of September) the guide told me to ascend the nearest ridge, which he thought would lead me to the four peaks that crown the summit.
The climbing up such rough rocks was very fatiguing; the sides were so indented, that what was gained in one five minutes was often lost in the next.
At last, when I reached the ridge, my disappointment was extreme in finding a precipitous valley as deep as the plain, which cut the chain transversely in two, and separated me from the four points.
This valley is very narrow, but flat-bottomed, and it forms a fine horse-pass for the Indians, as it connects the plains on the northern and southern sides of the range.
Having descended, and while crossing it, I saw two horses grazing: I immediately hid myself in the long grass, and began to reconnoitre; but as I could see no signs of Indians I proceeded cautiously on my second ascent.
It was late in the day, and this part of the mountain, like the other, was steep and rugged.
I was on the top of the second peak by two o'clock, but got there with extreme difficulty; every twenty yards I had the cramp in the upper part of both thighs, so that I was afraid I should not have been able to have got down again.
It was also necessary to return by another road, as it was out of the question to pass over the saddle-back.
I was therefore obliged to give up the two higher peaks.
Their altitude was but little greater, and every purpose of geology had been answered; so that the attempt was not worth the hazard of any further exertion.
I presume the cause of the cramp was the great change in the kind of muscular action, from that of hard riding to that of still harder climbing.
It is a lesson worth remembering, as in some cases it might cause much difficulty.
I have already said the mountain is composed of white quartz rock, and with it a little glossy clay-slate is associated.
At the height of a few hundred feet above the plain patches of conglomerate adhered in several places to the solid rock.
They resembled in hardness, and in the nature of the cement, the masses which may be seen daily forming on some coasts.
I do not doubt these pebbles were in a similar manner aggregated, at a period when the great calcareous formation was depositing beneath the surrounding sea.
We may believe that the jagged and battered forms of the hard quartz yet show the effects of the waves of an open ocean.
I was, on the whole, disappointed with this ascent.
Even the view was insignificant;--a plain like the sea, but without its beautiful colour and defined outline.
The scene, however, was novel, and a little danger, like salt to meat, gave it a relish.
That the danger was very little was certain, for my two companions made a good fire--a thing which is never done when it is suspected that Indians are near.
I reached the place of our bivouac by sunset, and drinking much mate, and smoking several cigaritos, soon made up my bed for the night.
The wind was very strong and cold, but I never slept more comfortably.
September 10th.
--In the morning, having fairly scudded before the gale, we arrived by the middle of the day at the Sauce posta.
In the road we saw great numbers of deer, and near the mountain a guanaco.
The plain, which abuts against the Sierra, is traversed by some curious gullies, of which one was about twenty feet wide, and at least thirty deep; we were obliged in consequence to make a considerable circuit before we could find a pass.
We stayed the night at the posta, the conversation, as was generally the case, being about the Indians.
The Sierra Ventana was formerly a great place of resort; and three or four years ago there was much fighting there.
My guide had been present when many Indians were killed: the women escaped to the top of the ridge, and fought most desperately with great stones; many thus saving themselves.
September 11th.
--Proceeded to the third posta in company with the lieutenant who commanded it.
The distance is called fifteen leagues; but it is only guess-work, and is generally overstated.
The road was uninteresting, over a dry grassy plain; and on our left hand at a greater or less distance there were some low hills; a continuation of which we crossed close to the posta.
Before our arrival we met a large herd of cattle and horses, guarded by fifteen soldiers; but we were told many had been lost.
It is very difficult to drive animals across the plains; for if in the night a puma, or even a fox, approaches, nothing can prevent the horses dispersing in every direction; and a storm will have the same effect.
A short time since, an officer left Buenos Ayres with five hundred horses, and when he arrived at the army he had under twenty.
Soon afterwards we perceived by the cloud of dust, that a party of horsemen were coming towards us; when far distant my companions knew them to be Indians, by their long hair streaming behind their backs.
The Indians generally have a fillet round their heads, but never any covering; and their black hair blowing across their swarthy faces, heightens to an uncommon degree the wildness of their appearance.
They turned out to be a party of Bernantio's friendly tribe, going to a salina for salt.
The Indians eat much salt, their children sucking it like sugar.
This habit is very different from that of the Spanish Gauchos, who, leading the same kind of life, eat scarcely any; according to Mungo Park, [2] it is people who live on vegetable food who have an unconquerable desire for salt.
The Indians gave us good-humoured nods as they passed at full gallop, driving before them a troop of horses, and followed by a train of lanky dogs.
September 12th and 13th.
--I stayed at this posta two days, waiting for a troop of soldiers, which General Rosas had the kindness to send to inform me, would shortly travel to Buenos Ayres; and he advised me to take the opportunity of the escort.
In the morning we rode to some neighbouring hills to view the country, and to examine the geology.
After dinner the soldiers divided themselves into two parties for a trial of skill with the bolas.
Two spears were stuck in the ground twenty-five yards apart, but they were struck and entangled only once in four or five times.
The balls can be thrown fifty or sixty yards, but with little certainty.
This, however, does not apply to a man on horseback; for when the speed of the horse is added to the force of the arm, it is said, that they can be whirled with effect to the distance of eighty yards.
As a proof of their force, I may mention, that at the Falkland Islands, when the Spaniards murdered some of their own countrymen and all the Englishmen, a young friendly Spaniard was running away, when a great tall man, by name Luciano, came at full gallop
Just as the Spaniard was on the point of reaching the boat, Luciano threw the balls: they struck him on the legs with such a jerk, as to throw him down and to render him for some time insensible.
The man, after Luciano had had his talk, was allowed to escape.
He told us that his legs were marked by great weals, where the thong had wound round, as if he had been flogged with a whip.
In the middle of the day two men arrived, who brought a parcel from the next posta to be forwarded to the general: so that besides these two, our party consisted this evening of my guide and self, the lieutenant, and his four soldiers.
The latter were strange beings; the first a fine young negro; the second half Indian and negro; and the two others non-descripts; namely, an old Chilian miner, the colour of mahogany, and another partly a mulatto; but two such mongrels with such detestable
At night, when they were sitting round the fire, and playing at cards, I retired to view such a Salvator Rosa scene.
They were seated under a low cliff, so that I could look down upon them; around the party were lying dogs, arms, remnants of deer and ostriches; and their long spears were stuck in the turf.
Further in the dark background, their horses were tied up, ready for any sudden danger.
If the stillness of the desolate plain was broken by one of the dogs barking, a soldier, leaving the fire, would place his head close to the ground, and thus slowly scan the horizon.
Even if the noisy teru-tero uttered its scream, there would be a pause in the conversation, and every head, for a moment, a little inclined.
What a life of misery these men appear to us to lead!
They were at least ten leagues from the Sauce posta, and since the murder committed by the Indians, twenty from another.
The Indians are supposed to have made their attack in the middle of the night; for very early in the morning after the murder, they were luckily seen approaching this posta.
The whole party here, however, escaped, together with the troop of horses; each one taking a line for himself, and driving with him as many animals as he was able to manage.
The little hovel, built of thistle-stalks, in which they slept, neither kept out the wind nor rain; indeed in the latter case the only effect the roof had, was to condense it into larger drops.
They had nothing to eat excepting what they could catch, such as ostriches, deer, armadilloes, etc.
, and their only fuel was the dry stalks of a small plant, somewhat resembling an aloe.
The sole luxury which these men enjoyed was smoking the little paper cigars, and sucking mate.
I used to think that the carrion vultures, man's constant attendants on these dreary plains, while seated on the little neighbouring cliffs seemed by their very patience to say, "Ah!
when the Indians come we shall have a feast".
In the morning we all sallied forth to hunt, and although we had not much success, there were some animated chases.
Soon after starting the party separated, and so arranged their plans, that at a certain time of the day (in guessing which they show much skill) they should all meet from different points of the compass on a plain piece of ground, and thus drive together
One day I went out hunting at Bahia Blanca, but the men there merely rode in a crescent, each being about a quarter of a mile apart from the other.
A fine male ostrich being turned by the headmost riders, tried to escape on one side.
The Gauchos pursued at a reckless pace, twisting their horses about with the most admirable command, and each man whirling the balls round his head.
At length the foremost threw them, revolving through the air: in an instant the ostrich rolled over and over, its legs fairly lashed together by the thong.
The plains abound with three kinds of partridge, [3] two of which are as large as hen pheasants.
Their destroyer, a small and pretty fox, was also singularly numerous; in the course of the day we could not have seen less than forty or fifty.
They were generally near their earths, but the dogs killed one.
When we returned to the posta, we found two of the party returned who had been hunting by themselves.
They had killed a puma, and had found an ostrich's nest with twenty-seven eggs in it.
Each of these is said to equal in weight eleven hen's eggs; so that we obtained from this one nest as much food as 297 hen's eggs would have given.
September 14th.
--As the soldiers belonging to the next posta meant to return, and we should together make a party of five, and all armed, I determined not to wait for the expected troops.
My host, the lieutenant, pressed me much to stop.
As he had been very obliging--not only providing me with food, but lending me his private horses--I wanted to make him some remuneration.
I asked my guide whether I might do so, but he told me certainly not; that the only answer I should receive, probably would be, "We have meat for the dogs in our country, and therefore do not grudge it to a Christian".
It must not be supposed that the rank of lieutenant in such an army would at all prevent the acceptance of payment: it was only the high sense of hospitality, which every traveller is bound to acknowledge as nearly universal throughout these provinces.
After galloping some leagues, we came to a low swampy country, which extends for nearly eighty miles northward, as far as the Sierra Tapalguen.
In some parts there were fine damp plains, covered with grass, while others had a soft, black, and peaty soil.
There were also many extensive but shallow lakes, and large beds of reeds.
The country on the whole resembled the better parts of the Cambridgeshire fens.
At night we had some difficulty in finding amidst the swamps, a dry place for our bivouac.
September 15th.
--Rose very early in the morning and shortly after passed the posta where the Indians had murdered the five soldiers.
The officer had eighteen chuzo wounds in his body.
By the middle of the day, after a hard gallop, we reached the fifth posta: on account of some difficulty in procuring horses we stayed there the night.
As this point was the most exposed on the whole line, twenty-one soldiers were stationed here; at sunset they returned from hunting, bringing with them seven deer, three ostriches, and many armadilloes and partridges.
When riding through the country, it is a common practice to set fire to the plain; and hence at night, as on this occasion, the horizon was illuminated in several places by brilliant conflagrations.
This is done partly for the sake of puzzling any stray Indians, but chiefly for improving the pasture.
In grassy plains unoccupied by the larger ruminating quadrupeds, it seems necessary to remove the superfluous vegetation by fire, so as to render the new year's growth serviceable.
The rancho at this place did not boast even of a roof, but merely consisted of a ring of thistle-stalks, to break the force of the wind.
It was situated on the borders of an extensive but shallow lake, swarming with wild fowl, among which the black-necked swan was conspicuous.
The kind of plover, which appears as if mounted on stilts (Himantopus nigricollis), is here common in flocks of considerable size.
It has been wrongfully accused of inelegance; when wading about in shallow water, which is its favourite resort, its gait is far from awkward.
These birds in a flock utter a noise, that singularly resembles the cry of a pack of small dogs in full chase: waking in the night, I have more than once been for a moment startled at the distant sound.
The teru-tero (Vanellus cayanus) is another bird, which often disturbs the stillness of the night.
In appearance and habits it resembles in many respects our peewits; its wings, however, are armed with sharp spurs, like those on the legs of the common cock.
As our peewit takes its name from the sound of its voice, so does the teru-tero.
While riding over the grassy plains, one is constantly pursued by these birds, which appear to hate mankind, and I am sure deserve to be hated for their never-ceasing, unvaried, harsh screams.
To the sportsman they are most annoying, by telling every other bird and animal of his approach: to the traveller in the country, they may possibly, as Molina says, do good, by warning him of the midnight robber.
During the breeding season, they attempt, like our peewits, by feigning to be wounded, to draw away from their nests dogs and other enemies.
The eggs of this bird are esteemed a great delicacy.
September 16th.
--To the seventh posta at the foot of the Sierra Tapalguen.
The country was quite level, with a coarse herbage and a soft peaty soil.
The hovel was here remarkably neat, the posts and rafters being made of about a dozen dry thistle-stalks bound together with thongs of hide; and by the support of these Ionic-like columns, the roof and sides were thatched with reeds.
We were here told a fact, which I would not have credited, if I had not had partly ocular proof of it; namely, that, during the previous night hail as large as small apples, and extremely hard, had fallen with such violence, as to kill the greater number
One of the men had already found thirteen deer (Cervus campestris) lying dead, and I saw their _fresh_ hides; another of the party, a few minutes after my arrival brought in seven more.
Now I well know, that one man without dogs could hardly have killed seven deer in a week.
The men believed they had seen about fifteen ostriches (part of one of which we had for dinner); and they said that several were running about evidently blind in one eye.
Numbers of smaller birds, as ducks, hawks, and partridges, were killed.
I saw one of the latter with a black mark on its back, as if it had been struck with a paving-stone.
A fence of thistle-stalks round the hovel was nearly broken down, and my informer, putting his head out to see what was the matter, received a severe cut, and now wore a bandage.
The storm was said to have been of limited extent: we certainly saw from our last night's bivouac a dense cloud and lightning in this direction.
It is marvellous how such strong animals as deer could thus have been killed; but I have no doubt, from the evidence I have given, that the story is not in the least exaggerated.
I am glad, however, to have its credibility supported by the Jesuit Dobrizhoffen, [4] who, speaking of a country much to the northward, says, hail fell of an enormous size and killed vast numbers of cattle: the Indians hence called the place
Dr. Malcolmson, also, informs me that he witnessed in 1831 in India, a hail-storm, which killed numbers of large birds and much injured the cattle.
These hailstones were flat, and one was ten inches in circumference, and another weighed two ounces.
They ploughed up a gravel-walk like musket-balls, and passed through glass-windows, making round holes, but not cracking them.
Having finished our dinner, of hail-stricken meat, we crossed the Sierra Tapalguen; a low range of hills, a few hundred feet in height, which commences at Cape Corrientes.
The rock in this part is pure quartz; further eastward I understand it is granitic.
The hills are of a remarkable form; they consist of flat patches of table-land, surrounded by low perpendicular cliffs, like the outliers of a sedimentary deposit.
The hill which I ascended was very small, not above a couple of hundred yards in diameter; but I saw others larger.
One which goes by the name of the "Corral," is said to be two or three miles in diameter, and encompassed by perpendicular cliffs, between thirty and forty feet high, excepting at one spot, where the entrance lies.
Falconer [5] gives a curious account of the Indians driving troops of wild horses into it, and then by guarding the entrance, keeping them secure.
I have never heard of any other instance of table-land in a formation of quartz, and which, in the hill I examined, had neither cleavage nor stratification.
I was told that the rock of the "Corral" was white, and would strike fire.
We did not reach the posta on the Rio Tapalguen till after it was dark.
At supper, from something which was said, I was suddenly struck with horror at thinking that I was eating one of the favourite dishes of the country namely, a half-formed calf, long before its proper time of birth.
It turned out to be Puma; the meat is very white and remarkably like veal in taste.
Dr. Shaw was laughed at for stating that "the flesh of the lion is in great esteem having no small affinity with veal, both in colour, taste, and flavour".
Such certainly is the case with the Puma.
The Gauchos differ in their opinion, whether the Jaguar is good eating, but are unanimous in saying that cat is excellent.
September 17th.
--We followed the course of the Rio Tapalguen, through a very fertile country, to the ninth posta.
Tapalguen, itself, or the town of Tapalguen, if it may be so called, consists of a perfectly level plain, studded over, as far as the eye can reach, with the toldos or oven-shaped huts of the Indians.
The families of the friendly Indians, who were fighting on the side of Rosas, resided here.
We met and passed many young Indian women, riding by two or three together on the same horse: they, as well as many of the young men, were strikingly handsome,--their fine ruddy complexions being the picture of health.
Besides the toldos, there were three ranchos; one inhabited by the Commandant, and the two others by Spaniards with small shops.
We were here able to buy some biscuit.
I had now been several days without tasting anything besides meat: I did not at all dislike this new regimen; but I felt as if it would only have agreed with me with hard exercise.
I have heard that patients in England, when desired to confine themselves exclusively to an animal diet, even with the hope of life before their eyes, have hardly been able to endure it.
Yet the Gaucho in the Pampas, for months together, touches nothing but beef.
But they eat, I observe, a very large proportion of fat, which is of a less animalized nature; and they particularly dislike dry meat, such as that of the Agouti.
Dr. Richardson [6] also, has remarked, "that when people have fed for a long time solely upon lean animal food, the desire for fat becomes so insatiable, that they can consume a large quantity of unmixed and even oily fat without nausea:" this appears to
It is, perhaps, from their meat regimen that the Gauchos, like other carnivorous animals, can abstain long from food.
I was told that at Tandeel, some troops voluntarily pursued a party of Indians for three days, without eating or drinking.
We saw in the shops many articles, such as horsecloths, belts, and garters, woven by the Indian women.
The patterns were very pretty, and the colours brilliant; the workmanship of the garters was so good that an English merchant at Buenos Ayres maintained they must have been manufactured in England, till he found the tassels had been fastened by split
September 18th.
--We had a very long ride this day.
At the twelfth posta, which is seven leagues south of the Rio Salado, we came to the first estancia with cattle and white women.
Afterwards we had to ride for many miles through a country flooded with water above our horses' knees.
By crossing the stirrups, and riding Arab-like with our legs bent up, we contrived to keep tolerably dry.
It was nearly dark when we arrived at the Salado; the stream was deep, and about forty yards wide; in summer, however, its bed becomes almost dry, and the little remaining water nearly as salt as that of the sea.
We slept at one of the great estancias of General Rosas.
It was fortified, and of such an extent, that arriving in the dark I thought it was a town and fortress.
In the morning we saw immense herds of cattle, the general here having seventy-four square leagues of land.
Formerly nearly three hundred men were employed about this estate, and they defied all the attacks of the Indians.
September 19th.
--Passed the Guardia del Monte.
This is a nice scattered little town, with many gardens, full of peach and quince trees.
The plain here looked like that around Buenos Ayres; the turf being short and bright green, with beds of clover and thistles, and with bizcacha holes.
I was very much struck with the marked change in the aspect of the country after having crossed the Salado.
From a coarse herbage we passed on to a carpet of fine green verdure.
I at first attributed this to some change in the nature of the soil, but the inhabitants assured me that here, as well as in Banda Oriental, where there is as great a difference between the country round Monte Video and the thinly-inhabited savannahs of
Exactly the same fact has been observed in the prairies [7] of North America, where coarse grass, between five and six feet high, when grazed by cattle, changes into common pasture land.
I am not botanist enough to say whether the change here is owing to the introduction of new species, to the altered growth of the same, or to a difference in their proportional numbers.
Azara has also observed with astonishment this change: he is likewise much perplexed by the immediate appearance of plants not occurring in the neighbourhood, on the borders of any track that leads to a newly-constructed hovel.
In another part he says, [8] "ces chevaux (sauvages) ont la manie de preferer les chemins, et le bord des routes pour deposer leurs excremens, dont on trouve des monceaux dans ces endroits".
Does this not partly explain the circumstance?
We thus have lines of richly manured land serving as channels of communication across wide districts.
Near the Guardia we find the southern limit of two European plants, now become extraordinarily common.
The fennel in great profusion covers the ditch-banks in the neighbourhood of Buenos Ayres, Monte Video, and other towns.
But the cardoon (Cynara cardunculus) has a far wider range: [9] it occurs in these latitudes on both sides of the, Cordillera, across the continent.
I saw it in unfrequented spots in Chile, Entre Rios, and Banda Oriental.
In the latter country alone, very many (probably several hundred) square miles are covered by one mass of these prickly plants, and are impenetrable by man or beast.
Over the undulating plains, where these great beds occur, nothing else can now live.
Before their introduction, however, the surface must have supported, as in other parts, a rank herbage.
I doubt whether any case is on record of an invasion on so grand a scale of one plant over the aborigines.
As I have already said, I nowhere saw the cardoon south of the Salado; but it is probable that in proportion as that country becomes inhabited, the cardoon will extend its limits.
The case is different with the giant thistle (with variegated leaves) of the Pampas, for I met with it in the valley of the Sauce.
According to the principles so well laid down by Mr. Lyell, few countries have undergone more remarkable changes, since the year 1535, when the first colonist of La Plata landed with seventy-two horses.
The countless herds of horses, cattle, and sheep, not only have altered the whole aspect of the vegetation, but they have almost banished the guanaco, deer and ostrich.
Numberless other changes must likewise have taken place; the wild pig in some parts probably replaces the peccari; packs of wild dogs may be heard howling on the wooded banks of the less-frequented streams; and the common cat, altered into a large and
As M. d'Orbigny has remarked, the increase in numbers of the carrion-vulture, since the introduction of the domestic animals, must have been infinitely great; and we have given reasons for believing that they have extended their southern range.
No doubt many plants, besides the cardoon and fennel, are naturalized; thus the islands near the mouth of the Parana, are thickly clothed with peach and orange trees, springing from seeds carried there by the waters of the river.
While changing horses at the Guardia several people questioned us much about the army,--I never saw anything like the enthusiasm for Rosas, and for the success of the "most just of all wars, because against barbarians".
This expression, it must be confessed, is very natural, for till lately, neither man, woman nor horse, was safe from the attacks of the Indians.
We had a long day's ride over the same rich green plain, abounding with various flocks, and with here and there a solitary estancia, and its one _ombu_ tree.
In the evening it rained heavily: on arriving at a posthouse we were told by the owner, that if we had not a regular passport we must pass on, for there were so many robbers he would trust no one.
When he read, however, my passport, which began with "El Naturalista Don Carlos," his respect and civility were as unbounded as his suspicions had been before.
What a naturalist might be, neither he nor his countrymen, I suspect, had any idea; but probably my title lost nothing of its value from that cause.
September 20th.
--We arrived by the middle of the day at Buenos Ayres.
The outskirts of the city looked quite pretty, with the agave hedges, and groves of olive, peach and willow trees, all just throwing out their fresh green leaves.
I rode to the house of Mr. Lumb, an English merchant, to whose kindness and hospitality, during my stay in the country, I was greatly indebted.
The city of Buenos Ayres is large; [10] and I should think one of the most regular in the world.
Every street is at right angles to the one it crosses, and the parallel ones being equidistant, the houses are collected into solid squares of equal dimensions, which are called quadras.
On the other hand, the houses themselves are hollow squares; all the rooms opening into a neat little courtyard.
They are generally only one story high, with flat roofs, which are fitted with seats and are much frequented by the inhabitants in summer.
In the centre of the town is the Plaza, where the public offices, fortress, cathedral, etc.
, stand.
Here also, the old viceroys, before the revolution, had their palaces.
The general assemblage of buildings possesses considerable architectural beauty, although none individually can boast of any.
The great _corral_, where the animals are kept for slaughter to supply food to this beef-eating population, is one of the spectacles best worth seeing.
The strength of the horse as compared to that of the bullock is quite astonishing: a man on horseback having thrown his lazo round the horns of a beast, can drag it anywhere he chooses.
The animal ploughing up the ground with outstretched legs, in vain efforts to resist the force, generally dashes at full speed to one side; but the horse immediately turning to receive the shock, stands so firmly that the bullock is almost thrown down, and
The struggle is not, however, one of fair strength; the horse's girth being matched against the bullock's extended neck.
In a similar manner a man can hold the wildest horse, if caught with the lazo, just behind the ears.
When the bullock has been dragged to the spot where it is to be slaughtered, the matador with great caution cuts the hamstrings.
Then is given the death bellow; a noise more expressive of fierce agony than any I know.
I have often distinguished it from a long distance, and have always known that the struggle was then drawing to a close.
The whole sight is horrible and revolting: the ground is almost made of bones; and the horses and riders are drenched with gore.
[1] I call these thistle-stalks for the want of a more correct name.
I believe it is a species of Eryngium.
[2] Travels in Africa, p.
233.
[3] Two species of Tinamus and Eudromia elegans of A. d'Orbigny, which can only be called a partridge with regard to its habits.
[4] History of the Abipones, vol.
ii.
p.
6.
[5] Falconer's Patagonia, p.
70.
[6] Fauna Boreali-Americana, vol.
i.
p.
35.
[7] See Mr. Atwater's account of the Prairies, in Silliman's N. A. Journal, vol.
i.
p.
117.
[8] Azara's Voyages, vol.
i.
p.
373.
[9] M. A. d'Orbigny (vol.
i.
p.
474) says that the cardoon and artichoke are both found wild.
Dr. Hooker (Botanical Magazine, vol.
iv.
p.
2862), has described a variety of the Cynara from this part of South America under the name of inermis.
He states that botanists are now generally agreed that the cardoon and the artichoke are varieties of one plant.
I may add, that an intelligent farmer assured me that he had observed in a deserted garden some artichokes changing into the common cardoon.
Dr. Hooker believes that Head's vivid description of the thistle of the Pampas applies to the cardoon, but this is a mistake.
Captain Head referred to the plant, which I have mentioned a few lines lower down, under the title of giant thistle.
Whether it is a true thistle I do not know; but it is quite different from the cardoon; and more like a thistle properly so called.
[10] It is said to contain 60,000 inhabitants.
Monte Video, the second town of importance on the banks of the Plata, has 15,000.
CHAPTER VII BUENOS AYRES AND ST.
FE Excursion to St. Fe--Thistle Beds--Habits of the Bizcacha--Little Owl--Saline Streams--Level Plain--Mastodon--St. Fe--Change in Landscape--Geology--Tooth of extinct Horse--Relation of the Fossil and recent Quadrupeds of North and South America--Effects
SEPTEMBER 27th.
--In the evening I set out on an excursion to St. Fe, which is situated nearly three hundred English miles from Buenos Ayres, on the banks of the Parana.
The roads in the neighbourhood of the city after the rainy weather, were extraordinarily bad.
I should never have thought it possible for a bullock waggon to have crawled along: as it was, they scarcely went at the rate of a mile an hour, and a man was kept ahead, to survey the best line for making the attempt.
The bullocks were terribly jaded: it is a great mistake to suppose that with improved roads, and an accelerated rate of travelling, the sufferings of the animals increase in the same proportion.
We passed a train of waggons and a troop of beasts on their road to Mendoza.
The distance is about 580 geographical miles, and the journey is generally performed in fifty days.
These waggons are very long, narrow, and thatched with reeds; they have only two wheels, the diameter of which in some cases is as much as ten feet.
Each is drawn by six bullocks, which are urged on by a goad at least twenty feet long: this is suspended from within the roof; for the wheel bullocks a smaller one is kept; and for the intermediate pair, a point projects at right angles from the middle of
The whole apparatus looked like some implement of war.
September 28th.
--We passed the small town of Luxan where there is a wooden bridge over the river--a most unusual convenience in this country.
We passed also Areco.
The plains appeared level, but were not so in fact; for in various places the horizon was distant.
The estancias are here wide apart; for there is little good pasture, owing to the land being covered by beds either of an acrid clover, or of the great thistle.
The latter, well known from the animated description given by Sir F. Head, were at this time of the year two-thirds grown; in some parts they were as high as the horse's back, but in others they had not yet sprung up, and the ground was bare and dusty as
The clumps were of the most brilliant green, and they made a pleasing miniature-likeness of broken forest land.
When the thistles are full grown, the great beds are impenetrable, except by a few tracts, as intricate as those in a labyrinth.
These are only known to the robbers, who at this season inhabit them, and sally forth at night to rob and cut throats with impunity.
Upon asking at a house whether robbers were numerous, I was answered, "The thistles are not up yet;"--the meaning of which reply was not at first very obvious.
There is little interest in passing over these tracts, for they are inhabited by few animals or birds, excepting the bizcacha and its friend the little owl.
The bizcacha [1] is well known to form a prominent feature in the zoology of the Pampas.
It is found as far south as the Rio Negro, in lat.
41 degs.
, but not beyond.
It cannot, like the agouti, subsist on the gravelly and desert plains of Patagonia, but prefers a clayey or sandy soil, which produces a different and more abundant vegetation.
Near Mendoza, at the foot of the Cordillera, it occurs in close neighbourhood with the allied alpine species.
It is a very curious circumstance in its geographical distribution, that it has never been seen, fortunately for the inhabitants of Banda Oriental, to the eastward of the river Uruguay: yet in this province there are plains which appear admirably adapted
The Uruguay has formed an insuperable obstacle to its migration: although the broader barrier of the Parana has been passed, and the bizcacha is common in Entre Rios, the province between these two great rivers.
Near Buenos Ayres these animals are exceedingly common.
Their most favourite resort appears to be those parts of the plain which during one-half of the year are covered with giant thistles, to the exclusion of other plants.
The Gauchos affirm that it lives on roots; which, from the great strength of its gnawing teeth, and the kind of places frequented by it, seems probable.
In the evening the bizcachas come out in numbers, and quietly sit at the mouths of their burrows on their haunches.
At such times they are very tame, and a man on horseback passing by seems only to present an object for their grave contemplation.
They run very awkwardly, and when running out of danger, from their elevated tails and short front legs much resemble great rats.
Their flesh, when cooked, is very white and good, but it is seldom used.
The bizcacha has one very singular habit; namely, dragging every hard object to the mouth of its burrow: around each group of holes many bones of cattle, stones, thistle-stalks, hard lumps of earth, dry dung, etc.
, are collected into an irregular heap, which frequently amounts to as much as a wheelbarrow would contain.
I was credibly informed that a gentleman, when riding on a dark night, dropped his watch; he returned in the morning, and by searching the neighbourhood of every bizcacha hole on the line of road, as he expected, he soon found it.
This habit of picking up whatever may be lying on the ground anywhere near its habitation, must cost much trouble.
For what purpose it is done, I am quite unable to form even the most remote conjecture: it cannot be for defence, because the rubbish is chiefly placed above the mouth of the burrow, which enters the ground at a very small inclination.
No doubt there must exist some good reason; but the inhabitants of the country are quite ignorant of it.
The only fact which I know analogous to it, is the habit of that extraordinary Australian bird, the Calodera maculata, which makes an elegant vaulted passage of twigs for playing in, and which collects near the spot, land and sea-shells, bones and the
Mr. Gould, who has described these facts, informs me, that the natives, when they lose any hard object, search the playing passages, and he has known a tobacco-pipe thus recovered.
The little owl (Athene cunicularia), which has been so often mentioned, on the plains of Buenos Ayres exclusively inhabits the holes of the bizcacha; but in Banda Oriental it is its own workman.
During the open day, but more especially in the evening, these birds may be seen in every direction standing frequently by pairs on the hillock near their burrows.
If disturbed they either enter the hole, or, uttering a shrill harsh cry, move with a remarkably undulatory flight to a short distance, and then turning round, steadily gaze at their pursuer.
Occasionally in the evening they may be heard hooting.
I found in the stomachs of two which I opened the remains of mice, and I one day saw a small snake killed and carried away.
It is said that snakes are their common prey during the daytime.
I may here mention, as showing on what various kinds of food owls subsist, that a species killed among the islets of the Chonos Archipelago, had its stomach full of good-sized crabs.
In India [2] there is a fishing genus of owls, which likewise catches crabs.
In the evening we crossed the Rio Arrecife on a simple raft made of barrels lashed together, and slept at the post-house on the other side.
I this day paid horse-hire for thirty-one leagues; and although the sun was glaring hot I was but little fatigued.
When Captain Head talks of riding fifty leagues a day, I do not imagine the distance is equal to 150 English miles.
At all events, the thirty-one leagues was only 76 miles in a straight line, and in an open country I should think four additional miles for turnings would be a sufficient allowance.
29th and 30th.
--We continued to ride over plains of the same character.
At San Nicolas I first saw the noble river of the Parana.
At the foot of the cliff on which the town stands, some large vessels were at anchor.
Before arriving at Rozario, we crossed the Saladillo, a stream of fine clear running water, but too saline to drink.
Rozario is a large town built on a dead level plain, which forms a cliff about sixty feet high over the Parana.
The river here is very broad, with many islands, which are low and wooded, as is also the opposite shore.
The view would resemble that of a great lake, if it were not for the linear-shaped islets, which alone give the idea of running water.
The cliffs are the most picturesque part; sometimes they are absolutely perpendicular, and of a red colour; at other times in large broken masses, covered with cacti and mimosa-trees.
The real grandeur, however, of an immense river like this, is derived from reflecting how important a means of communication and commerce it forms between one nation and another; to what a distance it travels, and from how vast a territory it drains the
For many leagues north and south of San Nicolas and Rozario, the country is really level.
Scarcely anything which travellers have written about its extreme flatness, can be considered as exaggeration.
Yet I could never find a spot where, by slowly turning round, objects were not seen at greater distances in some directions than in others; and this manifestly proves inequality in the plain.
At sea, a person's eye being six feet above the surface of the water, his horizon is two miles and four-fifths distant.
In like manner, the more level the plain, the more nearly does the horizon approach within these narrow limits; and this, in my opinion, entirely destroys that grandeur which one would have imagined that a vast level plain would have possessed.
October 1st.
--We started by moonlight and arrived at the Rio Tercero by sunrise.
The river is also called the Saladillo, and it deserves the name, for the water is brackish.
I stayed here the greater part of the day, searching for fossil bones.
Besides a perfect tooth of the Toxodon, and many scattered bones, I found two immense skeletons near each other, projecting in bold relief from the perpendicular cliff of the Parana.
They were, however, so completely decayed, that I could only bring away small fragments of one of the great molar teeth; but these are sufficient to show that the remains belonged to a Mastodon, probably to the same species with that, which formerly must
The men who took me in the canoe, said they had long known of these skeletons, and had often wondered how they had got there: the necessity of a theory being felt, they came to the conclusion that, like the bizcacha, the mastodon was formerly a burrowing
In the evening we rode another stage, and crossed the Monge, another brackish stream, bearing the dregs of the washings of the Pampas.
October 2nd.
--We passed through Corunda, which, from the luxuriance of its gardens, was one of the prettiest villages I saw.
From this point to St. Fe the road is not very safe.
The western side of the Parana northward, ceases to be inhabited; and hence the Indians sometimes come down thus far, and waylay travellers.
The nature of the country also favours this, for instead of a grassy plain, there is an open woodland, composed of low prickly mimosas.
We passed some houses that had been ransacked and since deserted; we saw also a spectacle, which my guides viewed with high satisfaction; it was the skeleton of an Indian with the dried skin hanging on the bones, suspended to the branch of a tree.
In the morning we arrived at St. Fe.
I was surprised to observe how great a change of climate a difference of only three degrees of latitude between this place and Buenos Ayres had caused.
This was evident from the dress and complexion of the men--from the increased size of the ombu-trees--the number of new cacti and other plants--and especially from the birds.
In the course of an hour I remarked half-a-dozen birds, which I had never seen at Buenos Ayres.
Considering that there is no natural boundary between the two places, and that the character of the country is nearly similar, the difference was much greater than I should have expected.
October 3rd and 4th.
--I was confined for these two days to my bed by a headache.
A good-natured old woman, who attended me, wished me to try many odd remedies.
A common practice is, to bind an orange-leaf or a bit of black plaster to each temple: and a still more general plan is, to split a bean into halves, moisten them, and place one on each temple, where they will easily adhere.
It is not thought proper ever to remove the beans or plaster, but to allow them to drop off, and sometimes, if a man, with patches on his head, is asked, what is the matter?
he will answer, "I had a headache the day before yesterday".
Many of the remedies used by the people of the country are ludicrously strange, but too disgusting to be mentioned.
One of the least nasty is to kill and cut open two puppies and bind them on each side of a broken limb.
Little hairless dogs are in great request to sleep at the feet of invalids.
St. Fe is a quiet little town, and is kept clean and in good order.
The governor, Lopez, was a common soldier at the time of the revolution; but has now been seventeen years in power.
This stability of government is owing to his tyrannical habits; for tyranny seems as yet better adapted to these countries than republicanism.
The governor's favourite occupation is hunting Indians: a short time since he slaughtered forty-eight, and sold the children at the rate of three or four pounds apiece.
October 5th.
--We crossed the Parana to St. Fe Bajada, a town on the opposite shore.
The passage took some hours, as the river here consisted of a labyrinth of small streams, separated by low wooded islands.
I had a letter of introduction to an old Catalonian Spaniard, who treated me with the most uncommon hospitality.
The Bajada is the capital of Entre Rios.
In 1825 the town contained 6000 inhabitants, and the province 30,000; yet, few as the inhabitants are, no province has suffered more from bloody and desperate revolutions.
They boast here of representatives, ministers, a standing army, and governors: so it is no wonder that they have their revolutions.
At some future day this must be one of the richest countries of La Plata.
The soil is varied and productive; and its almost insular form gives it two grand lines of communication by the rivers Parana and Uruguay.
I was delayed here five days, and employed myself in examining the geology of the surrounding country, which was very interesting.
We here see at the bottom of the cliffs, beds containing sharks' teeth and sea-shells of extinct species, passing above into an indurated marl, and from that into the red clayey earth of the Pampas, with its calcareous concretions and the bones of
This vertical section clearly tells us of a large bay of pure salt-water, gradually encroached on, and at last converted into the bed of a muddy estuary, into which floating carcasses were swept.
At Punta Gorda, in Banda Oriental, I found an alternation of the Pampaean estuary deposit, with a limestone containing some of the same extinct sea-shells; and this shows either a change in the former currents, or more probably an oscillation of level in
Until lately, my reasons for considering the Pampaean formation to be an estuary deposit were, its general appearance, its position at the mouth of the existing great river the Plata, and the presence of so many bones of terrestrial quadrupeds: but now
M. A. d'Orbigny found on the banks of the Parana, at the height of a hundred feet, great beds of an estuary shell, now living a hundred miles lower down nearer the sea; and I found similar shells at a less height on the banks of the Uruguay; this shows
Below Buenos Ayres there are upraised beds of sea-shells of existing species, which also proves that the period of elevation of the Pampas was within the recent period.
In the Pampaean deposit at the Bajada I found the osseous armour of a gigantic armadillo-like animal, the inside of which, when the earth was removed, was like a great cauldron; I found also teeth of the Toxodon and Mastodon, and one tooth of a Horse, in
This latter tooth greatly interested me, [3] and I took scrupulous care in ascertaining that it had been embedded contemporaneously with the other remains; for I was not then aware that amongst the fossils from Bahia Blanca there was a horse's tooth hidden
Mr. Lyell has lately brought from the United States a tooth of a horse; and it is an interesting fact, that Professor Owen could find in no species, either fossil or recent, a slight but peculiar curvature characterizing it, until he thought of comparing
Certainly it is a marvellous fact in the history of the Mammalia, that in South America a native horse should have lived and disappeared, to be succeeded in after-ages by the countless herds descended from the few introduced with the Spanish colonists!
The existence in South America of a fossil horse, of the mastodon, possibly of an elephant, [4] and of a hollow-horned ruminant, discovered by MM.
Lund and Clausen in the caves of Brazil, are highly interesting facts with respect to the geographical distribution of animals.
At the present time, if we divide America, not by the Isthmus of Panama, but by the southern part of Mexico [5] in lat.
20 degs.
, where the great table-land presents an obstacle to the migration of species, by affecting the climate, and by forming, with the exception of some valleys and of a fringe of low land on the coast, a broad barrier; we shall then have the two zoological
Some few species alone have passed the barrier, and may be considered as wanderers from the south, such as the puma, opossum, kinkajou, and peccari.
South America is characterized by possessing many peculiar gnawers, a family of monkeys, the llama, peccari, tapir, opossums, and, especially, several genera of Edentata, the order which includes the sloths, ant-eaters, and armadilloes.
North America, on the other hand, is characterized (putting on one side a few wandering species) by numerous peculiar gnawers, and by four genera (the ox, sheep, goat, and antelope) of hollow-horned ruminants, of which great division South America is not
Formerly, but within the period when most of the now existing shells were living, North America possessed, besides hollow-horned ruminants, the elephant, mastodon, horse, and three genera of Edentata, namely, the Megatherium, Megalonyx, and Mylodon.
Within nearly this same period (as proved by the shells at Bahia Blanca) South America possessed, as we have just seen, a mastodon, horse, hollow-horned ruminant, and the same three genera (as well as several others) of the Edentata.
Hence it is evident that North and South America, in having within a late geological period these several genera in common, were much more closely related in the character of their terrestrial inhabitants than they now are.
The more I reflect on this case, the more interesting it appears: I know of no other instance where we can almost mark the period and manner of the splitting up of one great region into two well-characterized zoological provinces.
The geologist, who is fully impressed with the vast oscillations of level which have affected the earth's crust within late periods, will not fear to speculate on the recent elevation of the Mexican platform, or, more probably, on the recent submergence of
The South American character of the West Indian mammals [6] seems to indicate that this archipelago was formerly united to the southern continent, and that it has subsequently been an area of subsidence.
When America, and especially North America, possessed its elephants, mastodons, horse, and hollow-horned ruminants, it was much more closely related in its zoological characters to the temperate parts of Europe and Asia than it now is.
As the remains of these genera are found on both sides of Behring's Straits [7] and on the plains of Siberia, we are led to look to the north-western side of North America as the former point of communication between the Old and so-called New World.
And as so many species, both living and extinct, of these same genera inhabit and have inhabited the Old World, it seems most probable that the North American elephants, mastodons, horse, and hollow-horned ruminants migrated, on land since submerged near
While travelling through the country, I received several vivid descriptions of the effects of a late great drought; and the account of this may throw some light on the cases where vast numbers of animals of all kinds have been embedded together.
The period included between the years 1827 and 1830 is called the "gran seco," or the great drought.
During this time so little rain fell, that the vegetation, even to the thistles, failed; the brooks were dried up, and the whole country assumed the appearance of a dusty high road.
This was especially the case in the northern part of the province of Buenos Ayres and the southern part of St. Fe.
Very great numbers of birds, wild animals, cattle, and horses perished from the want of food and water.
A man told me that the deer [8] used to come into his courtyard to the well, which he had been obliged to dig to supply his own family with water; and that the partridges had hardly strength to fly away when pursued.
The lowest estimation of the loss of cattle in the province of Buenos Ayres alone, was taken at one million head.
A proprietor at San Pedro had previously to these years 20,000 cattle; at the end not one remained.
San Pedro is situated in the middle of the finest country; and even now abounds again with animals; yet during the latter part of the "gran seco," live cattle were brought in vessels for the consumption of the inhabitants.
The animals roamed from their estancias, and, wandering far southward, were mingled together in such multitudes, that a government commission was sent from Buenos Ayres to settle the disputes of the owners.
Sir Woodbine Parish informed me of another and very curious source of dispute; the ground being so long dry, such quantities of dust were blown about, that in this open country the landmarks became obliterated, and people could not tell the limits of their
I was informed by an eye-witness that the cattle in herds of thousands rushed into the Parana, and being exhausted by hunger they were unable to crawl up the muddy banks, and thus were drowned.
The arm of the river which runs by San Pedro was so full of putrid carcasses, that the master of a vessel told me that the smell rendered it quite impassable.
Without doubt several hundred thousand animals thus perished in the river: their bodies when putrid were seen floating down the stream; and many in all probability were deposited in the estuary of the Plata.
All the small rivers became highly saline, and this caused the death of vast numbers in particular spots; for when an animal drinks of such water it does not recover.
Azara describes [9] the fury of the wild horses on a similar occasion, rushing into the marshes, those which arrived first being overwhelmed and crushed by those which followed.
He adds that more than once he has seen the carcasses of upwards of a thousand wild horses thus destroyed.
I noticed that the smaller streams in the Pampas were paved with a breccia of bones but this probably is the effect of a gradual increase, rather than of the destruction at any one period.
Subsequently to the drought of 1827 to 1832, a very rainy season followed which caused great floods.
Hence it is almost certain that some thousands of the skeletons were buried by the deposits of the very next year.
What would be the opinion of a geologist, viewing such an enormous collection of bones, of all kinds of animals and of all ages, thus embedded in one thick earthy mass?
Would he not attribute it to a flood having swept over the surface of the land, rather than to the common order of things?
[10] October 12th.
--I had intended to push my excursion further, but not being quite well, I was compelled to return by a balandra, or one-masted vessel of about a hundred tons' burden, which was bound to Buenos Ayres.
As the weather was not fair, we moored early in the day to a branch of a tree on one of the islands.
The Parana is full of islands, which undergo a constant round of decay and renovation.
In the memory of the master several large ones had disappeared, and others again had been formed and protected by vegetation.
They are composed of muddy sand, without even the smallest pebble, and were then about four feet above the level of the river; but during the periodical floods they are inundated.
They all present one character; numerous willows and a few other trees are bound together by a great variety of creeping plants, thus forming a thick jungle.
These thickets afford a retreat for capybaras and jaguars.
The fear of the latter animal quite destroyed all pleasure in scrambling through the woods.
This evening I had not proceeded a hundred yards, before finding indubitable signs of the recent presence of the tiger, I was obliged to come back.
On every island there were tracks; and as on the former excursion "el rastro de los Indios" had been the subject of conversation, so in this was "el rastro del tigre".
The wooded banks of the great rivers appear to be the favourite haunts of the jaguar; but south of the Plata, I was told that they frequented the reeds bordering lakes: wherever they are, they seem to require water.
Their common prey is the capybara, so that it is generally said, where capybaras are numerous there is little danger from the jaguar.
Falconer states that near the southern side of the mouth of the Plata there are many jaguars, and that they chiefly live on fish; this account I have heard repeated.
On the Parana they have killed many wood-cutters, and have even entered vessels at night.
There is a man now living in the Bajada, who, coming up from below when it was dark, was seized on the deck; he escaped, however, with the loss of the use of one arm.
When the floods drive these animals from the islands, they are most dangerous.
I was told that a few years since a very large one found its way into a church at St. Fe: two padres entering one after the other were killed, and a third, who came to see what was the matter, escaped with difficulty.
The beast was destroyed by being shot from a corner of the building which was unroofed.
They commit also at these times great ravages among cattle and horses.
It is said that they kill their prey by breaking their necks.
If driven from the carcass, they seldom return to it.
The Gauchos say that the jaguar, when wandering about at night, is much tormented by the foxes yelping as they follow him.
This is a curious coincidence with the fact which is generally affirmed of the jackals accompanying, in a similarly officious manner, the East Indian tiger.
The jaguar is a noisy animal, roaring much by night, and especially before bad weather.
One day, when hunting on the banks of the Uruguay, I was shown certain trees, to which these animals constantly recur for the purpose, as it is said, of sharpening their claws.
I saw three well-known trees; in front, the bark was worn smooth, as if by the breast of the animal, and on each side there were deep scratches, or rather grooves, extending in an oblique line, nearly a yard in length.
The scars were of different ages.
A common method of ascertaining whether a jaguar is in the neighbourhood is to examine these trees.
I imagine this habit of the jaguar is exactly similar to one which may any day be seen in the common cat, as with outstretched legs and exserted claws it scrapes the leg of a chair; and I have heard of young fruit-trees in an orchard in England having been
Some such habit must also be common to the puma, for on the bare hard soil of Patagonia I have frequently seen scores so deep that no other animal could have made them.
The object of this practice is, I believe, to tear off the ragged points of their claws, and not, as the Gauchos think, to sharpen them.
The jaguar is killed, without much difficulty, by the aid of dogs baying and driving him up a tree, where he is despatched with bullets.
Owing to bad weather we remained two days at our moorings.
Our only amusement was catching fish for our dinner: there were several kinds, and all good eating.
A fish called the "armado" (a Silurus) is remarkable from a harsh grating noise which it makes when caught by hook and line, and which can be distinctly heard when the fish is beneath the water.
This same fish has the power of firmly catching hold of any object, such as the blade of an oar or the fishing-line, with the strong spine both of its pectoral and dorsal fin.
In the evening the weather was quite tropical, the thermometer standing at 79 degs.
Numbers of fireflies were hovering about, and the musquitoes were very troublesome.
I exposed my hand for five minutes, and it was soon black with them; I do not suppose there could have been less than fifty, all busy sucking.
October 15th.
--We got under way and passed Punta Gorda, where there is a colony of tame Indians from the province of Missiones.
We sailed rapidly down the current, but before sunset, from a silly fear of bad weather, we brought-to in a narrow arm of the river.
I took the boat and rowed some distance up this creek.
It was very narrow, winding, and deep; on each side a wall thirty or forty feet high, formed by trees intwined with creepers, gave to the canal a singularly gloomy appearance.
I here saw a very extraordinary bird, called the Scissor-beak (Rhynchops nigra).
It has short legs, web feet, extremely long-pointed wings, and is of about the size of a tern.
The beak is flattened laterally, that is, in a plane at right angles to that of a spoonbill or duck.
It is as flat and elastic as an ivory paper-cutter, and the lower mandible, differing from every other bird, is an inch and a half longer than the upper.
In a lake near Maldonado, from which the water had been nearly drained, and which, in consequence, swarmed with small fry, I saw several of these birds, generally in small flocks, flying rapidly backwards and forwards close to the surface of the lake.
They kept their bills wide open, and the lower mandible half buried in the water.
Thus skimming the surface, they ploughed it in their course: the water was quite smooth, and it formed a most curious spectacle to behold a flock, each bird leaving its narrow wake on the mirror-like surface.
In their flight they frequently twist about with extreme quickness, and dexterously manage with their projecting lower mandible to plough up small fish, which are secured by the upper and shorter half of their scissor-like [picture] bills.
This fact I repeatedly saw, as, like swallows, they continued to fly backwards and forwards close before me.
Occasionally when leaving the surface of the water their flight was wild, irregular, and rapid; they then uttered loud harsh cries.
When these birds are fishing, the advantage of the long primary feathers of their wings, in keeping them dry, is very evident.
When thus employed, their forms resemble the symbol by which many artists represent marine birds.
Their tails are much used in steering their irregular course.
These birds are common far inland along the course of the Rio Parana; it is said that they remain here during the whole year, and breed in the marshes.
During the day they rest in flocks on the grassy plains at some distance from the water.
Being at anchor, as I have said, in one of the deep creeks between the islands of the Parana, as the evening drew to a close, one of these scissor-beaks suddenly appeared.
The water was quite still, and many little fish were rising.
The bird continued for a long time to skim the surface, flying in its wild and irregular manner up and down the narrow canal, now dark with the growing night and the shadows of the overhanging trees.
At Monte Video, I observed that some large flocks during the day remained on the mud-banks at the head of the harbour, in the same manner as on the grassy plains near the Parana; and every evening they took flight seaward.
From these facts I suspect that the Rhynchops generally fishes by night, at which time many of the lower animals come most abundantly to the surface.
M. Lesson states that he has seen these birds opening the shells of the mactrae buried in the sand-banks on the coast of Chile: from their weak bills, with the lower mandible so much projecting, their short legs and long wings, it is very improbable that
In our course down the Parana, I observed only three other birds, whose habits are worth mentioning.
One is a small kingfisher (Ceryle Americana); it has a longer tail than the European species, and hence does not sit in so stiff and upright a position.
Its flight also, instead of being direct and rapid, like the course of an arrow, is weak and undulatory, as among the soft-billed birds.
It utters a low note, like the clicking together of two small stones.
A small green parrot (Conurus murinus), with a grey breast, appears to prefer the tall trees on the islands to any other situation for its building-place.
A number of nests are placed so close together as to form one great mass of sticks.
These parrots always live in flocks, and commit great ravages on the corn-fields.
I was told, that near Colonia 2500 were killed in the course of one year.
A bird with a forked tail, terminated by two long feathers (Tyrannus savana), and named by the Spaniards scissor-tail, is very common near Buenos Ayres: it commonly sits on a branch of the _ombu_ tree, near a house, and thence takes a short flight in
When on the wing it presents in its manner of flight and general appearance a caricature-likeness of the common swallow.
It has the power of turning very shortly in the air, and in so doing opens and shuts its tail, sometimes in a horizontal or lateral and sometimes in a vertical direction, just like a pair of scissors.
October 16th.
--Some leagues below Rozario, the western shore of the Parana is bounded by perpendicular cliffs, which extend in a long line to below San Nicolas; hence it more resembles a sea-coast than that of a fresh-water river.
It is a great drawback to the scenery of the Parana, that, from the soft nature of its banks, the water is very muddy.
The Uruguay, flowing through a granitic country, is much clearer; and where the two channels unite at the head of the Plata, the waters may for a long distance be distinguished by their black and red colours.
In the evening, the wind being not quite fair, as usual we immediately moored, and the next day, as it blew rather freshly, though with a favouring current, the master was much too indolent to think of starting.
At Bajada, he was described to me as "hombre muy aflicto"--a man always miserable to get on; but certainly he bore all delays with admirable resignation.
He was an old Spaniard, and had been many years in this country.
He professed a great liking to the English, but stoutly maintained that the battle of Trafalgar was merely won by the Spanish captains having been all bought over; and that the only really gallant action on either side was performed by the Spanish admiral.
It struck me as rather characteristic, that this man should prefer his countrymen being thought the worst of traitors, rather than unskilful or cowardly.
18th and 19th.
--We continued slowly to sail down the noble stream: the current helped us but little.
We met, during our descent, very few vessels.
One of the best gifts of nature, in so grand a channel of communication, seems here wilfully thrown away--a river in which ships might navigate from a temperate country, as surprisingly abundant in certain productions as destitute of others, to another
How different would have been the aspect of this river if English colonists had by good fortune first sailed up the Plata!
What noble towns would now have occupied its shores!
Till the death of Francia, the Dictator of Paraguay, these two countries must remain distinct, as if placed on opposite sides of the globe.
And when the old bloody-minded tyrant is gone to his long account, Paraguay will be torn by revolutions, violent in proportion to the previous unnatural calm.
That country will have to learn, like every other South American state, that a republic cannot succeed till it contains a certain body of men imbued with the principles of justice and honour.
October 20th.
--Being arrived at the mouth of the Parana, and as I was very anxious to reach Buenos Ayres, I went on shore at Las Conchas, with the intention of riding there.
Upon landing, I found to my great surprise that I was to a certain degree a prisoner.
A violent revolution having broken out, all the ports were laid under an embargo.
I could not return to my vessel, and as for going by land to the city, it was out of the question.
After a long conversation with the commandant, I obtained permission to go the next day to General Rolor, who commanded a division of the rebels on this side the capital.
In the morning I rode to the encampment.
The general, officers, and soldiers, all appeared, and I believe really were, great villains.
The general, the very evening before he left the city, voluntarily went to the Governor, and with his hand to his heart, pledged his word of honour that he at least would remain faithful to the last.
The general told me that the city was in a state of close blockade, and that all he could do was to give me a passport to the commander-in-chief of the rebels at Quilmes.
We had therefore to take a great sweep round the city, and it was with much difficulty that we procured horses.
My reception at the encampment was quite civil, but I was told it was impossible that I could be allowed to enter the city.
I was very anxious about this, as I anticipated the Beagle's departure from the Rio Plata earlier than it took place.
Having mentioned, however, General Rosas's obliging kindness to me when at the Colorado, magic itself could not have altered circumstances quicker than did this conversation.
I was instantly told that though they could not give me a passport, if I chose to leave my guide and horses, I might pass their sentinels.
I was too glad to accept of this, and an officer was sent with me to give directions that I should not be stopped at the bridge.
The road for the space of a league was quite deserted.
I met one party of soldiers, who were satisfied by gravely looking at an old passport: and at length I was not a little pleased to find myself within the city.
This revolution was supported by scarcely any pretext of grievances: but in a state which, in the course of nine months (from February to October, 1820), underwent fifteen changes in its government--each governor, according to the constitution, being
In this case, a party of men--who, being attached to Rosas, were disgusted with the governor Balcarce--to the number of seventy left the city, and with the cry of Rosas the whole country took arms.
The city was then blockaded, no provisions, cattle or horses, were allowed to enter; besides this, there was only a little skirmishing, and a few men daily killed.
The outside party well knew that by stopping the supply of meat they would certainly be victorious.
General Rosas could not have known of this rising; but it appears to be quite consonant with the plans of his party.
A year ago he was elected governor, but he refused it, unless the Sala would also confer on him extraordinary powers.
This was refused, and since then his party have shown that no other governor can keep his place.
The warfare on both sides was avowedly protracted till it was possible to hear from Rosas.
A note arrived a few days after I left Buenos Ayres, which stated that the General disapproved of peace having been broken, but that he thought the outside party had justice on their side.
On the bare reception of this, the Governor, ministers, and part of the military, to the number of some hundreds, fled from the city.
The rebels entered, elected a new governor, and were paid for their services to the number of 5500 men.
From these proceedings, it was clear that Rosas ultimately would become the dictator: to the term king, the people in this, as in other republics, have a particular dislike.
Since leaving South America, we have heard that Rosas has been elected, with powers and for a time altogether opposed to the constitutional principles of the republic.
[1] The bizcacha (Lagostomus trichodactylus) somewhat resembles a large rabbit, but with bigger gnawing teeth and a long tail; it has, however, only three toes behind, like the agouti.
During the last three or four years the skins of these animals have been sent to England for the sake of the fur.
[2] Journal of Asiatic Soc.
, vol.
v.
p.
363.
[3] I need hardly state here that there is good evidence against any horse living in America at the time of Columbus.
[4] Cuvier.
Ossemens Fossils, tom.
i.
p.
158.
[5] This is the geographical division followed by Lichtenstein, Swainson, Erichson, and Richardson.
The section from Vera Cruz to Acapulco, given by Humboldt in the Polit.
Essay on Kingdom of N. Spain will show how immense a barrier the Mexican table-land forms.
Dr. Richardson, in his admirable Report on the Zoology of N. America read before the Brit.
Assoc.
1836 (p.
157), talking of the identification of a Mexican animal with the Synetheres prehensilis, says, "We do not know with what propriety, but if correct, it is, if not a solitary instance, at least very nearly so, of a rodent animal being common to North and
[6] See Dr. Richardson's Report, p.
157; also L'Institut, 1837, p.
253.
Cuvier says the kinkajou is found in the larger Antilles, but this is doubtful.
M. Gervais states that the Didelphis crancrivora is found there.
It is certain that the West Indies possess some mammifers peculiar to themselves.
A tooth of a mastadon has been brought from Bahama; Edin.
New Phil.
Journ.
, 1826, p.
395.
[7] See the admirable Appendix by Dr. Buckland to Beechey's Voyage; also the writings of Chamisso in Kotzebue's Voyage.
[8] In Captain Owen's Surveying Voyage (vol.
ii.
p.
274) there is a curious account of the effects of a drought on the elephants, at Benguela (west coast of Africa).
"A number of these animals had some time since entered the town, in a body, to possess themselves of the wells, not being able to procure any water in the country.
The inhabitants mustered, when a desperate conflict ensued, which terminated in the ultimate discomfiture of the invaders, but not until they had killed one man, and wounded several others".
The town is said to have a population of nearly three thousand!
Dr. Malcolmson informs me that, during a great drought in India, the wild animals entered the tents of some troops at Ellore, and that a hare drank out of a vessel held by the adjutant of the regiment.
[9] Travels, vol.
i.
p.
374.
[10] These droughts to a certain degree seem to be almost periodical; I was told the dates of several others, and the intervals were about fifteen years.
CHAPTER VIII BANDA ORIENTAL AND PATAGONIA Excursion to Colonia del Sacramiento--Value of an Estancia--Cattle, how counted--Singular Breed of Oxen--Perforated Pebbles--Shepherd Dogs--Horses broken-in, Gauchos riding--Character of Inhabitants--Rio
HAVING been delayed for nearly a fortnight in the city, I was glad to escape on board a packet bound for Monte Video.
A town in a state of blockade must always be a disagreeable place of residence; in this case moreover there were constant apprehensions from robbers within.
The sentinels were the worst of all; for, from their office and from having arms in their hands, they robbed with a degree of authority which other men could not imitate.
Our passage was a very long and tedious one.
The Plata looks like a noble estuary on the map; but is in truth a poor affair.
A wide expanse of muddy water has neither grandeur nor beauty.
At one time of the day, the two shores, both of which are extremely low, could just be distinguished from the deck.
On arriving at Monte Video I found that the Beagle would not sail for some time, so I prepared for a short excursion in this part of Banda Oriental.
Everything which I have said about the country near Maldonado is applicable to Monte Video; but the land, with the one exception of the Green Mount 450 feet high, from which it takes its name, is far more level.
Very little of the undulating grassy plain is enclosed; but near the town there are a few hedge-banks, covered with agaves, cacti, and fennel.
November 14th.
--We left Monte Video in the afternoon.
I intended to proceed to Colonia del Sacramiento, situated on the northern bank of the Plata and opposite to Buenos Ayres, and thence, following up the Uruguay, to the village of Mercedes on the Rio Negro (one of the many rivers of this name in South
We slept at the house of my guide at Canelones.
In the morning we rose early, in the hopes of being able to ride a good distance; but it was a vain attempt, for all the rivers were flooded.
We passed in boats the streams of Canelones, St. Lucia, and San Jose, and thus lost much time.
On a former excursion I crossed the Lucia near its mouth, and I was surprised to observe how easily our horses, although not used to swim, passed over a width of at least six hundred yards.
On mentioning this at Monte Video, I was told that a vessel containing some mountebanks and their horses, being wrecked in the Plata, one horse swam seven miles to the shore.
In the course of the day I was amused by the dexterity with which a Gaucho forced a restive horse to swim a river.
He stripped off his clothes, and jumping on its back, rode into the water till it was out of its depth; then slipping off over the crupper, he caught hold of the tail, and as often as the horse turned round the man frightened it back by splashing water in
As soon as the horse touched the bottom on the other side, the man pulled himself on, and was firmly seated, bridle in hand, before the horse gained the bank.
A naked man on a naked horse is a fine spectacle; I had no idea how well the two animals suited each other.
The tail of a horse is a very useful appendage; I have passed a river in a boat with four people in it, which was ferried across in the same way as the Gaucho.
If a man and horse have to cross a broad river, the best plan is for the man to catch hold of the pommel or mane, and help himself with the other arm.
We slept and stayed the following day at the post of Cufre.
In the evening the postman or letter-carrier arrived.
He was a day after his time, owing to the Rio Rozario being flooded.
It would not, however, be of much consequence; for, although he had passed through some of the principal towns in Banda Oriental, his luggage consisted of two letters!
The view from the house was pleasing; an undulating green surface, with distant glimpses of the Plata.
I find that I look at this province with very different eyes from what I did upon my first arrival.
I recollect I then thought it singularly level; but now, after galloping over the Pampas, my only surprise is, what could have induced me ever to call it level.
The country is a series of undulations, in themselves perhaps not absolutely great, but, as compared to the plains of St. Fe, real mountains.
From these inequalities there is an abundance of small rivulets, and the turf is green and luxuriant.
November 17th.
--We crossed the Rozario, which was deep and rapid, and passing the village of Colla, arrived at midday at Colonia del Sacramiento.
The distance is twenty leagues, through a country covered with fine grass, but poorly stocked with cattle or inhabitants.
I was invited to sleep at Colonia, and to accompany on the following day a gentleman to his estancia, where there were some limestone rocks.
The town is built on a stony promontory something in the same manner as at Monte Video.
It is strongly fortified, but both fortifications and town suffered much in the Brazilian war.
It is very ancient; and the irregularity of the streets, and the surrounding groves of old orange and peach trees, gave it a pretty appearance.
The church is a curious ruin; it was used as a powder-magazine, and was struck by lightning in one of the ten thousand thunderstorms of the Rio Plata.
Two-thirds of the building were blown away to the very foundation; and the rest stands a shattered and curious monument of the united powers of lightning and gunpowder.
In the evening I wandered about the half-demolished walls of the town.
It was the chief seat of the Brazilian war;--a war most injurious to this country, not so much in its immediate effects, as in being the origin of a multitude of generals and all other grades of officers.
More generals are numbered (but not paid) in the United Provinces of La Plata than in the United Kingdom of Great Britain.
These gentlemen have learned to like power, and do not object to a little skirmishing.
Hence there are many always on the watch to create disturbance and to overturn a government which as yet has never rested on any staple foundation.
I noticed, however, both here and in other places, a very general interest in the ensuing election for the President; and this appears a good sign for the prosperity of this little country.
The inhabitants do not require much education in their representatives; I heard some men discussing the merits of those for Colonia; and it was said that, "although they were not men of business, they could all sign their names:" with this they seemed to
18th.
--Rode with my host to his estancia, at the Arroyo de San Juan.
In the evening we took a ride round the estate: it contained two square leagues and a half, and was situated in what is called a rincon; that is, one side was fronted by the Plata, and the two others guarded by impassable brooks.
There was an excellent port for little vessels, and an abundance of small wood, which is valuable as supplying fuel to Buenos Ayres.
I was curious to know the value of so complete an estancia.
Of cattle there were 3000, and it would well support three or four times that number; of mares 800, together with 150 broken-in horses, and 600 sheep.
There was plenty of water and limestone, a rough house, excellent corrals, and a peach orchard.
For all this he had been offered 2000 Pounds, and he only wanted 500 Pounds additional, and probably would sell it for less.
The chief trouble with an estancia is driving the cattle twice a week to a central spot, in order to make them tame, and to count them.
This latter operation would be thought difficult, where there are ten or fifteen thousand head together.
It is managed on the principle that the cattle invariably divide themselves into little troops of from forty to one hundred.
Each troop is recognized by a few peculiarly marked animals, and its number is known: so that, one being lost out of ten thousand, it is perceived by its absence from one of the tropillas.
During a stormy night the cattle all mingle together; but the next morning the tropillas separate as before; so that each animal must know its fellow out of ten thousand others.
On two occasions I met with in this province some oxen of a very curious breed, called nata or niata.
They appear externally to hold nearly the same relation to other cattle, which bull or pug dogs do to other dogs.
Their forehead is very short and broad, with the nasal end turned up, and the upper lip much drawn back; their lower jaws project beyond the upper, and have a corresponding upward curve; hence their teeth are always exposed.
Their nostrils are seated high up and are very open; their eyes project outwards.
When walking they carry their heads low, on a short neck; and their hinder legs are rather longer compared with the front legs than is usual.
Their bare teeth, their short heads, and upturned nostrils give them the most ludicrous self-confident air of defiance imaginable.
Since my return, I have procured a skeleton head, through the kindness of my friend Captain Sulivan, R. N., which is now deposited in the College of Surgeons.
[1] Don F. Muniz, of Luxan, has kindly collected for me all the information which he could respecting this breed.
From his account it seems that about eighty or ninety years ago, they were rare and kept as curiosities at Buenos Ayres.
The breed is universally believed to have originated amongst the Indians southward of the Plata; and that it was with them the commonest kind.
Even to this day, those reared in the provinces near the Plata show their less civilized origin, in being fiercer than common cattle, and in the cow easily deserting her first calf, if visited too often or molested.
It is a singular fact that an almost similar structure to the abnormal [2] one of the niata breed, characterizes, as I am informed by Dr. Falconer, that great extinct ruminant of India, the Sivatherium.
The breed is very _true_; and a niata bull and cow invariably produce niata calves.
A niata bull with a common cow, or the reverse cross, produces offspring having an intermediate character, but with the niata characters strongly displayed: according to Senor Muniz, there is the clearest evidence, contrary to the common belief of
When the pasture is tolerably long, the niata cattle feed with the tongue and palate as well as common cattle; but during the great droughts, when so many animals perish, the niata breed is under a great disadvantage, and would be exterminated if not
This strikes me as a good illustration of how little we are able to judge from the ordinary habits of life, on what circumstances, occurring only at long intervals, the rarity or extinction of a species may be determined.
November 19th.
--Passing the valley of Las Vacas, we slept at a house of a North American, who worked a lime-kiln on the Arroyo de las Vivoras.
In the morning we rode to a protecting headland on the banks of the river, called Punta Gorda.
On the way we tried to find a jaguar.
There were plenty of fresh tracks, and we visited the trees, on which they are said to sharpen their claws; but we did not succeed in disturbing one.
From this point the Rio Uruguay presented to our view a noble volume of water.
From the clearness and rapidity of the stream, its appearance was far superior to that of its neighbour the Parana.
On the opposite coast, several branches from the latter river entered the Uruguay.
As the sun was shining, the two colours of the waters could be seen quite distinct.
In the evening we proceeded on our road towards Mercedes on the Rio Negro.
At night we asked permission to sleep at an estancia at which we happened to arrive.
It was a very large estate, being ten leagues square, and the owner is one of the greatest landowners in the country.
His nephew had charge of it, and with him there was a captain in the army, who the other day ran away from Buenos Ayres.
Considering their station, their conversation was rather amusing.
They expressed, as was usual, unbounded astonishment at the globe being round, and could scarcely credit that a hole would, if deep enough, come out on the other side.
They had, however, heard of a country where there were six months of light and six of darkness, and where the inhabitants were very tall and thin!
They were curious about the price and condition of horses and cattle in England.
Upon finding out we did not catch our animals with the lazo, they cried out, "Ah, then, you use nothing but the bolas:" the idea of an enclosed country was quite new to them.
The captain at last said, he had one question to ask me, which he should be very much obliged if I would answer with all truth.
I trembled to think how deeply scientific it would be: it was, "Whether the ladies of Buenos Ayres were not the handsomest in the world".
I replied, like a renegade, "Charmingly so".
He added, "I have one other question: Do ladies in any other part of the world wear such large combs"?
I solemnly assured him that they did not.
They were absolutely delighted.
The captain exclaimed, "Look there!
a man who has seen half the world says it is the case; we always thought so, but now we know it".
My excellent judgment in combs and beauty procured me a most hospitable reception; the captain forced me to take his bed, and he would sleep on his recado.
21st.
--Started at sunrise, and rode slowly during the whole day.
The geological nature of this part of the province was different from the rest, and closely resembled that of the Pampas.
In consequence, there were immense beds of the thistle, as well as of the cardoon: the whole country, indeed, may be called one great bed of these plants.
The two sorts grow separate, each plant in company with its own kind.
The cardoon is as high as a horse's back, but the Pampas thistle is often higher than the crown of the rider's head.
To leave the road for a yard is out of the question; and the road itself is partly, and in some cases entirely closed.
Pasture, of course there is none; if cattle or horses once enter the bed, they are for the time completely lost.
Hence it is very hazardous to attempt to drive cattle at this season of the year; for when jaded enough to face the thistles, they rush among them, and are seen no more.
In these districts there are very few estancias, and these few are situated in the neighbourhood of damp valleys, where fortunately neither of these overwhelming plants can exist.
As night came on before we arrived at our journey's end, we slept at a miserable little hovel inhabited by the poorest people.
The extreme though rather formal courtesy of our host and hostess, considering their grade of life, was quite delightful.
November 22nd.
--Arrived at an estancia on the Berquelo belonging to a very hospitable Englishman, to whom I had a letter of introduction from my friend Mr. Lumb.
I stayed here three days.
One morning I rode with my host to the Sierra del Pedro Flaco, about twenty miles up the Rio Negro.
Nearly the whole country was covered with good though coarse grass, which was as high as a horse's belly; yet there were square leagues without a single head of cattle.
The province of Banda Oriental, if well stocked, would support an astonishing number of animals, at present the annual export of hides from Monte Video amounts to three hundred thousand; and the home consumption, from waste, is very considerable.
An "estanciero" told me that he often had to send large herds of cattle a long journey to a salting establishment, and that the tired beasts were frequently obliged to be killed and skinned; but that he could never persuade the Gauchos to eat of them, and
The view of the Rio Negro from the Sierra was more picturesque than any other which I saw in this province.
The river, broad, deep, and rapid, wound at the foot of a rocky precipitous cliff: a belt of wood followed its course, and the horizon terminated in the distant undulations of the turf-plain.
When in this neighbourhood, I several times heard of the Sierra de las Cuentas: a hill distant many miles to the northward.
The name signifies hill of beads.
I was assured that vast numbers of little round stones, of various colours, each with a small cylindrical hole, are found there.
Formerly the Indians used to collect them, for the purpose of making necklaces and bracelets--a taste, I may observe, which is common to all savage nations, as well as to the most polished.
I did not know what to understand from this story, but upon mentioning it at the Cape of Good Hope to Dr. Andrew Smith, he told me that he recollected finding on the south-eastern coast of Africa, about one hundred miles to the eastward of St. John's
Each crystal was about five lines in diameter, and from an inch to an inch and a half in length.
Many of them had a small canal extending from one extremity to the other, perfectly cylindrical, and of a size that readily admitted a coarse thread or a piece of fine catgut.
Their colour was red or dull white.
The natives were acquainted with this structure in crystals.
I have mentioned these circumstances because, although no crystallized body is at present known to assume this form, it may lead some future traveller to investigate the real nature of such stones.
While staying at this estancia, I was amused with what I saw and heard of the shepherd-dogs of the country.
[3] When riding, it is a common thing to meet a large flock of sheep guarded by one or two dogs, at the distance of some miles from any house or man.
I often wondered how so firm a friendship had been established.
The method of education consists in separating the puppy, while very young, from the bitch, and in accustoming it to its future companions.
An ewe is held three or four times a day for the little thing to suck, and a nest of wool is made for it in the sheep-pen; at no time is it allowed to associate with other dogs, or with the children of the family.
The puppy is, moreover, generally castrated; so that, when grown up, it can scarcely have any feelings in common with the rest of its kind.
From this education it has no wish to leave the flock, and just as another dog will defend its master, man, so will these the sheep.
It is amusing to observe, when approaching a flock, how the dog immediately advances barking, and the sheep all close in his rear, as if round the oldest ram.
These dogs are also easily taught to bring home the flock, at a certain hour in the evening.
Their most troublesome fault, when young, is their desire of playing with the sheep; for in their sport they sometimes gallop their poor subjects most unmercifully.
The shepherd-dog comes to the house every day for some meat, and as soon as it is given him, he skulks away as if ashamed of himself.
On these occasions the house-dogs are very tyrannical, and the least of them will attack and pursue the stranger.
The minute, however, the latter has reached the flock, he turns round and begins to bark, and then all the house-dogs take very quickly to their heels.
In a similar manner a whole pack of the hungry wild dogs will scarcely ever (and I was told by some never) venture to attack a flock guarded by even one of these faithful shepherds.
The whole account appears to me a curious instance of the pliability of the affections in the dog; and yet, whether wild or however educated, he has a feeling of respect or fear for those that are fulfilling their instinct of association.
For we can understand on no principle the wild dogs being driven away by the single one with its flock, except that they consider, from some confused notion, that the one thus associated gains power, as if in company with its own kind.
F. Cuvier has observed that all animals that readily enter into domestication, consider man as a member of their own society, and thus fulfil their instinct of association.
In the above case the shepherd-dog ranks the sheep as its fellow-brethren, and thus gains confidence; and the wild dogs, though knowing that the individual sheep are not dogs, but are good to eat, yet partly consent to this view when seeing them in a flock
One evening a "domidor" (a subduer of horses) came for the purpose of breaking-in some colts.
I will describe the preparatory steps, for I believe they have not been mentioned by other travellers.
A troop of wild young horses is driven into the corral, or large enclosure of stakes, and the door is shut.
We will suppose that one man alone has to catch and mount a horse, which as yet had never felt bridle or saddle.
I conceive, except by a Gaucho, such a feat would be utterly impracticable.
The Gaucho picks out a full-grown colt; and as the beast rushes round the circus he throws his lazo so as to catch both the front legs.
Instantly the horse rolls over with a heavy shock, and whilst struggling on the ground, the Gaucho, holding the lazo tight, makes a circle, so as to catch one of the hind legs just beneath the fetlock, and draws it close to the two front legs: he then
Then sitting on the horse's neck, he fixes a strong bridle, without a bit, to the lower jaw: this he does by passing a narrow thong through the eye-holes at the end of the reins, and several times round both jaw and tongue.
The two front legs are now tied closely together with a strong leathern thong, fastened by a slip-knot.
The lazo, which bound the three together, being then loosed, the horse rises with difficulty.
The Gaucho now holding fast the bridle fixed to the lower jaw, leads the horse outside the corral.
If a second man is present (otherwise the trouble is much greater) he holds the animal's head, whilst the first puts on the horsecloths and saddle, and girths the whole together.
During this operation, the horse, from dread and astonishment at thus being bound round the waist, throws himself over and over again on the ground, and, till beaten, is unwilling to rise.
At last, when the saddling is finished, the poor animal can hardly breathe from fear, and is white with foam and sweat.
The man now prepares to mount by pressing heavily on the stirrup, so that the horse may not lose its balance; and at the moment that he throws his leg over the animal's back, he pulls the slip-knot binding the front legs, and the beast is free.
Some "domidors" pull the knot while the animal is lying on the ground, and, standing over the saddle, allow him to rise beneath them.
The horse, wild with dread, gives a few most violent bounds, and then starts off at full gallop: when quite exhausted, the man, by patience, brings him back to the corral, where, reeking hot and scarcely alive, the poor beast is let free.
Those animals which will not gallop away, but obstinately throw themselves on the ground, are by far the most troublesome.
This process is tremendously severe, but in two or three trials the horse is tamed.
It is not, however, for some weeks that the animal is ridden with the iron bit and solid ring, for it must learn to associate the will of its rider with the feel of the rein, before the most powerful bridle can be of any service.
Animals are so abundant in these countries, that humanity and self-interest are not closely united; therefore I fear it is that the former is here scarcely known.
One day, riding in the Pampas with a very respectable "estanciero," my horse, being tired, lagged behind.
The man often shouted to me to spur him.
When I remonstrated that it was a pity, for the horse was quite exhausted, he cried out, "Why not?
--never mind--spur him--it is my horse".
I had then some difficulty in making him comprehend that it was for the horse's sake, and not on his account, that I did not choose to use my spurs.
He exclaimed, with a look of great surprise, "Ah, Don Carlos, que cosa"!
It was clear that such an idea had never before entered his head.
The Gauchos are well known to be perfect riders.
The idea of being thrown, let the horse do what it likes; never enters their head.
Their criterion of a good rider is, a man who can manage an untamed colt, or who, if his horse falls, alights on his own feet, or can perform other such exploits.
I have heard of a man betting that he would throw his horse down twenty times, and that nineteen times he would not fall himself.
I recollect seeing a Gaucho riding a very stubborn horse, which three times successively reared so high as to fall backwards with great violence.
The man judged with uncommon coolness the proper moment for slipping off, not an instant before or after the right time; and as soon as the horse got up, the man jumped on his back, and at last they started at a gallop.
The Gaucho never appears to exert any muscular force.
I was one day watching a good rider, as we were galloping along at a rapid pace, and thought to myself, "Surely if the horse starts, you appear so careless on your seat, you must fall".
At this moment, a male ostrich sprang from its nest right beneath the horse's nose: the young colt bounded on one side like a stag; but as for the man, all that could be said was, that he started and took fright with his horse.
In Chile and Peru more pains are taken with the mouth of the horse than in La Plata, and this is evidently a consequence of the more intricate nature of the country.
In Chile a horse is not considered perfectly broken, till he can be brought up standing, in the midst of his full speed, on any particular spot,--for instance, on a cloak thrown on the ground: or, again, he will charge a wall, and rearing, scrape the
I have seen an animal bounding with spirit, yet merely reined by a fore-finger and thumb, taken at full gallop across a courtyard, and then made to wheel round the post of a veranda with great speed, but at so equal a distance, that the rider, with
Then making a demi-volte in the air, with the other arm outstretched in a like manner, he wheeled round, with astonishing force, in an opposite direction.
Such a horse is well broken; and although this at first may appear useless, it is far otherwise.
It is only carrying that which is daily necessary into perfection.
When a bullock is checked and caught by the lazo, it will sometimes gallop round and round in a circle, and the horse being alarmed at the great strain, if not well broken, will not readily turn like the pivot of a wheel.
In consequence many men have been killed; for if the lazo once takes a twist round a man's body, it will instantly, from the power of the two opposed animals, almost cut him in twain.
On the same principle the races are managed; the course is only two or three hundred yards long, the wish being to have horses that can make a rapid dash.
The race-horses are trained not only to stand with their hoofs touching a line, but to draw all four feet together, so as at the first spring to bring into play the full action of the hind-quarters.
In Chile I was told an anecdote, which I believe was true; and it offers a good illustration of the use of a well-broken animal.
A respectable man riding one day met two others, one of whom was mounted on a horse, which he knew to have been stolen from himself.
He challenged them; they answered him by drawing their sabres and giving chase.
The man, on his good and fleet beast, kept just ahead: as he passed a thick bush he wheeled round it, and brought up his horse to a dead check.
The pursuers were obliged to shoot on one side and ahead.
Then instantly dashing on, right behind them, he buried his knife in the back of one, wounded the other, recovered his horse from the dying robber, and rode home.
For these feats of horsemanship two things are necessary: a most severe bit, like the Mameluke, the power of which, though seldom used, the horse knows full well; and large blunt spurs, that can be applied either as a mere touch, or as an instrument of
I conceive that with English spurs, the slightest touch of which pricks the skin, it would be impossible to break in a horse after the South American fashion.
At an estancia near Las Vacas large numbers of mares are weekly slaughtered for the sake of their hides, although worth only five paper dollars, or about half a crown apiece.
It seems at first strange that it can answer to kill mares for such a trifle; but as it is thought ridiculous in this country ever to break in or ride a mare, they are of no value except for breeding.
The only thing for which I ever saw mares used, was to tread out wheat from the ear, for which purpose they were driven round a circular enclosure, where the wheat-sheaves were strewed.
The man employed for slaughtering the mares happened to be celebrated for his dexterity with the lazo.
Standing at the distance of twelve yards from the mouth of the corral, he has laid a wager that he would catch by the legs every animal, without missing one, as it rushed past him.
There was another man who said he would enter the corral on foot, catch a mare, fasten her front legs together, drive her out, throw her down, kill, skin, and stake the hide for drying (which latter is a tedious job); and he engaged that he would perform
Or he would kill and take the skin off fifty in the same time.
This would have been a prodigious task, for it is considered a good day's work to skin and stake the hides of fifteen or sixteen animals.
November 26th.
--I set out on my return in a direct line for Monte Video.
Having heard of some giant's bones at a neighbouring farm-house on the Sarandis, a small stream entering the Rio Negro, I rode there accompanied by my host, and purchased for the value of eighteen pence the head of the Toxodon.
[4] When found it was quite perfect; but the boys knocked out some of the teeth with stones, and then set up the head as a mark to throw at.
By a most fortunate chance I found a perfect tooth, which exactly fitted one of the sockets in this skull, embedded by itself on the banks of the Rio Tercero, at the distance of about 180 miles from this place.
I found remains of this extraordinary animal at two other places, so that it must formerly have been common.
I found here, also, some large portions of the armour of a gigantic armadillo-like animal, and part of the great head of a Mylodon.
The bones of this head are so fresh, that they contain, according to the analysis by Mr. T. Reeks, seven per cent of animal matter; and when placed in a spirit-lamp, they burn with a small flame.
The number of the remains embedded in the grand estuary deposit which forms the Pampas and covers the granitic rocks of Banda Oriental, must be extraordinarily great.
I believe a straight line drawn in any direction through the Pampas would cut through some skeleton or bones.
Besides those which I found during my short excursions, I heard of many others, and the origin of such names as "the stream of the animal," "the hill of the giant," is obvious.
At other times I heard of the marvellous property of certain rivers, which had the power of changing small bones into large; or, as some maintained, the bones themselves grew.
As far as I am aware, not one of these animals perished, as was formerly supposed, in the marshes or muddy river-beds of the present land, but their bones have been exposed by the streams intersecting the subaqueous deposit in which they were originally
We may conclude that the whole area of the Pampas is one wide sepulchre of these extinct gigantic quadrupeds.
By the middle of the day, on the 28th, we arrived at Monte Video, having been two days and a half on the road.
The country for the whole way was of a very uniform character, some parts being rather more rocky and hilly than near the Plata.
Not far from Monte Video we passed through the village of Las Pietras, so named from some large rounded masses of syenite.
Its appearance was rather pretty.
In this country a few fig-trees round a group of houses, and a site elevated a hundred feet above the general level, ought always to be called picturesque.
During the last six months I have had an opportunity of seeing a little of the character of the inhabitants of these provinces.
The Gauchos, or countryrmen, are very superior to those who reside in the towns.
The Gaucho is invariably most obliging, polite, and hospitable: I did not meet with even one instance of rudeness or inhospitality.
He is modest, both respecting himself and country, but at the same time a spirited, bold fellow.
On the other hand, many robberies are committed, and there is much bloodshed: the habit of constantly wearing the knife is the chief cause of the latter.
It is lamentable to hear how many lives are lost in trifling quarrels.
In fighting, each party tries to mark the face of his adversary by slashing his nose or eyes; as is often attested by deep and horrid-looking scars.
Robberies are a natural consequence of universal gambling, much drinking, and extreme indolence.
At Mercedes I asked two men why they did not work.
One gravely said the days were too long; the other that he was too poor.
The number of horses and the profusion of food are the destruction of all industry.
Moreover, there are so many feast-days; and again, nothing can succeed without it be begun when the moon is on the increase; so that half the month is lost from these two causes.
Police and justice are quite inefficient.
If a man who is poor commits murder and is taken, he will be imprisoned, and perhaps even shot; but if he is rich and has friends, he may rely on it no very severe consequence will ensue.
It is curious that the most respectable inhabitants of the country invariably assist a murderer to escape: they seem to think that the individual sins against the government, and not against the people.
A traveller has no protection besides his fire-arms; and the constant habit of carrying them is the main check to more frequent robberies.
The character of the higher and more educated classes who reside in the towns, partakes, but perhaps in a lesser degree, of the good parts of the Gaucho, but is, I fear, stained by many vices of which he is free.
Sensuality, mockery of all religion, and the grossest corruption, are far from uncommon.
Nearly every public officer can be bribed.
The head man in the post-office sold forged government franks.
The governor and prime minister openly combined to plunder the state.
Justice, where gold came into play, was hardly expected by any one.
I knew an Englishman, who went to the Chief Justice (he told me, that not then understanding the ways of the place, he trembled as he entered the room), and said, "Sir, I have come to offer you two hundred (paper) dollars (value about five pounds sterling)
I know it is against the law, but my lawyer (naming him) recommended me to take this step".
The Chief Justice smiled acquiescence, thanked him, and the man before night was safe in prison.
With this entire want of principle in many of the leading men, with the country full of ill-paid turbulent officers, the people yet hope that a democratic form of government can succeed!
On first entering society in these countries, two or three features strike one as particularly remarkable.
The polite and dignified manners pervading every rank of life, the excellent taste displayed by the women in their dresses, and the equality amongst all ranks.
At the Rio Colorado some men who kept the humblest shops used to dine with General Rosas.
A son of a major at Bahia Blanca gained his livelihood by making paper cigars, and he wished to accompany me, as guide or servant, to Buenos Ayres, but his father objected on the score of the danger alone.
Many officers in the army can neither read nor write, yet all meet in society as equals.
In Entre Rios, the Sala consisted of only six representatives.
One of them kept a common shop, and evidently was not degraded by the office.
All this is what would be expected in a new country; nevertheless the absence of gentlemen by profession appears to an Englishman something strange.
When speaking of these countries, the manner in which they have been brought up by their unnatural parent, Spain, should always be borne in mind.
On the whole, perhaps, more credit is due for what has been done, than blame for that which may be deficient.
It is impossible to doubt but that the extreme liberalism of these countries must ultimately lead to good results.
The very general toleration of foreign religions, the regard paid to the means of education, the freedom of the press, the facilities offered to all foreigners, and especially, as I am bound to add, to every one professing the humblest pretensions to
December 6th.
--The Beagle sailed from the Rio Plata, never again to enter its muddy stream.
Our course was directed to Port Desire, on the coast of Patagonia.
Before proceeding any further, I will here put together a few observations made at sea.
Several times when the ship has been some miles off the mouth of the Plata, and at other times when off the shores of Northern Patagonia, we have been surrounded by insects.
One evening, when we were about ten miles from the Bay of San Blas, vast numbers of butterflies, in bands or flocks of countless myriads, extended as far as the eye could range.
Even by the aid of a telescope it was not possible to see a space free from butterflies.
The seamen cried out "it was snowing butterflies," and such in fact was the appearance.
More species than one were present, but the main part belonged to a kind very similar to, but not identical with, the common English Colias edusa.
Some moths and hymenoptera accompanied the butterflies; and a fine beetle (Calosoma) flew on board.
Other instances are known of this beetle having been caught far out at sea; and this is the more remarkable, as the greater number of the Carabidae seldom or never take wing.
The day had been fine and calm, and the one previous to it equally so, with light and variable airs.
Hence we cannot suppose that the insects were blown off the land, but we must conclude that they voluntarily took flight.
The great bands of the Colias seem at first to afford an instance like those on record of the migrations of another butterfly, Vanessa cardui; [5] but the presence of other insects makes the case distinct, and even less intelligible.
Before sunset a strong breeze sprung up from the north, and this must have caused tens of thousands of the butterflies and other insects to have perished.
On another occasion, when seventeen miles off Cape Corrientes, I had a net overboard to catch pelagic animals.
Upon drawing it up, to my surprise, I found a considerable number of beetles in it, and although in the open sea, they did not appear much injured by the salt water.
I lost some of the specimens, but those which I preserved belonged to the genera Colymbetes, Hydroporus, Hydrobius (two species), Notaphus, Cynucus, Adimonia, and Scarabaeus.
At first I thought that these insects had been blown from the shore; but upon reflecting that out of the eight species four were aquatic, and two others partly so in their habits, it appeared to me most probable that they were floated into the sea by a
On any supposition it is an interesting circumstance to find live insects swimming in the open ocean seventeen miles from the nearest point of land.
There are several accounts of insects having been blown off the Patagonian shore.
Captain Cook observed it, as did more lately Captain King of the Adventure.
The cause probably is due to the want of shelter, both of trees and hills, so that an insect on the wing with an off-shore breeze, would be very apt to be blown out to sea.
The most remarkable instance I have known of an insect being caught far from the land, was that of a large grasshopper (Acrydium), which flew on board, when the Beagle was to windward of the Cape de Verd Islands, and when the nearest point of land, not
[6] On several occasions, when the Beagle has been within the mouth of the Plata, the rigging has been coated with the web of the Gossamer Spider.
One day (November 1st, 1832) I paid particular attention to this subject.
The weather had been fine and clear, and in the morning the air was full of patches of the flocculent web, as on an autumnal day in England.
The ship was sixty miles distant from the land, in the direction of a steady though light breeze.
Vast numbers of a small spider, about one-tenth of an inch in length, and of a dusky red colour, were attached to the webs.
There must have been, I should suppose, some thousands on the ship.
The little spider, when first coming in contact with the rigging, was always seated on a single thread, and not on the flocculent mass.
This latter seems merely to be produced by the entanglement of the single threads.
The spiders were all of one species, but of both sexes, together with young ones.
These latter were distinguished by their smaller size and more dusky colour.
I will not give the description of this spider, but merely state that it does not appear to me to be included in any of Latreille's genera.
The little aeronaut as soon as it arrived on board was very active, running about, sometimes letting itself fall, and then reascending the same thread; sometimes employing itself in making a small and very irregular mesh in the corners between the ropes.
It could run with facility on the surface of the water.
When disturbed it lifted up its front legs, in the attitude of attention.
On its first arrival it appeared very thirsty, and with exserted maxillae drank eagerly of drops of water, this same circumstance has been observed by Strack: may it not be in consequence of the little insect having passed through a dry and rarefied
Its stock of web seemed inexhaustible.
While watching some that were suspended by a single thread, I several times observed that the slightest breath of air bore them away out of sight, in a horizontal line.
On another occasion (25th) under similar circumstances, I repeatedly observed the same kind of small spider, either when placed or having crawled on some little eminence, elevate its abdomen, send forth a thread, and then sail away horizontally, but with a
I thought I could perceive that the spider, before performing the above preparatory steps, connected its legs together with the most delicate threads, but I am not sure whether this observation was correct.
One day, at St. Fe, I had a better opportunity of observing some similar facts.
A spider which was about three-tenths of an inch in length, and which in its general appearance resembled a Citigrade (therefore quite different from the gossamer), while standing on the summit of a post, darted forth four or five threads from its
These, glittering in the sunshine, might be compared to diverging rays of light; they were not, however, straight, but in undulations like films of silk blown by the wind.
They were more than a yard in length, and diverged in an ascending direction from the orifices.
The spider then suddenly let go its hold of the post, and was quickly borne out of sight.
The day was hot and apparently calm; yet under such circumstances, the atmosphere can never be so tranquil as not to affect a vane so delicate as the thread of a spider's web.
If during a warm day we look either at the shadow of any object cast on a bank, or over a level plain at a distant landmark, the effect of an ascending current of heated air is almost always evident: such upward currents, it has been remarked, are also
Hence I think there is not much difficulty in understanding the ascent of the fine lines projected from a spider's spinners, and afterwards of the spider itself; the divergence of the lines has been attempted to be explained, I believe by Mr. Murray, by
The circumstance of spiders of the same species, but of different sexes and ages, being found on several occasions at the distance of many leagues from the land, attached in vast numbers to the lines, renders it probable that the habit of sailing through
We may then reject Latreille's supposition, that the gossamer owes its origin indifferently to the young of several genera of spiders: although, as we have seen, the young of other spiders do possess the power of performing aerial voyages.
[7] During our different passages south of the Plata, I often towed astern a net made of bunting, and thus caught many curious animals.
Of Crustacea there were many strange and undescribed genera.
One, which in some respects is allied to the Notopods (or those crabs which have their posterior legs placed almost on their backs, for the purpose of adhering to the under side of rocks), is very remarkable from the structure of its hind pair of legs.
The penultimate joint, instead of terminating in a simple claw, ends in three bristle-like appendages of dissimilar lengths--the longest equalling that of the entire leg.
These claws are very thin, and are serrated with the finest teeth, directed backwards: their curved extremities are flattened, and on this part five most minute cups are placed which seem to act in the same manner as the suckers on the arms of the
As the animal lives in the open sea, and probably wants a place of rest, I suppose this beautiful and most anomalous structure is adapted to take hold of floating marine animals.
In deep water, far from the land, the number of living creatures is extremely small: south of the latitude 35 degs.
, I never succeeded in catching anything besides some beroe, and a few species of minute entomostracous crustacea.
In shoaler water, at the distance of a few miles from the coast, very many kinds of crustacea and some other animals are numerous, but only during the night.
Between latitudes 56 and 57 degs.
south of Cape Horn, the net was put astern several times; it never, however, brought up anything besides a few of two extremely minute species of Entomostraca.
Yet whales and seals, petrels and albatross, are exceedingly abundant throughout this part of the ocean.
It has always been a mystery to me on what the albatross, which lives far from the shore, can subsist; I presume that, like the condor, it is able to fast long; and that one good feast on the carcass of a putrid whale lasts for a long time.
The central and intertropical parts of the Atlantic swarm with Pteropoda, Crustacea, and Radiata, and with their devourers the flying-fish, and again with their devourers the bonitos and albicores; I presume that the numerous lower pelagic animals feed on
While sailing a little south of the Plata on one very dark night, the sea presented a wonderful and most beautiful spectacle.
There was a fresh breeze, and every part of the surface, which during the day is seen as foam, now glowed with a pale light.
The vessel drove before her bows two billows of liquid phosphorus, and in her wake she was followed by a milky train.
As far as the eye reached, the crest of every wave was bright, and the sky above the horizon, from the reflected glare of these livid flames, was not so utterly obscure as over the vault of the heavens.
As we proceed further southward the sea is seldom phosphorescent; and off Cape Horn I do not recollect more than once having seen it so, and then it was far from being brilliant.
This circumstance probably has a close connection with the scarcity of organic beings in that part of the ocean.
After the elaborate paper, [8] by Ehrenberg, on the phosphorescence of the sea, it is almost superfluous on my part to make any observations on the subject.
I may however add, that the same torn and irregular particles of gelatinous matter, described by Ehrenberg, seem in the southern as well as in the northern hemisphere, to be the common cause of this phenomenon.
The particles were so minute as easily to pass through fine gauze; yet many were distinctly visible by the naked eye.
The water when placed in a tumbler and agitated, gave out sparks, but a small portion in a watch-glass scarcely ever was luminous.
Ehrenberg states that these particles all retain a certain degree of irritability.
My observations, some of which were made directly after taking up the water, gave a different result.
I may also mention, that having used the net during one night, I allowed it to become partially dry, and having occasion twelve hours afterwards to employ it again, I found the whole surface sparkled as brightly as when first taken out of the water.
It does not appear probable in this case, that the particles could have remained so long alive.
On one occasion having kept a jelly-fish of the genus Dianaea till it was dead, the water in which it was placed became luminous.
When the waves scintillate with bright green sparks, I believe it is generally owing to minute crustacea.
But there can be no doubt that very many other pelagic animals, when alive, are phosphorescent.
On two occasions I have observed the sea luminous at considerable depths beneath the surface.
Near the mouth of the Plata some circular and oval patches, from two to four yards in diameter, and with defined outlines, shone with a steady but pale light; while the surrounding water only gave out a few sparks.
The appearance resembled the reflection of the moon, or some luminous body; for the edges were sinuous from the undulations of the surface.
The ship, which drew thirteen feet of water, passed over, without disturbing these patches.
Therefore we must suppose that some animals were congregated together at a greater depth than the bottom of the vessel.
Near Fernando Noronha the sea gave out light in flashes.
The appearance was very similar to that which might be expected from a large fish moving rapidly through a luminous fluid.
To this cause the sailors attributed it; at the time, however, I entertained some doubts, on account of the frequency and rapidity of the flashes.
I have already remarked that the phenomenon is very much more common in warm than in cold countries; and I have sometimes imagined that a disturbed electrical condition of the atmosphere was most favourable to its production.
Certainly I think the sea is most luminous after a few days of more calm weather than ordinary, during which time it has swarmed with various animals.
Observing that the water charged with gelatinous particles is in an impure state, and that the luminous appearance in all common cases is produced by the agitation of the fluid in contact with the atmosphere, I am inclined to consider that the
December 23rd.
--We arrived at Port Desire, situated in lat.
47 degs.
, on the coast of Patagonia.
The creek runs for about twenty miles inland, with an irregular width.
The Beagle anchored a few miles within the entrance, in front of the ruins of an old Spanish settlement.
The same evening I went on shore.
The first landing in any new country is very interesting, and especially when, as in this case, the whole aspect bears the stamp of a marked and individual character.
At the height of between two and three hundred feet above some masses of porphyry a wide plain extends, which is truly characteristic of Patagonia.
The surface is quite level, and is composed of well-rounded shingle mixed with a whitish earth.
Here and there scattered tufts of brown wiry grass are supported, and still more rarely, some low thorny bushes.
The weather is dry and pleasant, and the fine blue sky is but seldom obscured.
When standing in the middle of one of these desert plains and looking towards the interior, the view is generally bounded by the escarpment of another plain, rather higher, but equally level and desolate; and in every other direction the horizon is
In such a country the fate of the Spanish settlement was soon decided; the dryness of the climate during the greater part of the year, and the occasional hostile attacks of the wandering Indians, compelled the colonists to desert their half-finished
The style, however, in which they were commenced shows the strong and liberal hand of Spain in the old time.
The result of all the attempts to colonize this side of America south of 41 degs.
, has been miserable.
Port Famine expresses by its name the lingering and extreme sufferings of several hundred wretched people, of whom one alone survived to relate their misfortunes.
At St. Joseph's Bay, on the coast of Patagonia, a small settlement was made; but during one Sunday the Indians made an attack and massacred the whole party, excepting two men, who remained captives during many years.
At the Rio Negro I conversed with one of these men, now in extreme old age.
The zoology of Patagonia is as limited as its flora.
[9] On the arid plains a few black beetles (Heteromera) might be seen slowly crawling about, and occasionally a lizard darted from side to side.
Of birds we have three carrion hawks and in the valleys a few finches and insect-feeders.
An ibis (Theristicus melanops--a species said to be found in central Africa) is not uncommon on the most desert parts: in their stomachs I found grasshoppers, cicadae, small lizards, and even scorpions.
[10] At one time of the year these birds go in flocks, at another in pairs, their cry is very loud and singular, like the neighing of the guanaco.
The guanaco, or wild llama, is the characteristic quadruped of the plains of Patagonia; it is the South American representative of the camel of the East.
It is an elegant animal in a state of nature, with a long slender neck and fine legs.
It is very common over the whole of the temperate parts of the continent, as far south as the islands near Cape Horn.
It generally lives in small herds of from half a dozen to thirty in each; but on the banks of the St. Cruz we saw one herd which must have contained at least five hundred.
They are generally wild and extremely wary.
Mr. Stokes told me, that he one day saw through a glass a herd of these animals which evidently had been frightened, and were running away at full speed, although their distance was so great that he could not distinguish them with his naked eye.
The sportsman frequently receives the first notice of their presence, by hearing from a long distance their peculiar shrill neighing note of alarm.
If he then looks attentively, he will probably see the herd standing in a line on the side of some distant hill.
On approaching nearer, a few more squeals are given, and off they set at an apparently slow, but really quick canter, along some narrow beaten track to a neighbouring hill.
If, however, by chance he abruptly meets a single animal, or several together, they will generally stand motionless and intently gaze at him; then perhaps move on a few yards, turn round, and look again.
What is the cause of this difference in their shyness?
Do they mistake a man in the distance for their chief enemy the puma?
Or does curiosity overcome their timidity?
That they are curious is certain; for if a person lies on the ground, and plays strange antics, such as throwing up his feet in the air, they will almost always approach by degrees to reconnoitre him.
It was an artifice that was repeatedly practised by our sportsmen with success, and it had moreover the advantage of allowing several shots to be fired, which were all taken as parts of the performance.
On the mountains of Tierra del Fuego, I have more than once seen a guanaco, on being approached, not only neigh and squeal, but prance and leap about in the most ridiculous manner, apparently in defiance as a challenge.
These animals are very easily domesticated, and I have seen some thus kept in northern Patagonia near a house, though not under any restraint.
They are in this state very bold, and readily attack a man by striking him from behind with both knees.
It is asserted that the motive for these attacks is jealousy on account of their females.
The wild guanacos, however, have no idea of defence; even a single dog will secure one of these large animals, till the huntsman can come up.
In many of their habits they are like sheep in a flock.
Thus when they see men approaching in several directions on horseback, they soon become bewildered, and know not which way to run.
This greatly facilitates the Indian method of hunting, for they are thus easily driven to a central point, and are encompassed.
The guanacos readily take to the water: several times at Port Valdes they were seen swimming from island to island.
Byron, in his voyage says he saw them drinking salt water.
Some of our officers likewise saw a herd apparently drinking the briny fluid from a salina near Cape Blanco.
I imagine in several parts of the country, if they do not drink salt water, they drink none at all.
In the middle of the day they frequently roll in the dust, in saucer-shaped hollows.
The males fight together; two one day passed quite close to me, squealing and trying to bite each other; and several were shot with their hides deeply scored.
Herds sometimes appear to set out on exploring parties: at Bahia Blanca, where, within thirty miles of the coast, these animals are extremely unfrequent, I one day saw the tracks of thirty or forty, which had come in a direct line to a muddy salt-water
They then must have perceived that they were approaching the sea, for they had wheeled with the regularity of cavalry, and had returned back in as straight a line as they had advanced.
The guanacos have one singular habit, which is to me quite inexplicable; namely, that on successive days they drop their dung in the same defined heap.
I saw one of these heaps which was eight feet in diameter, and was composed of a large quantity.
This habit, according to M. A. d'Orbigny, is common to all the species of the genus; it is very useful to the Peruvian Indians, who use the dung for fuel, and are thus saved the trouble of collecting it.
The guanacos appear to have favourite spots for lying down to die.
On the banks of the St. Cruz, in certain circumscribed spaces, which were generally bushy and all near the river, the ground was actually white with bones.
On one such spot I counted between ten and twenty heads.
I particularly examined the bones; they did not appear, as some scattered ones which I had seen, gnawed or broken, as if dragged together by beasts of prey.
The animals in most cases must have crawled, before dying, beneath and amongst the bushes.
Mr. Bynoe informs me that during a former voyage he observed the same circumstance on the banks of the Rio Gallegos.
I do not at all understand the reason of this, but I may observe, that the wounded guanacos at the St. Cruz invariably walked towards the river.
At St. Jago in the Cape de Verd Islands, I remember having seen in a ravine a retired corner covered with bones of the goat; we at the time exclaimed that it was the burial ground of all the goats in the island.
I mention these trifling circumstances, because in certain cases they might explain the occurrence of a number of uninjured bones in a cave, or buried under alluvial accumulations; and likewise the cause why certain animals are more commonly embedded than
One day the yawl was sent under the command of Mr. Chaffers with three days' provisions to survey the upper part of the harbour.
In the morning we searched for some watering-places mentioned in an old Spanish chart.
We found one creek, at the head of which there was a trickling rill (the first we had seen) of brackish water.
Here the tide compelled us to wait several hours; and in the interval I walked some miles into the interior.
The plain as usual consisted of gravel, mingled with soil resembling chalk in appearance, but very different from it in nature.
From the softness of these materials it was worn into many gulleys.
There was not a tree, and, excepting the guanaco, which stood on the hill-top a watchful sentinel over its herd, scarcely an animal or a bird.
All was stillness and desolation.
Yet in passing over these scenes, without one bright object near, an ill-defined but strong sense of pleasure is vividly excited.
One asked how many ages the plain had thus lasted, and how many more it was doomed thus to continue.
"None can reply--all seems eternal now.
The wilderness has a mysterious tongue, Which teaches awful doubt".
[11] In the evening we sailed a few miles further up, and then pitched the tents for the night.
By the middle of the next day the yawl was aground, and from the shoalness of the water could not proceed any higher.
The water being found partly fresh, Mr. Chaffers took the dingey and went up two or three miles further, where she also grounded, but in a fresh-water river.
The water was muddy, and though the stream was most insignificant in size, it would be difficult to account for its origin, except from the melting snow on the Cordillera.
At the spot where we bivouacked, we were surrounded by bold cliffs and steep pinnacles of porphyry.
I do not think I ever saw a spot which appeared more secluded from the rest of the world, than this rocky crevice in the wide plain.
The second day after our return to the anchorage, a party of officers and myself went to ransack an old Indian grave, which I had found on the summit of a neighbouring hill.
Two immense stones, each probably weighing at least a couple of tons, had been placed in front of a ledge of rock about six feet high.
At the bottom of the grave on the hard rock there was a layer of earth about a foot deep, which must have been brought up from the plain below.
Above it a pavement of flat stones was placed, on which others were piled, so as to fill up the space between the ledge and the two great blocks.
To complete the grave, the Indians had contrived to detach from the ledge a huge fragment, and to throw it over the pile so as to rest on the two blocks.
We undermined the grave on both sides, but could not find any relics, or even bones.
The latter probably had decayed long since (in which case the grave must have been of extreme antiquity), for I found in another place some smaller heaps beneath which a very few crumbling fragments could yet be distinguished as having belonged to a man.
Falconer states, that where an Indian dies he is buried, but that subsequently his bones are carefully taken up and carried, let the distance be ever so great, to be deposited near the sea-coast.
This custom, I think, may be accounted for by recollecting, that before the introduction of horses, these Indians must have led nearly the same life as the Fuegians now do, and therefore generally have resided in the neighbourhood of the sea.
The common prejudice of lying where one's ancestors have lain, would make the now roaming Indians bring the less perishable part of their dead to their ancient burial-ground on the coast.
January 9th, 1834.
--Before it was dark the Beagle anchored in the fine spacious harbour of Port St. Julian, situated about one hundred and ten miles to the south of Port Desire.
We remained here eight days.
The country is nearly similar to that of Port Desire, but perhaps rather more sterile.
One day a party accompanied Captain Fitz Roy on a long walk round the head of the harbour.
We were eleven hours without tasting any water, and some of the party were quite exhausted.
From the summit of a hill (since well named Thirsty Hill) a fine lake was spied, and two of the party proceeded with concerted signals to show whether it was fresh water.
What was our disappointment to find a snow-white expanse of salt, crystallized in great cubes!
We attributed our extreme thirst to the dryness of the atmosphere; but whatever the cause might be, we were exceedingly glad late in the evening to get back to the boats.
Although we could nowhere find, during our whole visit, a single drop of fresh water, yet some must exist; for by an odd chance I found on the surface of the salt water, near the head of the bay, a Colymbetes not quite dead, which must have lived in some
Three other insects (a Cincindela, like hybrida, a Cymindis, and a Harpalus, which all live on muddy flats occasionally overflowed by the sea), and one other found dead on the plain, complete the list of the beetles.
A good-sized fly (Tabanus) was extremely numerous, and tormented us by its painful bite.
The common horsefly, which is so troublesome in the shady lanes of England, belongs to this same genus.
We here have the puzzle that so frequently occurs in the case of musquitoes--on the blood of what animals do these insects commonly feed?
The guanaco is nearly the only warm-blooded quadruped, and it is found in quite inconsiderable numbers compared with the multitude of flies.
The geology of Patagonia is interesting.
Differently from Europe, where the tertiary formations appear to have accumulated in bays, here along hundreds of miles of coast we have one great deposit, including many tertiary shells, all apparently extinct.
The most common shell is a massive gigantic oyster, sometimes even a foot in diameter.
These beds are covered by others of a peculiar soft white stone, including much gypsum, and resembling chalk, but really of a pumiceous nature.
It is highly remarkable, from being composed, to at least one-tenth of its bulk, of Infusoria.
Professor Ehrenberg has already ascertained in it thirty oceanic forms.
This bed extends for 500 miles along the coast, and probably for a considerably greater distance.
At Port St. Julian its thickness is more than 800 feet!
These white beds are everywhere capped by a mass of gravel, forming probably one of the largest beds of shingle in the world: it certainly extends from near the Rio Colorado to between 600 and 700 nautical miles southward, at Santa Cruz (a river a little
If this great bed of pebbles, without including the mud necessarily derived from their attrition, was piled into a mound, it would form a great mountain chain!
When we consider that all these pebbles, countless as the grains of sand in the desert, have been derived from the slow falling of masses of rock on the old coast-lines and banks of rivers, and that these fragments have been dashed into smaller pieces, and
Yet all this gravel has been transported, and probably rounded, subsequently to the deposition of the white beds, and long subsequently to the underlying beds with the tertiary shells.
Everything in this southern continent has been effected on a grand scale: the land, from the Rio Plata to Tierra del Fuego, a distance of 1200 miles, has been raised in mass (and in Patagonia to a height of between 300 and 400 feet), within the period of
The old and weathered shells left on the surface of the upraised plain still partially retain their colours.
The uprising movement has been interrupted by at least eight long periods of rest, during which the sea ate, deeply back into the land, forming at successive levels the long lines of cliffs, or escarpments, which separate the different plains as they rise
The elevatory movement, and the eating-back power of the sea during the periods of rest, have been equable over long lines of coast; for I was astonished to find that the step-like plains stand at nearly corresponding heights at far distant points.
The lowest plain is 90 feet high; and the highest, which I ascended near the coast, is 950 feet; and of this, only relics are left in the form of flat gravel-capped hills.
The upper plain of Santa Cruz slopes up to a height of 3000 feet at the foot of the Cordillera.
I have said that within the period of existing sea-shells, Patagonia has been upraised 300 to 400 feet: I may add, that within the period when icebergs transported boulders over the upper plain of Santa Cruz, the elevation has been at least 1500 feet.
Nor has Patagonia been affected only by upward movements: the extinct tertiary shells from Port St. Julian and Santa Cruz cannot have lived, according to Professor E. Forbes, in a greater depth of water than from 40 to 250 feet; but they are now covered
What a history of geological changes does the simply-constructed coast of Patagonia reveal!
At Port St. Julian, [12] in some red mud capping the gravel on the 90-feet plain, I found half the skeleton of the Macrauchenia Patachonica, a remarkable quadruped, full as large as a camel.
It belongs to the same division of the Pachydermata with the rhinoceros, tapir, and palaeotherium; but in the structure of the bones of its long neck it shows a clear relation to the camel, or rather to the guanaco and llama.
From recent sea-shells being found on two of the higher step-formed plains, which must have been modelled and upraised before the mud was deposited in which the Macrauchenia was entombed, it is certain that this curious quadruped lived long after the sea
I was at first much surprised how a large quadruped could so lately have subsisted, in lat.
49 degs.
15', on these wretched gravel plains, with their stunted vegetation; but the relationship of the Macrauchenia to the Guanaco, now an inhabitant of the most sterile parts, partly explains this difficulty.
The relationship, though distant, between the Macrauchenia and the Guanaco, between the Toxodon and the Capybara,--the closer relationship between the many extinct Edentata and the living sloths, ant-eaters, and armadillos, now so eminently characteristic
This relationship is shown wonderfully--as wonderfully as between the fossil and extinct Marsupial animals of Australia--by the great collection lately brought to Europe from the caves of Brazil by MM.
Lund and Clausen.
In this collection there are extinct species of all the thirty-two genera, excepting four, of the terrestrial quadrupeds now inhabiting the provinces in which the caves occur; and the extinct species are much more numerous than those now living: there are
This wonderful relationship in the same continent between the dead and the living, will, I do not doubt, hereafter throw more light on the appearance of organic beings on our earth, and their disappearance from it, than any other class of facts.
It is impossible to reflect on the changed state of the American continent without the deepest astonishment.
Formerly it must have swarmed with great monsters: now we find mere pigmies, compared with the antecedent, allied races.
If Buffon had known of the gigantic sloth and armadillo-like animals, and of the lost Pachydermata, he might have said with a greater semblance of truth that the creative force in America had lost its power, rather than that it had never possessed great
The greater number, if not all, of these extinct quadrupeds lived at a late period, and were the contemporaries of most of the existing sea-shells.
Since they lived, no very great change in the form of the land can have taken place.
What, then, has exterminated so many species and whole genera?
The mind at first is irresistibly hurried into the belief of some great catastrophe; but thus to destroy animals, both large and small, in Southern Patagonia, in Brazil, on the Cordillera of Peru, in North America up to Behring's Straits, we must shake the
An examination, moreover, of the geology of La Plata and Patagonia, leads to the belief that all the features of the land result from slow and gradual changes.
It appears from the character of the fossils in Europe, Asia, Australia, and in North and South America, that those conditions which favour the life of the _larger_ quadrupeds were lately co-extensive with the world: what those conditions were, no one has
It could hardly have been a change of temperature, which at about the same time destroyed the inhabitants of tropical, temperate, and arctic latitudes on both sides of the globe.
In North America we positively know from Mr. Lyell, that the large quadrupeds lived subsequently to that period, when boulders were brought into latitudes at which icebergs now never arrive: from conclusive but indirect reasons we may feel sure, that in
Did man, after his first inroad into South America, destroy, as has been suggested, the unwieldy Megatherium and the other Edentata?
We must at least look to some other cause for the destruction of the little tucutuco at Bahia Blanca, and of the many fossil mice and other small quadrupeds in Brazil.
No one will imagine that a drought, even far severer than those which cause such losses in the provinces of La Plata, could destroy every individual of every species from Southern Patagonia to Behring's Straits.
What shall we say of the extinction of the horse?
Did those plains fail of pasture, which have since been overrun by thousands and hundreds of thousands of the descendants of the stock introduced by the Spaniards?
Have the subsequently introduced species consumed the food of the great antecedent races?
Can we believe that the Capybara has taken the food of the Toxodon, the Guanaco of the Macrauchenia, the existing small Edentata of their numerous gigantic prototypes?
Certainly, no fact in the long history of the world is so startling as the wide and repeated exterminations of its inhabitants.
Nevertheless, if we consider the subject under another point of view, it will appear less perplexing.
We do not steadily bear in mind, how profoundly ignorant we are of the conditions of existence of every animal; nor do we always remember, that some check is constantly preventing the too rapid increase of every organized being left in a state of nature.
The supply of food, on an average, remains constant, yet the tendency in every animal to increase by propagation is geometrical; and its surprising effects have nowhere been more astonishingly shown, than in the case of the European animals run wild during
Every animal in a state of nature regularly breeds; yet in a species long established, any _great_ increase in numbers is obviously impossible, and must be checked by some means.
We are, nevertheless, seldom able with certainty to tell in any given species, at what period of life, or at what period of the year, or whether only at long intervals, the check falls; or, again, what is the precise nature of the check.
Hence probably it is, that we feel so little surprise at one, of two species closely allied in habits, being rare and the other abundant in the same district; or, again, that one should be abundant in one district, and another, filling the same place in
If asked how this is, one immediately replies that it is determined by some slight difference, in climate, food, or the number of enemies: yet how rarely, if ever, we can point out the precise cause and manner of action of the check!
We are therefore, driven to the conclusion, that causes generally quite inappreciable by us, determine whether a given species shall be abundant or scanty in numbers.
In the cases where we can trace the extinction of a species through man, either wholly or in one limited district, we know that it becomes rarer and rarer, and is then lost: it would be difficult to point out any just distinction [13] between a species
The evidence of rarity preceding extinction, is more striking in the successive tertiary strata, as remarked by several able observers; it has often been found that a shell very common in a tertiary stratum is now most rare, and has even long been thought
If then, as appears probable, species first become rare and then extinct--if the too rapid increase of every species, even the most favoured, is steadily checked, as we must admit, though how and when it is hard to say--and if we see, without the smallest
An action going on, on every side of us, and yet barely appreciable, might surely be carried a little further, without exciting our observation.
Who would feel any great surprise at hearing that the Magalonyx was formerly rare compared with the Megatherium, or that one of the fossil monkeys was few in number compared with one of the now living monkeys?
and yet in this comparative rarity, we should have the plainest evidence of less favourable conditions for their existence.
To admit that species generally become rare before they become extinct--to feel no surprise at the comparative rarity of one species with another, and yet to call in some extraordinary agent and to marvel greatly when a species ceases to exist, appears to
[1] Mr. Waterhouse has drawn up a detailed description of this head, which I hope he will publish in some Journal.
[2] A nearly similar abnormal, but I do not know whether hereditary, structure has been observed in the carp, and likewise in the crocodile of the Ganges: Histoire des Anomalies, par M. Isid.
Geoffroy St. Hilaire, tom.
i.
p.
244.
[3] M. A. d'Orbigny has given nearly a similar account of these dogs, tom.
i.
p.
175.
[4] I must express my obligations to Mr. Keane, at whose house I was staying on the Berquelo, and to Mr. Lumb at Buenos Ayres, for without their assistance these valuable remains would never have reached England.
[5] Lyell's Principles of Geology, vol.
iii.
p.
63.
[6] The flies which frequently accompany a ship for some days on its passage from harbour to harbour, wandering from the vessel, are soon lost, and all disappear.
[7] Mr. Blackwall, in his Researches in Zoology, has many excellent observations on the habits of spiders.
[8] An abstract is given in No.
IV.
of the Magazine of Zoology and Botany.
[9] I found here a species of cactus, described by Professor Henslow, under the name of Opuntia Darwinii (Magazine of Zoology and Botany, vol.
i.
p.
466), which was remarkable for the irritability of the stamens, when I inserted either a piece of stick or the end of my finger in the flower.
The segments of the perianth also closed on the pistil, but more slowly than the stamens.
Plants of this family, generally considered as tropical, occur in North America (Lewis and Clarke's Travels, p.
221), in the same high latitude as here, namely, in both cases, in 47 degs.
[10] These insects were not uncommon beneath stones.
I found one cannibal scorpion quietly devouring another.
[11] Shelley, Lines on Mt.
Blanc.
[12] I have lately heard that Capt.
Sulivan, R.N., has found numerous fossil bones, embedded in regular strata, on the banks of the R. Gallegos, in lat.
51 degs.
4'.
Some of the bones are large; others are small, and appear to have belonged to an armadillo.
This is a most interesting and important discovery.
[13] See the excellent remarks on this subject by Mr. Lyell, in his Principles of Geology.
CHAPTER IX SANTA CRUZ, PATAGONIA, AND THE FALKLAND ISLANDS Santa Cruz--Expedition up the River--Indians--Immense Streams of Basaltic Lava--Fragments not transported by the River--Excavations of the Valley--Condor, Habits of--Cordillera--Erratic Boulders of
APRIL 13, 1834.
--The Beagle anchored within the mouth of the Santa Cruz.
This river is situated about sixty miles south of Port St. Julian.
During the last voyage Captain Stokes proceeded thirty miles up it, but then, from the want of provisions, was obliged to return.
Excepting what was discovered at that time, scarcely anything was known about this large river.
Captain Fitz Roy now determined to follow its course as far as time would allow.
On the 18th three whale-boats started, carrying three weeks' provisions; and the party consisted of twenty-five souls--a force which would have been sufficient to have defied a host of Indians.
With a strong flood-tide and a fine day we made a good run, soon drank some of the fresh water, and were at night nearly above the tidal influence.
The river here assumed a size and appearance which, even at the highest point we ultimately reached, was scarcely diminished.
It was generally from three to four hundred yards broad, and in the middle about seventeen feet deep.
The rapidity of the current, which in its whole course runs at the rate of from four to six knots an hour, is perhaps its most remarkable feature.
The water is of a fine blue colour, but with a slight milky tinge, and not so transparent as at first sight would have been expected.
It flows over a bed of pebbles, like those which compose the beach and the surrounding plains.
It runs in a winding course through a valley, which extends in a direct line westward.
This valley varies from five to ten miles in breadth; it is bounded by step-formed terraces, which rise in most parts, one above the other, to the height of five hundred feet, and have on the opposite sides a remarkable correspondence.
April 19th.
--Against so strong a current it was, of course, quite impossible to row or sail: consequently the three boats were fastened together head and stern, two hands left in each, and the rest came on shore to track.
As the general arrangements made by Captain Fitz Roy were very good for facilitating the work of all, and as all had a share in it, I will describe the system.
The party including every one, was divided into two spells, each of which hauled at the tracking line alternately for an hour and a half.
The officers of each boat lived with, ate the same food, and slept in the same tent with their crew, so that each boat was quite independent of the others.
After sunset the first level spot where any bushes were growing, was chosen for our night's lodging.
Each of the crew took it in turns to be cook.
Immediately the boat was hauled up, the cook made his fire; two others pitched the tent; the coxswain handed the things out of the boat; the rest carried them up to the tents and collected firewood.
By this order, in half an hour everything was ready for the night.
A watch of two men and an officer was always kept, whose duty it was to look after the boats, keep up the fire, and guard against Indians.
Each in the party had his one hour every night.
During this day we tracked but a short distance, for there were many islets, covered by thorny bushes, and the channels between them were shallow.
April 20th.
--We passed the islands and set to work.
Our regular day's march, although it was hard enough, carried us on an average only ten miles in a straight line, and perhaps fifteen or twenty altogether.
Beyond the place where we slept last night, the country is completely _terra incognita_, for it was there that Captain Stokes turned back.
We saw in the distance a great smoke, and found the skeleton of a horse, so we knew that Indians were in the neighbourhood.
On the next morning (21st) tracks of a party of horse and marks left by the trailing of the chuzos, or long spears, were observed on the ground.
It was generally thought that the Indians had reconnoitred us during the night.
Shortly afterwards we came to a spot where, from the fresh footsteps of men, children, and horses, it was evident that the party had crossed the river.
April 22nd.
--The country remained the same, and was extremely uninteresting.
The complete similarity of the productions throughout Patagonia is one of its most striking characters.
The level plains of arid shingle support the same stunted and dwarf plants; and in the valleys the same thorn-bearing bushes grow.
Everywhere we see the same birds and insects.
Even the very banks of the river and of the clear streamlets which entered it, were scarcely enlivened by a brighter tint of green.
The curse of sterility is on the land, and the water flowing over a bed of pebbles partakes of the same curse.
Hence the number of water-fowls is very scanty; for there is nothing to support life in the stream of this barren river.
Patagonia, poor as she is in some respects, can however boast of a greater stock of small rodents [1] than perhaps any other country in the world.
Several species of mice are externally characterized by large thin ears and a very fine fur.
These little animals swarm amongst the thickets in the valleys, where they cannot for months together taste a drop of water excepting the dew.
They all seem to be cannibals for no sooner was a mouse caught in one of my traps that it was devoured by others.
A small and delicately shaped fox, which is likewise very abundant, probably derives its entire support from these small animals.
The guanaco is also in his proper district, herds of fifty or a hundred were common; and, as I have stated, we saw one which must have contained at least five hundred.
The puma, with the condor and other carrion-hawks in its train, follows and preys upon these animals.
The footsteps of the puma were to be seen almost everywhere on the banks of the river; and the remains of several guanacos, with their necks dislocated and bones broken, showed how they had met their death.
April 24th.
--Like the navigators of old when approaching an unknown land, we examined and watched for the most trivial sign of a change.
The drifted trunk of a tree, or a boulder of primitive rock, was hailed with joy, as if we had seen a forest growing on the flanks of the Cordillera.
The top, however, of a heavy bank of clouds, which remained almost constantly in one position, was the most promising sign, and eventually turned out a true harbinger.
At first the clouds were mistaken for the mountains themselves, instead of the masses of vapour condensed by their icy summits.
April 26th.
--We this day met with a marked change in the geological structure of the plains.
From the first starting I had carefully examined the gravel in the river, and for the two last days had noticed the presence of a few small pebbles of a very cellular basalt.
These gradually increased in number and in size, but none were as large as a man's head.
This morning, however, pebbles of the same rock, but more compact, suddenly became abundant, and in the course of half an hour we saw, at the distance of five of six miles, the angular edge of a great basaltic platform.
When we arrived at its base we found the stream bubbling among the fallen blocks.
For the next twenty-eight miles the river-course was encumbered with these basaltic masses.
Above that limit immense fragments of primitive rocks, derived from its surrounding boulder-formation, were equally numerous.
None of the fragments of any considerable size had been washed more than three or four miles down the river below their parent-source: considering the singular rapidity of the great body of water in the Santa Cruz, and that no still reaches occur in any
The basalt is only lava, which has flowed beneath the sea; but the eruptions must have been on the grandest scale.
At the point where we first met this formation it was 120 feet in thickness; following up the river course, the surface imperceptibly rose and the mass became thicker, so that at forty miles above the first station it was 320 feet thick.
What the thickness may be close to the Cordillera, I have no means of knowing, but the platform there attains a height of about three thousand feet above the level of the sea; we must therefore look to the mountains of that great chain for its source; and
At the first glance of the basaltic cliffs on the opposite sides of the valley, it was evident that the strata once were united.
What power, then, has removed along a whole line of country, a solid mass of very hard rock, which had an average thickness of nearly three hundred feet, and a breadth varying from rather less than two miles to four miles?
The river, though it has so little power in transporting even inconsiderable fragments, yet in the lapse of ages might produce by its gradual erosion an effect of which it is difficult to judge the amount.
But in this case, independently of the insignificance of such an agency, good reasons can be assigned for believing that this valley was formerly occupied by an arm of the sea.
It is needless in this work to detail the arguments leading to this conclusion, derived from the form and the nature of the step-formed terraces on both sides of the valley, from the manner in which the bottom of the valley near the Andes expands into a
If I had space I could prove that South America was formerly here cut off by a strait, joining the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, like that of Magellan.
But it may yet be asked, how has the solid basalt been moved?
Geologists formerly would have brought into play the violent action of some overwhelming debacle; but in this case such a supposition would have been quite inadmissible, because, the same step-like plains with existing sea-shells lying on their surface,
No possible action of any flood could thus have modelled the land, either within the valley or along the open coast; and by the formation of such step-like plains or terraces the valley itself had been hollowed out.
Although we know that there are tides, which run within the Narrows of the Strait of Magellan at the rate of eight knots an hour, yet we must confess that it makes the head almost giddy to reflect on the number of years, century after century, which the
Nevertheless, we must believe that the strata undermined by the waters of this ancient strait, were broken up into huge fragments, and these lying scattered on the beach were reduced first to smaller blocks, then to pebbles and lastly to the most
With the change in the geological structure of the plains the character of the landscape likewise altered.
While rambling up some of the narrow and rocky defiles, I could almost have fancied myself transported back again to the barren valleys of the island of St. Jago.
Among the basaltic cliffs I found some plants which I had seen nowhere else, but others I recognised as being wanderers from Tierra del Fuego.
These porous rocks serve as a reservoir for the scanty rain-water; and consequently on the line where the igneous and sedimentary formations unite, some small springs (most rare occurrences in Patagonia) burst forth; and they could be distinguished at a
April 27th.
--The bed of the river became rather narrower and hence the stream more rapid.
It here ran at the rate of six knots an hour.
From this cause, and from the many great angular fragments, tracking the boats became both dangerous and laborious.
This day I shot a condor.
It measured from tip to tip of the wings, eight and a half feet, and from beak to tail, four feet.
This bird is known to have a wide geographical range, being found on the west coast of South America, from the Strait of Magellan along the Cordillera as far as eight degrees north of the equator.
The steep cliff near the mouth of the Rio Negro is its northern limit on the Patagonian coast; and they have there wandered about four hundred miles from the great central line of their habitations in the Andes.
Further south, among the bold precipices at the head of Port Desire, the condor is not uncommon; yet only a few stragglers occasionally visit the sea-coast.
A line of cliff near the mouth of the Santa Cruz is frequented by these birds, and about eighty miles up the river, where the sides of the valley are formed by steep basaltic precipices, the condor reappears.
From these facts it seems that the condors require perpendicular cliffs.
In Chile, they haunt, during the greater part of the year, the lower country near the shores of the Pacific, and at night several roost together in one tree; but in the early part of summer, they retire to the most inaccessible parts of the inner
With respect to their propagation, I was told by the country people in Chile, that the condor makes no sort of nest, but in the months of November and December lays two large white eggs on a shelf of bare rock.
It is said that the young condors cannot fly for an entire year; and long after they are able, they continue to roost by night, and hunt by day with their parents.
The old birds generally live in pairs; but among the inland basaltic cliffs of the Santa Cruz, I found a spot, where scores must usually haunt.
On coming suddenly to the brow of the precipice, it was a grand spectacle to see between twenty and thirty of these great birds start heavily from their resting-place, and wheel away in majestic circles.
From the quantity of dung on the rocks they must long have frequented this cliff for roosting and breeding.
Having gorged themselves with carrion on the plains below, they retire to these favourite ledges to digest their food.
From these facts, the condor, like the gallinazo, must to a certain degree be considered as a gregarious bird.
In this part of the country they live altogether on the guanacos which have died a natural death, or as more commonly happens, have been killed by the pumas.
I believe, from what I saw in Patagonia, that they do not on ordinary occasions extend their daily excursions to any great distance from their regular sleeping-places.
The condors may oftentimes be seen at a great height, soaring over a certain spot in the most graceful circles.
On some occasions I am sure that they do this only for pleasure, but on others, the Chileno countryman tells you that they are watching a dying animal, or the puma devouring its prey.
If the condors glide down, and then suddenly all rise together, the Chileno knows that it is the puma which, watching the carcass, has sprung out to drive away the robbers.
Besides feeding on carrion, the condors frequently attack young goats and lambs; and the shepherd-dogs are trained, whenever they pass over, to run out, and looking upwards to bark violently.
The Chilenos destroy and catch numbers.
Two methods are used; one is to place a carcass on a level piece of ground within an enclosure of sticks with an opening, and when the condors are gorged to gallop up on horseback to the entrance, and thus enclose them: for when this bird has not space to
The second method is to mark the trees in which, frequently to the number of five or six together, they roost, and they at night to climb up and noose them.
They are such heavy sleepers, as I have myself witnessed, that this is not a difficult task.
At Valparaiso, I have seen a living condor sold for sixpence, but the common price is eight or ten shillings.
One which I saw brought in, had been tied with rope, and was much injured; yet, the moment the line was cut by which its bill was secured, although surrounded by people, it began ravenously to tear a piece of carrion.
In a garden at the same place, between twenty and thirty were kept alive.
They were fed only once a week, but they appeared in pretty good health.
[2] The Chileno countrymen assert that the condor will live, and retain its vigour, between five and six weeks without eating: I cannot answer for the truth of this, but it is a cruel experiment, which very likely has been tried.
When an animal is killed in the country, it is well known that the condors, like other carrion-vultures, soon gain intelligence of it, and congregate in an inexplicable manner.
In most cases it must not be overlooked, that the birds have discovered their prey, and have picked the skeleton clean, before the flesh is in the least degree tainted.
Remembering the experiments of M. Audubon, on the little smelling powers of carrion-hawks, I tried in the above mentioned garden the following experiment: the condors were tied, each by a rope, in a long row at the bottom of a wall; and having folded up a
I then threw it on the ground, within one yard of an old male bird; he looked at it for a moment with attention, but then regarded it no more.
With a stick I pushed it closer and closer, until at last he touched it with his beak; the paper was then instantly torn off with fury, and at the same moment, every bird in the long row began struggling and flapping its wings.
Under the same circumstances, it would have been quite impossible to have deceived a dog.
The evidence in favour of and against the acute smelling powers of carrion-vultures is singularly balanced.
Professor Owen has demonstrated that the olfactory nerves of the turkey-buzzard (Cathartes aura) are highly developed, and on the evening when Mr. Owen's paper was read at the Zoological Society, it was mentioned by a gentleman that he had seen the
On the other hand, besides the experiments of Audubon and that one by myself, Mr. Bachman has tried in the United States many varied plans, showing that neither the turkey-buzzard (the species dissected by Professor Owen) nor the gallinazo find their food
He covered portions of highly-offensive offal with a thin canvas cloth, and strewed pieces of meat on it: these the carrion-vultures ate up, and then remained quietly standing, with their beaks within the eighth of an inch of the putrid mass, without
A small rent was made in the canvas, and the offal was immediately discovered; the canvas was replaced by a fresh piece, and meat again put on it, and was again devoured by the vultures without their discovering the hidden mass on which they were
These facts are attested by the signatures of six gentlemen, besides that of Mr. Bachman.
[3] Often when lying down to rest on the open plains, on looking upwards, I have seen carrion-hawks sailing through the air at a great height.
Where the country is level I do not believe a space of the heavens, of more than fifteen degrees above the horizon, is commonly viewed with any attention by a person either walking or on horseback.
If such be the case, and the vulture is on the wing at a height of between three and four thousand feet, before it could come within the range of vision, its distance in a straight line from the beholder's eye, would be rather more than two British miles.
Might it not thus readily be overlooked?
When an animal is killed by the sportsman in a lonely valley, may he not all the while be watched from above by the sharp-sighted bird?
And will not the manner of its descend proclaim throughout the district to the whole family of carrion-feeders, that their prey is at hand?
When the condors are wheeling in a flock round and round any spot, their flight is beautiful.
Except when rising from the ground, I do not recollect ever having seen one of these birds flap its wings.
Near Lima, I watched several for nearly half an hour, without once taking off my eyes, they moved in large curves, sweeping in circles, descending and ascending without giving a single flap.
As they glided close over my head, I intently watched from an oblique position, the outlines of the separate and great terminal feathers of each wing; and these separate feathers, if there had been the least vibratory movement, would have appeared as if
The head and neck were moved frequently, and apparently with force; and the extended wings seemed to form the fulcrum on which the movements of the neck, body, and tail acted.
If the bird wished to descend, the wings were for a moment collapsed; and when again expanded with an altered inclination, the momentum gained by the rapid descent seemed to urge the bird upwards with the even and steady movement of a paper kite.
In the case of any bird soaring, its motion must be sufficiently rapid so that the action of the inclined surface of its body on the atmosphere may counterbalance its gravity.
The force to keep up the momentum of a body moving in a horizontal plane in the air (in which there is so little friction) cannot be great, and this force is all that is wanted.
The movements of the neck and body of the condor, we must suppose, is sufficient for this.
However this may be, it is truly wonderful and beautiful to see so great a bird, hour after hour, without any apparent exertion, wheeling and gliding over mountain and river.
April 29th.
--From some high land we hailed with joy the white summits of the Cordillera, as they were seen occasionally peeping through their dusky envelope of clouds.
During the few succeeding days we continued to get on slowly, for we found the river-course very tortuous, and strewed with immense fragments of various ancient slate rocks, and of granite.
The plain bordering the valley has here attained an elevation of about 1100 feet above the river, and its character was much altered.
The well-rounded pebbles of porphyry were mingled with many immense angular fragments of basalt and of primary rocks.
The first of these erratic boulders which I noticed, was sixty-seven miles distant from the nearest mountain; another which I measured was five yards square, and projected five feet above the gravel.
Its edges were so angular, and its size so great, that I at first mistook it for a rock _in situ_, and took out my compass to observe the direction of its cleavage.
The plain here was not quite so level as that nearer the coast, but yet in betrayed no signs of any great violence.
Under these circumstances it is, I believe, quite impossible to explain the transportal of these gigantic masses of rock so many miles from their parent-source, on any theory except by that of floating icebergs.
During the two last days we met with signs of horses, and with several small articles which had belonged to the Indians--such as parts of a mantle and a bunch of ostrich feathers--, but they appeared to have been lying long on the ground.
Between the place where the Indians had so lately crossed the river and this neighbourhood, though so many miles apart, the country appears to be quite unfrequented.
At first, considering the abundance of the guanacos, I was surprised at this; but it is explained by the stony nature of the plains, which would soon disable an unshod horse from taking part in the chase.
Nevertheless, in two places in this very central region, I found small heaps of stones, which I do not think could have been accidentally thrown together.
They were placed on points, projecting over the edge of the highest lava cliff, and they resembled, but on a small scale, those near Port Desire.
May 4th.
--Captain Fitz Roy determined to take the boats no higher.
The river had a winding course, and was very rapid; and the appearance of the country offered no temptation to proceed any further.
Everywhere we met with the same productions, and the same dreary landscape.
We were now one hundred and forty miles distant from the Atlantic and about sixty from the nearest arm of the Pacific.
The valley in this upper part expanded into a wide basin, bounded on the north and south by the basaltic platforms, and fronted by the long range of the snow-clad Cordillera.
But we viewed these grand mountains with regret, for we were obliged to imagine their nature and productions, instead of standing, as we had hoped, on their summits.
Besides the useless loss of time which an attempt to ascend the river and higher would have cost us, we had already been for some days on half allowance of bread.
This, although really enough for reasonable men, was, after a hard day's march, rather scanty food: a light stomach and an easy digestion are good things to talk about, but very unpleasant in practice.
5th.
--Before sunrise we commenced our descent.
We shot down the stream with great rapidity, generally at the rate of ten knots an hour.
In this one day we effected what had cost us five-and-a-half hard days' labour in ascending.
On the 8th, we reached the Beagle after our twenty-one days' expedition.
Every one, excepting myself, had cause to be dissatisfied; but to me the ascent afforded a most interesting section of the great tertiary formation of Patagonia.
On March 1st, 1833, and again on March 16th, 1834, the Beagle anchored in Berkeley Sound, in East Falkland Island.
This archipelago is situated in nearly the same latitude with the mouth of the Strait of Magellan; it covers a space of one hundred and twenty by sixty geographical miles, and is little more than half the size of Ireland.
After the possession of these miserable islands had been contested by France, Spain, and England, they were left uninhabited.
The government of Buenos Ayres then sold them to a private individual, but likewise used them, as old Spain had done before, for a penal settlement.
England claimed her right and seized them.
The Englishman who was left in charge of the flag was consequently murdered.
A British officer was next sent, unsupported by any power: and when we arrived, we found him in charge of a population, of which rather more than half were runaway rebels and murderers.
The theatre is worthy of the scenes acted on it.
An undulating land, with a desolate and wretched aspect, is everywhere covered by a peaty soil and wiry grass, of one monotonous brown colour.
Here and there a peak or ridge of grey quartz rock breaks through the smooth surface Every one has heard of the climate of these regions; it may be compared to that which is experienced at the height of between one and two thousand feet, on the mountains
[4] 16th.
--I will now describe a short excursion which made round a part of this island.
In the morning I started with six horses and two Gauchos: the latter were capital men for the purpose, and well accustomed to living on their own resources.
The weather was very boisterous and cold with heavy hail-storms.
We got on, however, pretty well but, except the geology, nothing could be less interesting than our day's ride.
The country is uniformly the same undulating moorland; the surface being covered by light brown withered grass and a few very small shrubs, all springing out of an elastic peaty soil.
In the valleys here and there might be seen a small flock of wild geese, and everywhere the ground was so soft that the snipe were able to feed.
Besides these two birds there were few others.
There is one main range of hills, nearly two thousand feet in height, and composed of quartz rock, the rugged and barren crests of which gave us some trouble to cross.
On the south side we came to the best country for wild cattle; we met, however, no great number, for they had been lately much harassed.
In the evening we came across a small herd.
One of my companions, St. Jago by name, soon separated a fat cow: he threw the bolas, and it struck her legs, but failed in becoming entangled.
Then dropping his hat to mark the spot where the balls were left, while at full gallop, he uncoiled his lazo, and after a most severe chase, again came up to the cow, and caught her round the horns.
The other Gaucho had gone on ahead with the spare horses, so that St. Jago had some difficulty in killing the furious beast.
He managed to get her on a level piece of ground, by taking advantage of her as often as she rushed at him; and when she would not move, my horse, from having been trained, would canter up, and with his chest give her a violent push.
But when on level ground it does not appear an easy job for one man to kill a beast mad with terror.
Nor would it be so, if the horse, when left to itself without its rider, did not soon learn, for its own safety, to keep the lazo tight, so that, if the cow or ox moves forward, the horse moves just as quickly forward; otherwise, it stands motionless
This horse, however, was a young one, and would not stand still, but gave in to the cow as she struggled.
It was admirable to see with what dexterity St. Jago dodged behind the beast, till at last he contrived to give the fatal touch to the main tendon of the hind leg after which, without much difficulty, he drove his knife into the head of the spinal marrow,
He cut off pieces of flesh with the skin to it, but without any bones, sufficient for our expedition.
We then rode on to our sleeping-place, and had for supper "carne con cuero," or meat roasted with the skin on it.
This is as superior to common beef as venison is to mutton.
A large circular piece taken from the back is roasted on the embers with the hide downwards and is the form of a saucer, so that none of the gravy is lost.
If any worthy alderman had supped with us that evening, "carne con cuero," without doubt, would soon have been celebrated in London.
During the night it rained, and the next day (17th) was very stormy, with much hail and snow.
We rode across the island to the neck of land which joins the Rincon del Toro (the great peninsula at the S. W. extremity) to the rest of the island.
From the great number of cows which have been killed, there is a large proportion of bulls.
These wander about single, or two and three together, and are very savage.
I never saw such magnificent beasts; they equalled in the size of their huge heads and necks the Grecian marble sculptures.
Capt.
Sulivan informs me that the hide of an average-sized bull weighs forty-seven pounds, whereas a hide of this weight, less thoroughly dried, is considered as a very heavy one at Monte Video.
The young bulls generally run away, for a short distance; but the old ones do not stir a step, except to rush at man and horse; and many horses have been thus killed.
An old bull crossed a boggy stream, and took his stand on the opposite side to us; we in vain tried to drive him away, and failing, were obliged to make a large circuit.
The Gauchos in revenge determined to emasculate him and render him for the future harmless.
It was very interesting to see how art completely mastered force.
One lazo was thrown over his horns as he rushed at the horse, and another round his hind legs: in a minute the monster was stretched powerless on the ground.
After the lazo has once been drawn tightly round the horns of a furious animal, it does not at first appear an easy thing to disengage it again without killing the beast: nor, I apprehend, would it be so if the man was by himself.
By the aid, however, of a second person throwing his lazo so as to catch both hind legs, it is quickly managed: for the animal, as long as its hind legs are kept outstretched, is quite helpless, and the first man can with his hands loosen his lazo from the
During our whole ride we saw only one troop of wild horses.
These animals, as well as the cattle, were introduced by the French in 1764, since which time both have greatly increased.
It is a curious fact, that the horses have never left the eastern end of the island, although there is no natural boundary to prevent them from roaming, and that part of the island is not more tempting than the rest.
The Gauchos whom I asked, though asserting this to be the case, were unable to account for it, except from the strong attachment which horses have to any locality to which they are accustomed.
Considering that the island does not appear fully stocked, and that there are no beasts of prey, I was particularly curious to know what has checked their originally rapid increase.
That in a limited island some check would sooner or later supervene, is inevitable; but why had the increase of the horse been checked sooner than that of the cattle?
Capt.
Sulivan has taken much pains for me in this inquiry.
The Gauchos employed here attribute it chiefly to the stallions constantly roaming from place to place, and compelling the mares to accompany them, whether or not the young foals are able to follow.
One Gaucho told Capt.
Sulivan that he had watched a stallion for a whole hour, violently kicking and biting a mare till he forced her to leave her foal to its fate.
Capt.
Sulivan can so far corroborate this curious account, that he has several times found young foals dead, whereas he has never found a dead calf.
Moreover, the dead bodies of full-grown horses are more frequently found, as if more subject to disease or accidents, than those of the cattle.
From the softness of the ground their hoofs often grow irregularly to a great length, and this causes lameness.
The predominant colours are roan and iron-grey.
All the horses bred here, both tame and wild, are rather small-sized, though generally in good condition; and they have lost so much strength, that they are unfit to be used in taking wild cattle with the lazo: in consequence, it is necessary to go to the
At some future period the southern hemisphere probably will have its breed of Falkland ponies, as the northern has its Shetland breed.
The cattle, instead of having degenerated like the horses seem, as before remarked, to have increased in size; and they are much more numerous than the horses.
Capt.
Sulivan informs me that they vary much less in the general form of their bodies and in the shape of their horns than English cattle.
In colour they differ much; and it is a remarkable circumstance, that in different parts of this one small island, different colours predominate.
Round Mount Usborne, at a height of from 1000 to 1500 feet above the sea, about half of some of the herds are mouse or lead-coloured, a tint which is not common in other parts of the island.
Near Port Pleasant dark brown prevails, whereas south of Choiseul Sound (which almost divides the island into two parts), white beasts with black heads and feet are the most common: in all parts black, and some spotted animals may be observed.
Capt.
Sulivan remarks, that the difference in the prevailing colours was so obvious, that in looking for the herds near Port Pleasant, they appeared from a long distance like black spots, whilst south of Choiseul Sound they appeared like white spots on the
Capt.
Sulivan thinks that the herds do not mingle; and it is a singular fact, that the mouse-coloured cattle, though living on the high land, calve about a month earlier in the season that the other coloured beasts on the lower land.
It is interesting thus to find the once domesticated cattle breaking into three colours, of which some one colour would in all probability ultimately prevail over the others, if the herds were left undisturbed for the next several centuries.
The rabbit is another animal which has been introduced; and has succeeded very well; so that they abound over large parts of the island.
Yet, like the horses, they are confined within certain limits; for they have not crossed the central chain of hills, nor would they have extended even so far as its base, if, as the Gauchos informed me, small colonies has not been carried there.
I should not have supposed that these animals, natives of northern Africa, could have existed in a climate so humid as this, and which enjoys so little sunshine that even wheat ripens only occasionally.
It is asserted that in Sweden, which any one would have thought a more favourable climate, the rabbit cannot live out of doors.
The first few pairs, moreover, had here to content against pre-existing enemies, in the fox and some large hawks.
The French naturalists have considered the black variety a distinct species, and called it Lepus Magellanicus.
[5] They imagined that Magellan, when talking of an animal under the name of "conejos" in the Strait of Magellan, referred to this species; but he was alluding to a small cavy, which to this day is thus called by the Spaniards.
The Gauchos laughed at the idea of the black kind being different from the grey, and they said that at all events it had not extended its range any further than the grey kind; that the two were never found separate; and that they readily bred together, and
Of the latter I now possess a specimen, and it is marked about the head differently from the French specific description.
This circumstance shows how cautious naturalists should be in making species; for even Cuvier, on looking at the skull of one of these rabbits, thought it was probably distinct!
The only quadruped native to the island [6]; is a large wolf-like fox (Canis antarcticus), which is common to both East and West Falkland.
I have no doubt it is a peculiar species, and confined to this archipelago; because many sealers, Gauchos, and Indians, who have visited these islands, all maintain that no such animal is found in any part of South America.
Molina, from a similarity in habits, thought that this was the same with his "culpeu;" [7] but I have seen both, and they are quite distinct.
These wolves are well known from Byron's account of their tameness and curiosity, which the sailors, who ran into the water to avoid them, mistook for fierceness.
To this day their manners remain the same.
They have been observed to enter a tent, and actually pull some meat from beneath the head of a sleeping seaman.
The Gauchos also have frequently in the evening killed them, by holding out a piece of meat in one hand, and in the other a knife ready to stick them.
As far as I am aware, there is no other instance in any part of the world, of so small a mass of broken land, distant from a continent, possessing so large an aboriginal quadruped peculiar to itself.
Their numbers have rapidly decreased; they are already banished from that half of the island which lies to the eastward of the neck of land between St. Salvador Bay and Berkeley Sound.
Within a very few years after these islands shall have become regularly settled, in all probability this for will be classed with the dodo, as an animal which has perished from the face of the earth.
At night (17th) we slept on the neck of land at the head of Choiseul Sound, which forms the south-west peninsula.
The valley was pretty well sheltered from the cold wind, but there was very little brushwood for fuel.
The Gauchos, however, soon found what, to my great surprise, made nearly as hot a fire as coals; this was the skeleton of a bullock lately killed, from which the flesh had been picked by the carrion-hawks.
They told me that in winter they often killed a beast, cleaned the flesh from the bones with their knives, and then with these same bones roasted the meat for their suppers.
18th.
--It rained during nearly the whole day.
At night we managed, however, with our saddle-cloths to keep ourselves pretty well dry and warm; but the ground on which we slept was on each occasion nearly in the state of a bog, and there was not a dry spot to sit down on after our day's ride.
I have in another part stated how singular it is that there should be absolutely no trees on these islands, although Tierra del Fuego is covered by one large forest.
The largest bush in the island (belonging to the family of Compositae) is scarcely so tall as our gorse.
The best fuel is afforded by a green little bush about the size of common heath, which has the useful property of burning while fresh and green.
It was very surprising to see the Gauchos, in the midst of rain and everything soaking wet, with nothing more than a tinder-box and a piece of rag, immediately make a fire.
They sought beneath the tufts of grass and bushel for a few dry twigs, and these they rubbed into fibres; then surrounding them with coarser twigs, something like a bird's nest, they put the rag with its spark of fire in the middle and covered it up.
The nest being then held up to the wind, by degrees it smoked more and more, and at last burst out in flames.
I do not think any other method would have had a chance of succeeding with such damp materials.
19th.
--Each morning, from not having ridden for some time previously, I was very stiff.
I was surprised to hear the Gauchos, who have from infancy almost lived on horseback, say that, under similar circumstances, they always suffer.
St. Jago told me, that having been confined for three months by illness, he went out hunting wild cattle, and in consequence, for the next two days, his thighs were so stiff that he was obliged to lie in bed.
This shows that the Gauchos, although they do not appear to do so, yet really must exert much muscular effort in riding.
The hunting wild cattle, in a country so difficult to pass as this is on account of the swampy ground, must be very hard work.
The Gauchos say they often pass at full speed over ground which would be impassable at a slower pace; in the same manner as a man is able to skate over thin ice.
When hunting, the party endeavours to get as close as possible to the herd without being discovered.
Each man carries four or five pair of the bolas; these he throws one after the other at as many cattle, which, when once entangled, are left for some days till they become a little exhausted by hunger and struggling.
They are then let free and driven towards a small herd of tame animals, which have been brought to the spot on purpose.
From their previous treatment, being too much terrified to leave the herd, they are easily driven, if their strength last out, to the settlement.
The weather continued so very bad that we determine to make a push, and try to reach the vessel before night.
From the quantity of rain which had fallen, the surface of the whole country was swampy.
I suppose my horse fell at least a dozen times, and sometimes the whole six horses were floundering in the mud together.
All the little streams are bordered by soft peat, which makes it very difficult for the horses to leap them without falling.
To complete our discomforts we were obliged to cross the head of a creek of the sea, in which the water was as high as our horses' backs; and the little waves, owing to the violence of the wind, broke over us, and made us very wet and cold.
Even the iron-framed Gauchos professed themselves glad when they reached the settlement, after our little excursion.
The geological structure of these islands is in most respects simple.
The lower country consists of clay-slate and sandstone, containing fossils, very closely related to, but not identical with, those found in the Silurian formations of Europe; the hills are formed of white granular quartz rock.
The strata of the latter are frequently arched with perfect symmetry, and the appearance of some of the masses is in consequence most singular.
Pernety [8] has devoted several pages to the description of a Hill of Ruins, the successive strata of which he has justly compared to the seats of an amphitheatre.
The quartz rock must have been quite pasty when it underwent such remarkable flexures without being shattered into fragments.
As the quartz insensibly passes into the sandstone, it seems probable that the former owes its origin to the sandstone having been heated to such a degree that it became viscid, and upon cooling crystallized.
While in the soft state it must have been pushed up through the overlying beds.
In many parts of the island the bottoms of the valleys are covered in an extraordinary manner by myriads of great loose angular fragments of the quartz rock, forming "streams of stones".
These have been mentioned with surprise by every voyager since the time of Pernety.
The blocks are not water-worn, their angles being only a little blunted; they vary in size from one or two feet in diameter to ten, or even more than twenty times as much.
They are not thrown together into irregular piles, but are spread out into level sheets or great streams.
It is not possible to ascertain their thickness, but the water of small streamlets can be heard trickling through the stones many feet below the surface.
The actual depth is probably great, because the crevices between the lower fragments must long ago have been filled up with sand.
The width of these sheets of stones varied from a few hundred feet to a mile; but the peaty soil daily encroaches on the borders, and even forms islets wherever a few fragments happen to lie close together.
In a valley south of Berkeley Sound, which some of our party called the "great valley of fragments," it was necessary to cross an uninterrupted band half a mile wide, by jumping from one pointed stone to another.
So large were the fragments, that being overtaken by a shower of rain, I readily found shelter beneath one of them.
Their little inclination is the most remarkable circumstance in these "streams of stones".
On the hill-sides I have seen them sloping at an angle of ten degrees with the horizon; but in some of the level, broad-bottomed valleys, the inclination is only just sufficient to be clearly perceived.
On so rugged a surface there was no means of measuring the angle, but to give a common illustration, I may say that the slope would not have checked the speed of an English mail-coach.
In some places, a continuous stream of these fragments followed up the course of a valley, and even extended to the very crest of the hill.
On these crests huge masses, exceeding in dimensions any small building, seemed to stand arrested in their headlong course: there, also, the curved strata of the archways lay piled on each other, like the ruins of some vast and ancient cathedral.
In endeavouring to describe these scenes of violence one is tempted to pass from one simile to another.
We may imagine that streams of white lava had flowed from many parts of the mountains into the lower country, and that when solidified they had been rent by some enormous convulsion into myriads of fragments.
The expression "streams of stones," which immediately occurred to every one, conveys the same idea.
These scenes are on the spot rendered more striking by the contrast of the low rounded forms of the neighbouring hills.
I was interested by finding on the highest peak of one range (about 700 feet above the sea) a great arched fragment, lying on its convex side, or back downwards.
Must we believe that it was fairly pitched up in the air, and thus turned?
Or, with more probability, that there existed formerly a part of the same range more elevated than the point on which this monument of a great convulsion of nature now lies.
As the fragments in the valleys are neither rounded nor the crevices filled up with sand, we must infer that the period of violence was subsequent to the land having been raised above the waters of the sea.
In a transverse section within these valleys, the bottom is nearly level, or rises but very little towards either side.
Hence the fragments appear to have travelled from the head of the valley; but in reality it seems more probable that they have been hurled down from the nearest slopes; and that since, by a vibratory movement of overwhelming force, [9] the fragments have
If during the earthquake [10] which in 1835 overthrew Concepcion, in Chile, it was thought wonderful that small bodies should have been pitched a few inches from the ground, what must we say to a movement which has caused fragments many tons in weight, to
I have seen, in the Cordillera of the Andes, the evident marks where stupendous mountains have been broken into pieces like so much thin crust, and the strata thrown of their vertical edges; but never did any scene, like these "streams of stones," so
I have little to remark on the zoology of these islands.
have before described the carrion-vulture of Polyborus.
There are some other hawks, owls, and a few small land-birds.
The water-fowl are particularly numerous, and they must formerly, from the accounts of the old navigators, have been much more so.
One day I observed a cormorant playing with a fish which it had caught.
Eight times successively the bird let its prey go, then dived after it, and although in deep water, brought it each time to the surface.
In the Zoological Gardens I have seen the otter treat a fish in the same manner, much as a cat does a mouse: I do not know of any other instance where dame Nature appears so wilfully cruel.
Another day, having placed myself between a penguin (Aptenodytes demersa) and the water, I was much amused by watching its habits.
It was a brave bird; and till reaching the sea, it regularly fought and drove me backwards.
Nothing less than heavy blows would have stopped him; every inch he gained he firmly kept, standing close before me erect and determined.
When thus opposed he continually rolled his head from side to side, in a very odd manner, as if the power of distinct vision lay only in the anterior and basal part of each eye.
This bird is commonly called the jackass penguin, from its habit, while on shore, of throwing its head backwards, and making a loud strange noise, very like the braying of an ass; but while at sea, and undisturbed, its note is very deep and solemn, and is
In diving, its little wings are used as fins; but on the land, as front legs.
When crawling, it may be said on four legs, through the tussocks or on the side of a grassy cliff, it moves so very quickly that it might easily be mistaken for a quadruped.
When at sea and fishing, it comes to the surface for the purpose of breathing with such a spring, and dives again so instantaneously, that I defy any one at first sight to be sure that it was not a fish leaping for sport.
Two kinds of geese frequent the Falklands.
The upland species (Anas Magellanica) is common, in pairs and in small flocks, throughout the island.
They do not migrate, but build on the small outlying islets.
This is supposed to be from fear of the foxes: and it is perhaps from the same cause that these birds, though very tame by day, are shy and wild in the dusk of the evening.
They live entirely on vegetable matter.
The rock-goose, so called from living exclusively on the sea-beach (Anas antarctica), is common both here and on the west coast of America, as far north as Chile.
In the deep and retired channels of Tierra del Fuego, the snow-white gander, invariably accompanied by his darker consort, and standing close by each other on some distant rocky point, is a common feature in the landscape.
In these islands a great loggerheaded duck or goose (Anas brachyptera), which sometimes weighs twenty-two pounds, is very abundant.
These birds were in former days called, from their extraordinary manner of paddling and splashing upon the water, race-horses; but now they are named, much more appropriately, steamers.
Their wings are too small and weak to allow of flight, but by their aid, partly swimming and partly flapping the surface of the water, they move very quickly.
The manner is something like that by which the common house-duck escapes when pursued by a dog; but I am nearly sure that the steamer moves its wings alternately, instead of both together, as in other birds.
These clumsy, loggerheaded ducks make such a noise and splashing, that the effect is exceedingly curious.
Thus we find in South America three birds which use their wings for other purposes besides flight; the penguins as fins, the steamer as paddles, and the ostrich as sails: and the Apteryz of New Zealand, as well as its gigantic extinct prototype the
The steamer is able to dive only to a very short distance.
It feeds entirely on shell-fish from the kelp and tidal rocks: hence the beak and head, for the purpose of breaking them, are surprisingly heavy and strong: the head is so strong that I have scarcely been able to fracture it with my geological hammer; and
When in the evening pluming themselves in a flock, they make the same odd mixture of sounds which bull-frogs do within the tropics.
In Tierra del Fuego, as well as in the Falkland Islands, made many observations on the lower marine animals, [11] but they are of little general interest.
I will mention only one class of facts, relating to certain zoophytes in the more highly organized division of that class.
Several genera (Flustra, Eschara, Cellaria, Crisia, and others) agree in having singular moveable organs (like those of Flustra avicularia, found in the European seas) attached to their cells.
The organ, in the greater number of cases, very closely resembles the head of a vulture; but the lower mandible can be opened much wider than in a real bird's beak.
The head itself possessed considerable powers of movement, by means of a short neck.
In one zoophyte the head itself was fixed, but the lower jaw free: in another it was replaced by a triangular hood, with beautifully-fitted trap-door, which evidently answered to the lower mandible.
In the greater number of species, each cell was provided with one head, but in others each cell had two.
The young cells at the end of the branches of these corallines contain quite immature polypi, yet the vulture-head attached to them, though small, are in every respect perfect When the polypus was removed by a needle from any of the cells, these organs did
When one of the vulture-like heads was cut off from the cell, the lower mandible retained its power of opening and closing.
Perhaps the most singular part of their structure is, that when there were more than two rows of cells on a branch, the central cells were furnished with these appendages, of only one-fourth the size of the outside ones.
Their movements varied according to the species; but in some I never saw the least motion; while others, with the lower mandible generally wide open, oscillated backwards and forwards at the rate of about five seconds each turn, others moved rapidly and by
When touched with a needle, the beak generally seized the point so firmly, that the whole branch might be shaken.
These bodies have no relation whatever with the production of the eggs or gemmules, as they are formed before the young polypi appear in the cells at the end of the growing branches; as they move independently of the polypi, and do not appear to be in any
The fleshy appendage at the lower extremity of the sea-pen (described at Bahia Blanca) also forms part of the zoophyte, as a whole, in the same manner as the roots of a tree form part of the whole tree, and not of the individual leaf or flower-buds.
In another elegant little coralline (Crisia?
), each cell was furnished with a long-toothed bristle, which had the power of moving quickly.
Each of these bristles and each of the vulture-like heads generally moved quite independently of the others, but sometimes all on both sides of a branch, sometimes only those on one side, moved together coinstantaneously, sometimes each moved in regular
In these actions we apparently behold as perfect a transmission of will in the zoophyte, though composed of thousands of distinct polypi, as in any single animal.
The case, indeed, is not different from that of the sea-pens, which, when touched, drew themselves into the sand on the coast of Bahia Blanca.
I will state one other instance of uniform action, though of a very different nature, in a zoophyte closely allied to Clytia, and therefore very simply organized.
Having kept a large tuft of it in a basin of salt-water, when it was dark I found that as often as I rubbed any part of a branch, the whole became strongly phosphorescent with a green light: I do not think I ever saw any object more beautifully so.
But the remarkable circumstance was, that the flashes of light always proceeded up the branches, from the base towards the extremities.
The examination of these compound animals was always very interesting to me.
What can be more remarkable that to see a plant-like body producing an egg, capable of swimming about and of choosing a proper place to adhere to, which then sprouts into branches, each crowded with innumerable distinct animals, often of complicated
The branches, moreover, as we have just seen, sometimes possess organs capable of movement and independent of the polypi.
Surprising as this union of separate individuals in common stock must always appear, every tree displays the same fact, for buds must be considered as individual plants.
It is, however, natural to consider a polypus, furnished with a mouth, intestines, and other organs, as a distinct individual, whereas the individuality of a leaf-bud is not easily realised, so that the union of separate individuals in a common body is
Our conception of a compound animal, where in some respects the individuality of each is not completed, may be aided, by reflecting on the production of two distinct creatures by bisecting a single one with a knife, or where Nature herself performs the
We may consider the polypi in a zoophyte, or the buds in a tree, as cases where the division of the individual has not been completely effected.
Certainly in the case of trees, and judging from analogy in that of corallines, the individuals propagated by buds seem more intimately related to each other, than eggs or seeds are to their parents.
It seems now pretty well established that plants propagated by buds all partake of a common duration of life; and it is familiar to every one, what singular and numerous peculiarities are transmitted with certainty, by buds, layers, and grafts, which by
[1] The desserts of Syria are characterized, according to Volney (tom.
i.
p.
351), by woody bushes, numerous rats, gazelles and hares.
In the landscape of Patagonia, the guanaco replaces the gazelle, and the agouti the hare.
[2] I noticed that several hours before any one of the condors died, all the lice, with which it was infested, crawled to the outside feathers.
I was assured that this always happens.
[3] London's Magazine of Nat.
Hist.
, vol.
vii.
[4] From accounts published since our voyage, and more especially from several interesting letters from Capt.
Sulivan, R. N., employed on the survey, it appears that we took an exaggerated view of the badness of the climate on these islands.
But when I reflect on the almost universal covering of peat, and on the fact of wheat seldom ripening here, I can hardly believe that the climate in summer is so fine and dry as it has lately been represented.
[5] Lesson's Zoology of the Voyage of the Coquille, tom.
i.
p.
168.
All the early voyagers, and especially Bougainville, distinctly state that the wolf-like fox was the only native animal on the island.
The distinction of the rabbit as a species, is taken from peculiarities in the fur, from the shape of the head, and from the shortness of the ears.
I may here observe that the difference between the Irish and English hare rests upon nearly similar characters, only more strongly marked.
[6] I have reason, however, to suspect that there is a field-mouse.
The common European rat and mouse have roamed far from the habitations of the settlers.
The common hog has also run wild on one islet; all are of a black colour: the boars are very fierce, and have great trunks.
[7] The "culpeu" is the Canis Magellanicus brought home by Captain King from the Strait of Magellan.
It is common in Chile.
[8] Pernety, Voyage aux Isles Malouines, p.
526.
[9] "Nous n'avons pas ete moins saisis d'etonnement a la vue de l'innombrable quantite de pierres de touts grandeurs, bouleversees les unes sur les autres, et cependent rangees, comme si elles avoient ete amoncelees negligemment pour remplir des ravins.
On ne se lassoit pas d'admirer les effets prodigieux de la nature".
--Pernety, p.
526.
[10] An inhabitant of Mendoza, and hence well capable of judging, assured me that, during the several years he had resided on these islands, he had never felt the slightest shock of an earthquake.
[11] I was surprised to find, on counting the eggs of a large white Doris (this sea-slug was three and a half inches long), how extraordinarily numerous they were.
From two to five eggs (each three-thousandths of an inch in diameter) were contained in spherical little case.
These were arranged two deep in transverse rows forming a ribbon.
The ribbon adhered by its edge to the rock in an oval spire.
One which I found, measured nearly twenty inches in length and half in breadth.
By counting how many balls were contained in a tenth of an inch in the row, and how many rows in an equal length of the ribbon, on the most moderate computation there were six hundred thousand eggs.
Yet this Doris was certainly not very common; although I was often searching under the stones, I saw only seven individuals.
No fallacy is more common with naturalists, than that the numbers of an individual species depend on its powers of propagation.
CHAPTER X TIERRA DEL FUEGO Tierra del Fuego, first arrival--Good Success Bay--An Account of the Fuegians on board--Interview With the Savages--Scenery of the Forests--Cape Horn--Wigwam Cove--Miserable Condition of the
DECEMBER 17th, 1832.
--Having now finished with Patagonia and the Falkland Islands, I will describe our first arrival in Tierra del Fuego.
A little after noon we doubled Cape St. Diego, and entered the famous strait of Le Maire.
We kept close to the Fuegian shore, but the outline of the rugged, inhospitable Statenland was visible amidst the clouds.
In the afternoon we anchored in the Bay of Good Success.
While entering we were saluted in a manner becoming the inhabitants of this savage land.
A group of Fuegians partly concealed by the entangled forest, were perched on a wild point overhanging the sea; and as we passed by, they sprang up and waving their tattered cloaks sent forth a loud and sonorous shout.
The savages followed the ship, and just before dark we saw their fire, and again heard their wild cry.
The harbour consists of a fine piece of water half surrounded by low rounded mountains of clay-slate, which are covered to the water's edge by one dense gloomy forest.
A single glance at the landscape was sufficient to show me how widely different it was from anything I had ever beheld.
At night it blew a gale of wind, and heavy squalls from the mountains swept past us.
It would have been a bad time out at sea, and we, as well as others, may call this Good Success Bay.
In the morning the Captain sent a party to communicate with the Fuegians.
When we came within hail, one of the four natives who were present advanced to receive us, and began to shout most vehemently, wishing to direct us where to land.
When we were on shore the party looked rather alarmed, but continued talking and making gestures with great rapidity.
It was without exception the most curious and interesting spectacle I ever beheld: I could not have believed how wide was the difference between savage and civilized man: it is greater than between a wild and domesticated animal, inasmuch as in man there
The chief spokesman was old, and appeared to be the head of the family; the three others were powerful young men, about six feet high.
The women and children had been sent away.
These Fuegians are a very different race from the stunted, miserable wretches farther westward; and they seem closely allied to the famous Patagonians of the Strait of Magellan.
Their only garment consists of a mantle made of guanaco skin, with the wool outside: this they wear just thrown over their shoulders, leaving their persons as often exposed as covered.
Their skin is of a dirty coppery-red colour.
The old man had a fillet of white feathers tied round his head, which partly confined his black, coarse, and entangled hair.
His face was crossed by two broad transverse bars; one, painted bright red, reached from ear to ear and included the upper lip; the other, white like chalk, extended above and parallel to the first, so that even his eyelids were thus coloured.
The other two men were ornamented by streaks of black powder, made of charcoal.
The party altogether closely resembled the devils which come on the stage in plays like Der Freischutz.
Their very attitudes were abject, and the expression of their countenances distrustful, surprised, and startled.
After we had presented them with some scarlet cloth, which they immediately tied round their necks, they became good friends.
This was shown by the old man patting our breasts, and making a chuckling kind of noise, as people do when feeding chickens.
I walked with the old man, and this demonstration of friendship was repeated several times; it was concluded by three hard slaps, which were given me on the breast and back at the same time.
He then bared his bosom for me to return the compliment, which being done, he seemed highly pleased.
The language of these people, according to our notions, scarcely deserves to be called articulate.
Captain Cook has compared it to a man clearing his throat, but certainly no European ever cleared his throat with so many hoarse, guttural, and clicking sounds.
They are excellent mimics: as often as we coughed or yawned, or made any odd motion, they immediately imitated us.
Some of our party began to squint and look awry; but one of the young Fuegians (whose whole face was painted black, excepting a white band across his eyes) succeeded in making far more hideous grimaces.
They could repeat with perfect correctness each word in any sentence we addressed them, and they remembered such words for some time.
Yet we Europeans all know how difficult it is to distinguish apart the sounds in a foreign language.
Which of us, for instance, could follow an American Indian through a sentence of more than three words?
All savages appear to possess, to an uncommon degree, this power of mimicry.
I was told, almost in the same words, of the same ludicrous habit among the Caffres; the Australians, likewise, have long been notorious for being able to imitate and describe the gait of any man, so that he may be recognized.
How can this faculty be explained?
is it a consequence of the more practised habits of perception and keener senses, common to all men in a savage state, as compared with those long civilized?
When a song was struck up by our party, I thought the Fuegians would have fallen down with astonishment.
With equal surprise they viewed our dancing; but one of the young men, when asked, had no objection to a little waltzing.
Little accustomed to Europeans as they appeared to be, yet they knew and dreaded our fire-arms; nothing would tempt them to take a gun in their hands.
They begged for knives, calling them by the Spanish word "cuchilla".
They explained also what they wanted, by acting as if they had a piece of blubber in their mouth, and then pretending to cut instead of tear it.
I have not as yet noticed the Fuegians whom we had on board.
During the former voyage of the Adventure and Beagle in 1826 to 1830, Captain Fitz Roy seized on a party of natives, as hostages for the loss of a boat, which had been stolen, to the great jeopardy of a party employed on the survey; and some of these
To settle these natives in their own country, was one chief inducement to Captain Fitz Roy to undertake our present voyage; and before the Admiralty had resolved to send out this expedition, Captain Fitz Roy had generously chartered a vessel, and would
The natives were accompanied by a missionary, R. Matthews; of whom and of the natives, Captain Fitz Roy has published a full and excellent account.
Two men, one of whom died in England of the small-pox, a boy and a little girl, were originally taken; and we had now on board, York Minster, Jemmy Button (whose name expresses his purchase-money), and Fuegia Basket.
York Minster was a full-grown, short, thick, powerful man: his disposition was reserved, taciturn, morose, and when excited violently passionate; his affections were very strong towards a few friends on board; his intellect good.
Jemmy Button was a universal favourite, but likewise passionate; the expression of his face at once showed his nice disposition.
He was merry and often laughed, and was remarkably sympathetic with any one in pain: when the water was rough, I was often a little sea-sick, and he used to come to me and say in a plaintive voice, "Poor, poor fellow"!
but the notion, after his aquatic life, of a man being sea-sick, was too ludicrous, and he was generally obliged to turn on one side to hide a smile or laugh, and then he would repeat his "Poor, poor fellow"!
He was of a patriotic disposition; and he liked to praise his own tribe and country, in which he truly said there were "plenty of trees," and he abused all the other tribes: he stoutly declared that there was no Devil in his land.
Jemmy was short, thick, and fat, but vain of his personal appearance; he used always to wear gloves, his hair was neatly cut, and he was distressed if his well-polished shoes were dirtied.
He was fond of admiring himself in a looking glass; and a merry-faced little Indian boy from the Rio Negro, whom we had for some months on board, soon perceived this, and used to mock him: Jemmy, who was always rather jealous of the attention paid to this
It seems yet wonderful to me, when I think over all his many good qualities that he should have been of the same race, and doubtless partaken of the same character, with the miserable, degraded savages whom we first met here.
Lastly, Fuegia Basket was a nice, modest, reserved young girl, with a rather pleasing but sometimes sullen expression, and very quick in learning anything, especially languages.
This she showed in picking up some Portuguese and Spanish, when left on shore for only a short time at Rio de Janeiro and Monte Video, and in her knowledge of English.
York Minster was very jealous of any attention paid to her; for it was clear he determined to marry her as soon as they were settled on shore.
Although all three could both speak and understand a good deal of English, it was singularly difficult to obtain much information from them, concerning the habits of their countrymen; this was partly owing to their apparent difficulty in understanding the
Every one accustomed to very young children, knows how seldom one can get an answer even to so simple a question as whether a thing is black or white; the idea of black or white seems alternately to fill their minds.
So it was with these Fuegians, and hence it was generally impossible to find out, by cross questioning, whether one had rightly understood anything which they had asserted.
Their sight was remarkably acute; it is well known that sailors, from long practice, can make out a distant object much better than a landsman; but both York and Jemmy were much superior to any sailor on board: several times they have declared what some
They were quite conscious of this power; and Jemmy, when he had any little quarrel with the officer on watch, would say, "Me see ship, me no tell".
It was interesting to watch the conduct of the savages, when we landed, towards Jemmy Button: they immediately perceived the difference between him and ourselves, and held much conversation one with another on the subject.
The old man addressed a long harangue to Jemmy, which it seems was to invite him to stay with them.
But Jemmy understood very little of their language, and was, moreover, thoroughly ashamed of his countrymen.
When York Minster afterwards came on shore, they noticed him in the same way, and told him he ought to shave; yet he had not twenty dwarf hairs on his face, whilst we all wore our untrimmed beards.
They examined the colour of his skin, and compared it with ours.
One of our arms being bared, they expressed the liveliest surprise and admiration at its whiteness, just in the same way in which I have seen the ourangoutang do at the Zoological Gardens.
We thought that they mistook two or three of the officers, who were rather shorter and fairer, though adorned with large beards, for the ladies of our party.
The tallest amongst the Fuegians was evidently much pleased at his height being noticed.
When placed back to back with the tallest of the boat's crew, he tried his best to edge on higher ground, and to stand on tiptoe.
He opened his mouth to show his teeth, and turned his face for a side view; and all this was done with such alacrity, that I dare say he thought himself the handsomest man in Tierra del Fuego.
After our first feeling of grave astonishment was over, nothing could be more ludicrous than the odd mixture of surprise and imitation which these savages every moment exhibited.
The next day I attempted to penetrate some way into the country.
Tierra del Fuego may be described as a mountainous land, partly submerged in the sea, so that deep inlets and bays occupy the place where valleys should exist.
The mountain sides, except on the exposed western coast, are covered from the water's edge upwards by one great forest.
The trees reach to an elevation of between 1000 and 1500 feet, and are succeeded by a band of peat, with minute alpine plants; and this again is succeeded by the line of perpetual snow, which, according to Captain King, in the Strait of Magellan descends
To find an acre of level land in any part of the country is most rare.
I recollect only one little flat piece near Port Famine, and another of rather larger extent near Goeree Road.
In both places, and everywhere else, the surface is covered by a thick bed of swampy peat.
Even within the forest, the ground is concealed by a mass of slowly putrefying vegetable matter, which, from being soaked with water, yields to the foot.
Finding it nearly hopeless to push my way through the wood, I followed the course of a mountain torrent.
At first, from the waterfalls and number of dead trees, I could hardly crawl along; but the bed of the stream soon became a little more open, from the floods having swept the sides.
I continued slowly to advance for an hour along the broken and rocky banks, and was amply repaid by the grandeur of the scene.
The gloomy depth of the ravine well accorded with the universal signs of violence.
On every side were lying irregular masses of rock and torn-up trees; other trees, though still erect, were decayed to the heart and ready to fall.
The entangled mass of the thriving and the fallen reminded me of the forests within the tropics--yet there was a difference: for in these still solitudes, Death, instead of Life, seemed the predominant spirit.
I followed the water-course till I came to a spot where a great slip had cleared a straight space down the mountain side.
By this road I ascended to a considerable elevation, and obtained a good view of the surrounding woods.
The trees all belong to one kind, the Fagus betuloides; for the number of the other species of Fagus and of the Winter's Bark, is quite inconsiderable.
This beech keeps its leaves throughout the year; but its foliage is of a peculiar brownish-green colour, with a tinge of yellow.
As the whole landscape is thus coloured, it has a sombre, dull appearance; nor is it often enlivened by the rays of the sun.
December 20th.
--One side of the harbour is formed by a hill about 1500 feet high, which Captain Fitz Roy has called after Sir J. Banks, in commemoration of his disastrous excursion, which proved fatal to two men of his party, and nearly so to Dr. Solander.
The snow-storm, which was the cause of their misfortune, happened in the middle of January, corresponding to our July, and in the latitude of Durham!
I was anxious to reach the summit of this mountain to collect alpine plants; for flowers of any kind in the lower parts are few in number.
We followed the same water-course as on the previous day, till it dwindled away, and we were then compelled to crawl blindly among the trees.
These, from the effects of the elevation and of the impetuous winds, were low, thick and crooked.
At length we reached that which from a distance appeared like a carpet of fine green turf, but which, to our vexation, turned out to be a compact mass of little beech-trees about four or five feet high.
They were as thick together as box in the border of a garden, and we were obliged to struggle over the flat but treacherous surface.
After a little more trouble we gained the peat, and then the bare slate rock.
A ridge connected this hill with another, distant some miles, and more lofty, so that patches of snow were lying on it.
As the day was not far advanced, I determined to walk there and collect plants along the road.
It would have been very hard work, had it not been for a well-beaten and straight path made by the guanacos; for these animals, like sheep, always follow the same line.
When we reached the hill we found it the highest in the immediate neighbourhood, and the waters flowed to the sea in opposite directions.
We obtained a wide view over the surrounding country: to the north a swampy moorland extended, but to the south we had a scene of savage magnificence, well becoming Tierra del Fuego.
There was a degree of mysterious grandeur in mountain behind mountain, with the deep intervening valleys, all covered by one thick, dusky mass of forest.
The atmosphere, likewise, in this climate, where gale succeeds gale, with rain, hail, and sleet, seems blacker than anywhere else.
In the Strait of Magellan looking due southward from Port Famine, the distant channels between the mountains appeared from their gloominess to lead beyond the confines of this world.
December 21st.
--The Beagle got under way: and on the succeeding day, favoured to an uncommon degree by a fine easterly breeze, we closed in with the Barnevelts, and running past Cape Deceit with its stony peaks, about three o'clock doubled the weather-beaten Cape Horn.
The evening was calm and bright, and we enjoyed a fine view of the surrounding isles.
Cape Horn, however, demanded his tribute, and before night sent us a gale of wind directly in our teeth.
We stood out to sea, and on the second day again made the land, when we saw on our weather-bow this notorious promontory in its proper form--veiled in a mist, and its dim outline surrounded by a storm of wind and water.
Great black clouds were rolling across the heavens, and squalls of rain, with hail, swept by us with such extreme violence, that the Captain determined to run into Wigwam Cove.
This is a snug little harbour, not far from Cape Horn; and here, at Christmas-eve, we anchored in smooth water.
The only thing which reminded us of the gale outside, was every now and then a puff from the mountains, which made the ship surge at her anchors.
December 25th.
--Close by the Cove, a pointed hill, called Kater's Peak, rises to the height of 1700 feet.
The surrounding islands all consist of conical masses of greenstone, associated sometimes with less regular hills of baked and altered clay-slate.
This part of Tierra del Fuego may be considered as the extremity of the submerged chain of mountains already alluded to.
The cove takes its name of "Wigwam" from some of the Fuegian habitations; but every bay in the neighbourhood might be so called with equal propriety.
The inhabitants, living chiefly upon shell-fish, are obliged constantly to change their place of residence; but they return at intervals to the same spots, as is evident from the piles of old shells, which must often amount to many tons in freight.
These heaps can be distinguished at a long distance by the bright green colour of certain plants, which invariably grow on them.
Among these may be enumerated the wild celery and scurvy grass, two very serviceable plants, the use of which has not been discovered by the natives.
The Fuegian wigwam resembles, in size and dimensions, a haycock.
It merely consists of a few broken branches stuck in the ground, and very imperfectly thatched on one side with a few tufts of grass and rushes.
The whole cannot be the work of an hour, and it is only used for a few days.
At Goeree Roads I saw a place where one of these naked men had slept, which absolutely offered no more cover than the form of a hare.
The man was evidently living by himself, and York Minster said he was "very bad man," and that probably he had stolen something.
On the west coast, however, the wigwams are rather better, for they are covered with seal-skins.
We were detained here several days by the bad weather.
The climate is certainly wretched: the summer solstice was now passed, yet every day snow fell on the hills, and in the valleys there was rain, accompanied by sleet.
The thermometer generally stood about 45 degs.
, but in the night fell to 38 or 40 degs.
From the damp and boisterous state of the atmosphere, not cheered by a gleam of sunshine, one fancied the climate even worse than it really was.
While going one day on shore near Wollaston Island, we pulled alongside a canoe with six Fuegians.
These were the most abject and miserable creatures I anywhere beheld.
On the east coast the natives, as we have seen, have guanaco cloaks, and on the west they possess seal-skins.
Amongst these central tribes the men generally have an otter-skin, or some small scrap about as large as a pocket-handkerchief, which is barely sufficient to cover their backs as low down as their loins.
It is laced across the breast by strings, and according as the wind blows, it is shifted from side to side.
But these Fuegians in the canoe were quite naked, and even one full-grown woman was absolutely so.
It was raining heavily, and the fresh water, together with the spray, trickled down her body.
In another harbour not far distant, a woman, who was suckling a recently-born child, came one day alongside the vessel, and remained there out of mere curiosity, whilst the sleet fell and thawed on her naked bosom, and on the skin of her naked baby!
These poor wretches were stunted in their growth, their hideous faces bedaubed with white paint, their skins filthy and greasy, their hair entangled, their voices discordant, and their gestures violent.
Viewing such men, one can hardly make one's self believe that they are fellow-creatures, and inhabitants of the same world.
It is a common subject of conjecture what pleasure in life some of the lower animals can enjoy: how much more reasonably the same question may be asked with respect to these barbarians!
At night, five or six human beings, naked and scarcely protected from the wind and rain of this tempestuous climate, sleep on the wet ground coiled up like animals.
Whenever it is low water, winter or summer, night or day, they must rise to pick shell-fish from the rocks; and the women either dive to collect sea-eggs, or sit patiently in their canoes, and with a baited hair-line without any hook, jerk out little fish.
If a seal is killed, or the floating carcass of a putrid whale is discovered, it is a feast; and such miserable food is assisted by a few tasteless berries and fungi.
They often suffer from famine: I heard Mr. Low, a sealing-master intimately acquainted with the natives of this country, give a curious account of the state of a party of one hundred and fifty natives on the west coast, who were very thin and in great
A succession of gales prevented the women from getting shell-fish on the rocks, and they could not go out in their canoes to catch seal.
A small party of these men one morning set out, and the other Indians explained to him, that they were going a four days' journey for food: on their return, Low went to meet them, and he found them excessively tired, each man carrying a great square piece
As soon as the blubber was brought into a wigwam, an old man cut off thin slices, and muttering over them, broiled them for a minute, and distributed them to the famished party, who during this time preserved a profound silence.
Mr. Low believes that whenever a whale is cast on shore, the natives bury large pieces of it in the sand, as a resource in time of famine; and a native boy, whom he had on board, once found a stock thus buried.
The different tribes when at war are cannibals.
From the concurrent, but quite independent evidence of the boy taken by Mr. Low, and of Jemmy Button, it is certainly true, that when pressed in winter by hunger, they kill and devour their old women before they kill their dogs: the boy, being asked by Mr.
This boy described the manner in which they are killed by being held over smoke and thus choked; he imitated their screams as a joke, and described the parts of their bodies which are considered best to eat.
Horrid as such a death by the hands of their friends and relatives must be, the fears of the old women, when hunger begins to press, are more painful to think of; we are told that they then often run away into the mountains, but that they are pursued by
Captain Fitz Roy could never ascertain that the Fuegians have any distinct belief in a future life.
They sometimes bury their dead in caves, and sometimes in the mountain forests; we do not know what ceremonies they perform.
Jemmy Button would not eat land-birds, because "eat dead men": they are unwilling even to mention their dead friends.
We have no reason to believe that they perform any sort of religious worship; though perhaps the muttering of the old man before he distributed the putrid blubber to his famished party, may be of this nature.
Each family or tribe has a wizard or conjuring doctor, whose office we could never clearly ascertain.
Jemmy believed in dreams, though not, as I have said, in the devil: I do not think that our Fuegians were much more superstitious than some of the sailors; for an old quartermaster firmly believed that the successive heavy gales, which we encountered off
The nearest approach to a religious feeling which I heard of, was shown by York Minster, who, when Mr. Bynoe shot some very young ducklings as specimens, declared in the most solemn manner, "Oh, Mr. Bynoe, much rain, snow, blow much".
This was evidently a retributive punishment for wasting human food.
In a wild and excited manner he also related, that his brother, one day whilst returning to pick up some dead birds which he had left on the coast, observed some feathers blown by the wind.
His brother said (York imitating his manner), "What that"?
and crawling onwards, he peeped over the cliff, and saw "wild man" picking his birds; he crawled a little nearer, and then hurled down a great stone and killed him.
York declared for a long time afterwards storms raged, and much rain and snow fell.
As far as we could make out, he seemed to consider the elements themselves as the avenging agents: it is evident in this case, how naturally, in a race a little more advanced in culture, the elements would become personified.
What the "bad wild men" were, has always appeared to me most mysterious: from what York said, when we found the place like the form of a hare, where a single man had slept the night before, I should have thought that they were thieves who had been driven
The different tribes have no government or chief; yet each is surrounded by other hostile tribes, speaking different dialects, and separated from each other only by a deserted border or neutral territory: the cause of their warfare appears to be the means
Their country is a broken mass of wild rocks, lofty hills, and useless forests: and these are viewed through mists and endless storms.
The habitable land is reduced to the stones on the beach; in search of food they are compelled unceasingly to wander from spot to spot, and so steep is the coast, that they can only move about in their wretched canoes.
They cannot know the feeling of having a home, and still less that of domestic affection; for the husband is to the wife a brutal master to a laborious slave.
Was a more horrid deed ever perpetrated, than that witnessed on the west coast by Byron, who saw a wretched mother pick up her bleeding dying infant-boy, whom her husband had mercilessly dashed on the stones for dropping a basket of sea-eggs!
How little can the higher powers of the mind be brought into play: what is there for imagination to picture, for reason to compare, or judgment to decide upon?
to knock a limpet from the rock does not require even cunning, that lowest power of the mind.
Their skill in some respects may be compared to the instinct of animals; for it is not improved by experience: the canoe, their most ingenious work, poor as it is, has remained the same, as we know from Drake, for the last two hundred and fifty years.
Whilst beholding these savages, one asks, whence have they come?
What could have tempted, or what change compelled a tribe of men, to leave the fine regions of the north, to travel down the Cordillera or backbone of America, to invent and build canoes, which are not used by the tribes of Chile, Peru, and Brazil, and
Although such reflections must at first seize on the mind, yet we may feel sure that they are partly erroneous.
There is no reason to believe that the Fuegians decrease in number; therefore we must suppose that they enjoy a sufficient share of happiness, of whatever kind it may be, to render life worth having.
Nature by making habit omnipotent, and its effects hereditary, has fitted the Fuegian to the climate and the productions of his miserable country.
After having been detained six days in Wigwam Cove by very bad weather, we put to sea on the 30th of December.
Captain Fitz Roy wished to get westward to land York and Fuegia in their own country.
When at sea we had a constant succession of gales, and the current was against us: we drifted to 57 degs.
23' south.
On the 11th of January, 1833, by carrying a press of sail, we fetched within a few miles of the great rugged mountain of York Minster (so called by Captain Cook, and the origin of the name of the elder Fuegian), when a violent squall compelled us to
The surf was breaking fearfully on the coast, and the spray was carried over a cliff estimated to 200 feet in height.
On the 12th the gale was very heavy, and we did not know exactly where we were: it was a most unpleasant sound to hear constantly repeated, "keep a good look-out to leeward".
On the 13th the storm raged with its full fury: our horizon was narrowly limited by the sheets of spray borne by the wind.
The sea looked ominous, like a dreary waving plain with patches of drifted snow: whilst the ship laboured heavily, the albatross glided with its expanded wings right up the wind.
At noon a great sea broke over us, and filled one of the whale boats, which was obliged to be instantly cut away.
The poor Beagle trembled at the shock, and for a few minutes would not obey her helm; but soon, like a good ship that she was, she righted and came up to the wind again.
Had another sea followed the first, our fate would have been decided soon, and for ever.
We had now been twenty-four days trying in vain to get westward; the men were worn out with fatigue, and they had not had for many nights or days a dry thing to put on.
Captain Fitz Roy gave up the attempt to get westward by the outside coast.
In the evening we ran in behind False Cape Horn, and dropped our anchor in forty-seven fathoms, fire flashing from the windlass as the chain rushed round it.
How delightful was that still night, after having been so long involved in the din of the warring elements!
January 15th, 1833.
--The Beagle anchored in Goeree Roads.
Captain Fitz Roy having resolved to settle the Fuegians, according to their wishes, in Ponsonby Sound, four boats were equipped to carry them there through the Beagle Channel.
This channel, which was discovered by Captain Fitz Roy during the last voyage, is a most remarkable feature in the geography of this, or indeed of any other country: it may be compared to the valley of Lochness in Scotland, with its chain of lakes and
It is about one hundred and twenty miles long, with an average breadth, not subject to any very great variation, of about two miles; and is throughout the greater part so perfectly straight, that the view, bounded on each side by a line of mountains,
It crosses the southern part of Tierra del Fuego in an east and west line, and in the middle is joined at right angles on the south side by an irregular channel, which has been called Ponsonby Sound.
This is the residence of Jemmy Button's tribe and family.
19th.
--Three whale-boats and the yawl, with a party of twenty-eight, started under the command of Captain Fitz Roy.
In the afternoon we entered the eastern mouth of the channel, and shortly afterwards found a snug little cove concealed by some surrounding islets.
Here we pitched our tents and lighted our fires.
Nothing could look more comfortable than this scene.
The glassy water of the little harbour, with the branches of the trees hanging over the rocky beach, the boats at anchor, the tents supported by the crossed oars, and the smoke curling up the wooded valley, formed a picture of quiet retirement.
The next day (20th) we smoothly glided onwards in our little fleet, and came to a more inhabited district.
Few if any of these natives could ever have seen a white man; certainly nothing could exceed their astonishment at the apparition of the four boats.
Fires were lighted on every point (hence the name of Tierra del Fuego, or the land of fire), both to attract our attention and to spread far and wide the news.
Some of the men ran for miles along the shore.
I shall never forget how wild and savage one group appeared: suddenly four or five men came to the edge of an overhanging cliff; they were absolutely naked, and their long hair streamed about their faces; they held rugged staffs in their hands, and,
At dinner-time we landed among a party of Fuegians.
At first they were not inclined to be friendly; for until the Captain pulled in ahead of the other boats, they kept their slings in their hands.
We soon, however, delighted them by trifling presents, such as tying red tape round their heads.
They liked our biscuit: but one of the savages touched with his finger some of the meat preserved in tin cases which I was eating, and feeling it soft and cold, showed as much disgust at it, as I should have done at putrid blubber.
Jemmy was thoroughly ashamed of his countrymen, and declared his own tribe were quite different, in which he was wofully mistaken.
It was as easy to please as it was difficult to satisfy these savages.
Young and old, men and children, never ceased repeating the word "yammerschooner," which means "give me".
After pointing to almost every object, one after the other, even to the buttons on our coats, and saying their favourite word in as many intonations as possible, they would then use it in a neuter sense, and vacantly repeat "yammerschooner".
After yammerschoonering for any article very eagerly, they would by a simple artifice point to their young women or little children, as much as to say, "If you will not give it me, surely you will to such as these".
At night we endeavoured in vain to find an uninhabited cove; and at last were obliged to bivouac not far from a party of natives.
They were very inoffensive as long as they were few in numbers, but in the morning (21st) being joined by others they showed symptoms of hostility, and we thought that we should have come to a skirmish.
An European labours under great disadvantages when treating with savages like these, who have not the least idea of the power of fire-arms.
In the very act of levelling his musket he appears to the savage far inferior to a man armed with a bow and arrow, a spear, or even a sling.
Nor is it easy to teach them our superiority except by striking a fatal blow.
Like wild beasts, they do not appear to compare numbers; for each individual, if attacked, instead of retiring, will endeavour to dash your brains out with a stone, as certainly as a tiger under similar circumstances would tear you.
Captain Fitz Roy on one occasion being very anxious, from good reasons, to frighten away a small party, first flourished a cutlass near them, at which they only laughed; he then twice fired his pistol close to a native.
The man both times looked astounded, and carefully but quickly rubbed his head; he then stared awhile, and gabbled to his companions, but he never seemed to think of running away.
We can hardly put ourselves in the position of these savages, and understand their actions.
In the case of this Fuegian, the possibility of such a sound as the report of a gun close to his ear could never have entered his mind.
He perhaps literally did not for a second know whether it was a sound or a blow, and therefore very naturally rubbed his head.
In a similar manner, when a savage sees a mark struck by a bullet, it may be some time before he is able at all to understand how it is effected; for the fact of a body being invisible from its velocity would perhaps be to him an idea totally
Moreover, the extreme force of a bullet, that penetrates a hard substance without tearing it, may convince the savage that it has no force at all.
Certainly I believe that many savages of the lowest grade, such as these of Tierra del Fuego, have seen objects struck, and even small animals killed by the musket, without being in the least aware how deadly an instrument it is.
22nd.
--After having passed an unmolested night, in what would appear to be neutral territory between Jemmy's tribe and the people whom we saw yesterday, we sailed pleasantly along.
I do not know anything which shows more clearly the hostile state of the different tribes, than these wide border or neutral tracts.
Although Jemmy Button well knew the force of our party, he was, at first, unwilling to land amidst the hostile tribe nearest to his own.
He often told us how the savage Oens men "when the leaf red," crossed the mountains from the eastern coast of Tierra del Fuego, and made inroads on the natives of this part of the country.
It was most curious to watch him when thus talking, and see his eyes gleaming and his whole face assume a new and wild expression.
As we proceeded along the Beagle Channel, the scenery assumed a peculiar and very magnificent character; but the effect was much lessened from the lowness of the point of view in a boat, and from looking along the valley, and thus losing all the beauty of
The mountains were here about three thousand feet high, and terminated in sharp and jagged points.
They rose in one unbroken sweep from the water's edge, and were covered to the height of fourteen or fifteen hundred feet by the dusky-coloured forest.
It was most curious to observe, as far as the eye could range, how level and truly horizontal the line on the mountain side was, at which trees ceased to grow: it precisely resembled the high-water mark of drift-weed on a sea-beach.
At night we slept close to the junction of Ponsonby Sound with the Beagle Channel.
A small family of Fuegians, who were living in the cove, were quiet and inoffensive, and soon joined our party round a blazing fire.
We were well clothed, and though sitting close to the fire were far from too warm; yet these naked savages, though further off, were observed, to our great surprise, to be streaming with perspiration at undergoing such a roasting.
They seemed, however, very well pleased, and all joined in the chorus of the seamen's songs: but the manner in which they were invariably a little behindhand was quite ludicrous.
During the night the news had spread, and early in the morning (23rd) a fresh party arrived, belonging to the Tekenika, or Jemmy's tribe.
Several of them had run so fast that their noses were bleeding, and their mouths frothed from the rapidity with which they talked; and with their naked bodies all bedaubed with black, white, [1] and red, they looked like so many demoniacs who had been
We then proceeded (accompanied by twelve canoes, each holding four or five people) down Ponsonby Sound to the spot where poor Jemmy expected to find his mother and relatives.
He had already heard that his father was dead; but as he had had a "dream in his head" to that effect, he did not seem to care much about it, and repeatedly comforted himself with the very natural reflection--"Me no help it".
He was not able to learn any particulars regarding his father's death, as his relations would not speak about it.
Jemmy was now in a district well known to him, and guided the boats to a quiet pretty cove named Woollya, surrounded by islets, every one of which and every point had its proper native name.
We found here a family of Jemmy's tribe, but not his relations: we made friends with them; and in the evening they sent a canoe to inform Jemmy's mother and brothers.
The cove was bordered by some acres of good sloping land, not covered (as elsewhere) either by peat or by forest-trees.
Captain Fitz Roy originally intended, as before stated, to have taken York Minster and Fuegia to their own tribe on the west coast; but as they expressed a wish to remain here, and as the spot was singularly favourable, Captain Fitz Roy determined to
Five days were spent in building for them three large wigwams, in landing their goods, in digging two gardens, and sowing seeds.
The next morning after our arrival (the 24th) the Fuegians began to pour in, and Jemmy's mother and brothers arrived.
Jemmy recognised the stentorian voice of one of his brothers at a prodigious distance.
The meeting was less interesting than that between a horse, turned out into a field, when he joins an old companion.
There was no demonstration of affection; they simply stared for a short time at each other; and the mother immediately went to look after her canoe.
We heard, however, through York that the mother has been inconsolable for the loss of Jemmy and had searched everywhere for him, thinking that he might have been left after having been taken in the boat.
The women took much notice of and were very kind to Fuegia.
We had already perceived that Jemmy had almost forgotten his own language.
I should think there was scarcely another human being with so small a stock of language, for his English was very imperfect.
It was laughable, but almost pitiable, to hear him speak to his wild brother in English, and then ask him in Spanish ("no sabe"?
) whether he did not understand him.
Everything went on peaceably during the three next days whilst the gardens were digging and wigwams building.
We estimated the number of natives at about one hundred and twenty.
The women worked hard, whilst the men lounged about all day long, watching us.
They asked for everything they saw, and stole what they could.
They were delighted at our dancing and singing, and were particularly interested at seeing us wash in a neighbouring brook; they did not pay much attention to anything else, not even to our boats.
Of all the things which York saw, during his absence from his country, nothing seems more to have astonished him than an ostrich, near Maldonado: breathless with astonishment he came running to Mr. Bynoe, with whom he was out walking--"Oh, Mr. Bynoe, oh,
Much as our white skins surprised the natives, by Mr. Low's account a negro-cook to a sealing vessel, did so more effectually, and the poor fellow was so mobbed and shouted at that he would never go on shore again.
Everything went on so quietly that some of the officers and myself took long walks in the surrounding hills and woods.
Suddenly, however, on the 27th, every woman and child disappeared.
We were all uneasy at this, as neither York nor Jemmy could make out the cause.
It was thought by some that they had been frightened by our cleaning and firing off our muskets on the previous evening; by others, that it was owing to offence taken by an old savage, who, when told to keep further off, had coolly spit in the sentry's
Captain Fitz Roy, to avoid the chance of an encounter, which would have been fatal to so many of the Fuegians, thought it advisable for us to sleep at a cove a few miles distant.
Matthews, with his usual quiet fortitude (remarkable in a man apparently possessing little energy of character), determined to stay with the Fuegians, who evinced no alarm for themselves; and so we left them to pass their first awful night.
On our return in the morning (28th) we were delighted to find all quiet, and the men employed in their canoes spearing fish.
Captain Fitz Roy determined to send the yawl and one whale-boat back to the ship; and to proceed with the two other boats, one under his own command (in which he most kindly allowed me to accompany him), and one under Mr. Hammond, to survey the western
The day to our astonishment was overpoweringly hot, so that our skins were scorched: with this beautiful weather, the view in the middle of the Beagle Channel was very remarkable.
Looking towards either hand, no object intercepted the vanishing points of this long canal between the mountains.
The circumstance of its being an arm of the sea was rendered very evident by several huge whales [2] spouting in different directions.
On one occasion I saw two of these monsters, probably male and female, slowly swimming one after the other, within less than a stone's throw of the shore, over which the beech-tree extended its branches.
We sailed on till it was dark, and then pitched our tents in a quiet creek.
The greatest luxury was to find for our beds a beach of pebbles, for they were dry and yielded to the body.
Peaty soil is damp; rock is uneven and hard; sand gets into one's meat, when cooked and eaten boat-fashion; but when lying in our blanket-bags, on a good bed of smooth pebbles, we passed most comfortable nights.
It was my watch till one o'clock.
There is something very solemn in these scenes.
At no time does the consciousness in what a remote corner of the world you are then standing, come so strongly before the mind.
Everything tends to this effect; the stillness of the night is interrupted only by the heavy breathing of the seamen beneath the tents, and sometimes by the cry of a night-bird.
The occasional barking of a dog, heard in the distance, reminds one that it is the land of the savage.
January 20th.
--Early in the morning we arrived at the point where the Beagle Channel divides into two arms; and we entered the northern one.
The scenery here becomes even grander than before.
The lofty mountains on the north side compose the granitic axis, or backbone of the country and boldly rise to a height of between three and four thousand feet, with one peak above six thousand feet.
They are covered by a wide mantle of perpetual snow, and numerous cascades pour their waters, through the woods, into the narrow channel below.
In many parts, magnificent glaciers extend from the mountain side to the water's edge.
It is scarcely possible to imagine anything more beautiful than the beryl-like blue of these glaciers, and especially as contrasted with the dead white of the upper expanse of snow.
The fragments which had fallen from the glacier into the water were floating away, and the channel with its icebergs presented, for the space of a mile, a miniature likeness of the Polar Sea.
The boats being hauled on shore at our dinner-hour, we were admiring from the distance of half a mile a perpendicular cliff of ice, and were wishing that some more fragments would fall.
At last, down came a mass with a roaring noise, and immediately we saw the smooth outline of a wave travelling towards us.
The men ran down as quickly as they could to the boats; for the chance of their being dashed to pieces was evident.
One of the seamen just caught hold of the bows, as the curling breaker reached it: he was knocked over and over, but not hurt, and the boats though thrice lifted on high and let fall again, received no damage.
This was most fortunate for us, for we were a hundred miles distant from the ship, and we should have been left without provisions or fire-arms.
I had previously observed that some large fragments of rock on the beach had been lately displaced; but until seeing this wave, I did not understand the cause.
One side of the creek was formed by a spur of mica-slate; the head by a cliff of ice about forty feet high; and the other side by a promontory fifty feet high, built up of huge rounded fragments of granite and mica-slate, out of which old trees were
This promontory was evidently a moraine, heaped up at a period when the glacier had greater dimensions.
When we reached the western mouth of this northern branch of the Beagle Channel, we sailed amongst many unknown desolate islands, and the weather was wretchedly bad.
We met with no natives.
The coast was almost everywhere so steep, that we had several times to pull many miles before we could find space enough to pitch our two tents: one night we slept on large round boulders, with putrefying sea-weed between them; and when the tide rose, we
The farthest point westward which we reached was Stewart Island, a distance of about one hundred and fifty miles from our ship.
We returned into the Beagle Channel by the southern arm, and thence proceeded, with no adventure, back to Ponsonby Sound.
February 6th.
--We arrived at Woollya.
Matthews gave so bad an account of the conduct of the Fuegians, that Captain Fitz Roy determined to take him back to the Beagle; and ultimately he was left at New Zealand, where his brother was a missionary.
From the time of our leaving, a regular system of plunder commenced; fresh parties of the natives kept arriving: York and Jemmy lost many things, and Matthews almost everything which had not been concealed underground.
Every article seemed to have been torn up and divided by the natives.
Matthews described the watch he was obliged always to keep as most harassing; night and day he was surrounded by the natives, who tried to tire him out by making an incessant noise close to his head.
One day an old man, whom Matthews asked to leave his wigwam, immediately returned with a large stone in his hand: another day a whole party came armed with stones and stakes, and some of the younger men and Jemmy's brother were crying: Matthews met them
Another party showed by signs that they wished to strip him naked and pluck all the hairs out of his face and body.
I think we arrived just in time to save his life.
Jemmy's relatives had been so vain and foolish, that they had showed to strangers their plunder, and their manner of obtaining it.
It was quite melancholy leaving the three Fuegians with their savage countrymen; but it was a great comfort that they had no personal fears.
York, being a powerful resolute man, was pretty sure to get on well, together with his wife Fuegia.
Poor Jemmy looked rather disconsolate, and would then, I have little doubt, have been glad to have returned with us.
His own brother had stolen many things from him; and as he remarked, "What fashion call that:" he abused his countrymen, "all bad men, no sabe (know) nothing" and, though I never heard him swear before, "damned fools".
Our three Fuegians, though they had been only three years with civilized men, would, I am sure, have been glad to have retained their new habits; but this was obviously impossible.
I fear it is more than doubtful, whether their visit will have been of any use to them.
In the evening, with Matthews on board, we made sail back to the ship, not by the Beagle Channel, but by the southern coast.
The boats were heavily laden and the sea rough, and we had a dangerous passage.
By the evening of the 7th we were on board the Beagle after an absence of twenty days, during which time we had gone three hundred miles in the open boats.
On the 11th, Captain Fitz Roy paid a visit by himself to the Fuegians and found them going on well; and that they had lost very few more things.
On the last day of February in the succeeding year (1834) the Beagle anchored in a beautiful little cove at the eastern entrance of the Beagle Channel.
Captain Fitz Roy determined on the bold, and as it proved successful, attempt to beat against the westerly winds by the same route, which we had followed in the boats to the settlement at Woollya.
We did not see many natives until we were near Ponsonby Sound, where we were followed by ten or twelve canoes.
The natives did not at all understand the reason of our tacking, and, instead of meeting us at each tack, vainly strove to follow us in our zigzag course.
I was amused at finding what a difference the circumstance of being quite superior in force made, in the interest of beholding these savages.
While in the boats I got to hate the very sound of their voices, so much trouble did they give us.
The first and last word was "yammerschooner".
When, entering some quiet little cove, we have looked round and thought to pass a quiet night, the odious word "yammerschooner" has shrilly sounded from some gloomy nook, and then the little signal-smoke has curled up to spread the news far and wide.
On leaving some place we have said to each other, "Thank heaven, we have at last fairly left these wretches"!
when one more faint hallo from an all-powerful voice, heard at a prodigious distance, would reach our ears, and clearly could we distinguish--"yammerschooner".
But now, the more Fuegians the merrier; and very merry work it was.
Both parties laughing, wondering, gaping at each other; we pitying them, for giving us good fish and crabs for rags, etc.
; they grasping at the chance of finding people so foolish as to exchange such splendid ornaments for a good supper.
It was most amusing to see the undisguised smile of satisfaction with which one young woman with her face painted black, tied several bits of scarlet cloth round her head with rushes.
Her husband, who enjoyed the very universal privilege in this country of possessing two wives, evidently became jealous of all the attention paid to his young wife; and, after a consultation with his naked beauties, was paddled away by them.
Some of the Fuegians plainly showed that they had a fair notion of barter.
I gave one man a large nail (a most valuable present) without making any signs for a return; but he immediately picked out two fish, and handed them up on the point of his spear.
If any present was designed for one canoe, and it fell near another, it was invariably given to the right owner.
The Fuegian boy, whom Mr. Low had on board showed, by going into the most violent passion, that he quite understood the reproach of being called a liar, which in truth he was.
We were this time, as on all former occasions, much surprised at the little notice, or rather none whatever, which was taken of many things, the use of which must have been evident to the natives.
Simple circumstances--such as the beauty of scarlet cloth or blue beads, the absence of women, our care in washing ourselves,--excited their admiration far more than any grand or complicated object, such as our ship.
Bougainville has well remarked concerning these people, that they treat the "chefs d'oeuvre de l'industrie humaine, comme ils traitent les loix de la nature et ses phenomenes".
On the 5th of March, we anchored in a cove at Woollya, but we saw not a soul there.
We were alarmed at this, for the natives in Ponsonby Sound showed by gestures, that there had been fighting; and we afterwards heard that the dreaded Oens men had made a descent.
Soon a canoe, with a little flag flying, was seen approaching, with one of the men in it washing the paint off his face.
This man was poor Jemmy,--now a thin, haggard savage, with long disordered hair, and naked, except a bit of blanket round his waist.
We did not recognize him till he was close to us, for he was ashamed of himself, and turned his back to the ship.
We had left him plump, fat, clean, and well-dressed;--I never saw so complete and grievous a change.
As soon, however, as he was clothed, and the first flurry was over, things wore a good appearance.
He dined with Captain Fitz Roy, and ate his dinner as tidily as formerly.
He told us that he had "too much" (meaning enough) to eat, that he was not cold, that his relations were very good people, and that he did not wish to go back to England: in the evening we found out the cause of this great change in Jemmy's feelings, in
With his usual good feeling he brought two beautiful otter-skins for two of his best friends, and some spear-heads and arrows made with his own hands for the Captain.
He said he had built a canoe for himself, and he boasted that he could talk a little of his own language!
But it is a most singular fact, that he appears to have taught all his tribe some English: an old man spontaneously announced "Jemmy Button's wife".
Jemmy had lost all his property.
He told us that York Minster had built a large canoe, and with his wife Fuegia, [3] had several months since gone to his own country, and had taken farewell by an act of consummate villainy; he persuaded Jemmy and his mother to come with him, and then on
Jemmy went to sleep on shore, and in the morning returned, and remained on board till the ship got under way, which frightened his wife, who continued crying violently till he got into his canoe.
He returned loaded with valuable property.
Every soul on board was heartily sorry to shake hands with him for the last time.
I do not now doubt that he will be as happy as, perhaps happier than, if he had never left his own country.
Every one must sincerely hope that Captain Fitz Roy's noble hope may be fulfilled, of being rewarded for the many generous sacrifices which he made for these Fuegians, by some shipwrecked sailor being protected by the descendants of Jemmy Button and his
When Jemmy reached the shore, he lighted a signal fire, and the smoke curled up, bidding us a last and long farewell, as the ship stood on her course into the open sea.
The perfect equality among the individuals composing the Fuegian tribes must for a long time retard their civilization.
As we see those animals, whose instinct compels them to live in society and obey a chief, are most capable of improvement, so is it with the races of mankind.
Whether we look at it as a cause or a consequence, the more civilized always have the most artificial governments.
For instance, the inhabitants of Otaheite, who, when first discovered, were governed by hereditary kings, had arrived at a far higher grade than another branch of the same people, the New Zealanders,--who, although benefited by being compelled to turn
In Tierra del Fuego, until some chief shall arise with power sufficient to secure any acquired advantage, such as the domesticated animals, it seems scarcely possible that the political state of the country can be improved.
At present, even a piece of cloth given to one is torn into shreds and distributed; and no one individual becomes richer than another.
On the other hand, it is difficult to understand how a chief can arise till there is property of some sort by which he might manifest his superiority and increase his power.
I believe, in this extreme part of South America, man exists in a lower state of improvement than in any other part of the world.
The South Sea Islanders, of the two races inhabiting the Pacific, are comparatively civilized.
The Esquimau in his subterranean hut, enjoys some of the comforts of life, and in his canoe, when fully equipped, manifests much skill.
Some of the tribes of Southern Africa prowling about in search of roots, and living concealed on the wild and arid plains, are sufficiently wretched.
The Australian, in the simplicity of the arts of life, comes nearest the Fuegian: he can, however, boast of his boomerang, his spear and throwing-stick, his method of climbing trees, of tracking animals, and of hunting.
Although the Australian may be superior in acquirements, it by no means follows that he is likewise superior in mental capacity: indeed, from what I saw of the Fuegians when on board and from what I have read of the Australians, I should think the case was
[1] This substance, when dry, is tolerably compact, and of little specific gravity: Professor Ehrenberg has examined it: he states (Konig Akad.
der Wissen: Berlin, Feb.
1845) that it is composed of infusoria, including fourteen polygastrica, and four phytolitharia.
He says that they are all inhabitants of fresh-water; this is a beautiful example of the results obtainable through Professor Ehrenberg's microscopic researches; for Jemmy Button told me that it is always collected at the bottoms of mountain-brooks.
It is, moreover, a striking fact that in the geographical distribution of the infusoria, which are well known to have very wide ranges, that all the species in this substance, although brought from the extreme southern point of Tierra del Fuego, are old,
[2] One day, off the East coast of Tierra del Fuego, we saw a grand sight in several spermaceti whales jumping upright quite out of the water, with the exception of their tail-fins.
As they fell down sideways, they splashed the water high up, and the sound reverberated like a distant broadside.
[3] Captain Sulivan, who, since his voyage in the Beagle, has been employed on the survey of the Falkland Islands, heard from a sealer in (1842?
), that when in the western part of the Strait of Magellan, he was astonished by a native woman coming on board, who could talk some English.
Without doubt this was Fuega Basket.
She lived (I fear the term probably bears a double interpretation) some days on board.
CHAPTER XI STRAIT OF MAGELLAN.
--CLIMATE OF THE SOUTHERN COASTS Strait of Magellan--Port Famine--Ascent of Mount Tarn--Forests--Edible Fungus--Zoology--Great Sea-weed--Leave Tierra del Fuego--Climate--Fruit-trees and Productions of the Southern Coasts--Height of Snow-line on the
IN THE end of May, 1834, we entered for a second time the eastern mouth of the Strait of Magellan.
The country on both sides of this part of the Strait consists of nearly level plains, like those of Patagonia.
Cape Negro, a little within the second Narrows, may be considered as the point where the land begins to assume the marked features of Tierra del Fuego.
On the east coast, south of the Strait, broken park-like scenery in a like manner connects these two countries, which are opposed to each other in almost every feature.
It is truly surprising to find in a space of twenty miles such a change in the landscape.
If we take a rather greater distance, as between Port Famine and Gregory Bay, that is about sixty miles, the difference is still more wonderful.
At the former place, we have rounded mountains concealed by impervious forests, which are drenched with the rain, brought by an endless succession of gales; while at Cape Gregory, there is a clear and bright blue sky over the dry and sterile plains.
The atmospheric currents, [1] although rapid, turbulent, and unconfined by any apparent limits, yet seem to follow, like a river in its bed, a regularly determined course.
During our previous visit (in January), we had an interview at Cape Gregory with the famous so-called gigantic Patagonians, who gave us a cordial reception.
Their height appears greater than it really is, from their large guanaco mantles, their long flowing hair, and general figure: on an average, their height is about six feet, with some men taller and only a few shorter; and the women are also tall;
In features they strikingly resemble the more northern Indians whom I saw with Rosas, but they have a wilder and more formidable appearance: their faces were much painted with red and black, and one man was ringed and dotted with white like a Fuegian.
Captain Fitz Roy offered to take any three of them on board, and all seemed determined to be of the three.
It was long before we could clear the boat; at last we got on board with our three giants, who dined with the Captain, and behaved quite like gentlemen, helping themselves with knives, forks, and spoons: nothing was so much relished as sugar.
This tribe has had so much communication with sealers and whalers that most of the men can speak a little English and Spanish; and they are half civilized, and proportionally demoralized.
The next morning a large party went on shore, to barter for skins and ostrich-feathers; fire-arms being refused, tobacco was in greatest request, far more so than axes or tools.
The whole population of the toldos, men, women, and children, were arranged on a bank.
It was an amusing scene, and it was impossible not to like the so-called giants, they were so thoroughly good-humoured and unsuspecting: they asked us to come again.
They seem to like to have Europeans to live with them; and old Maria, an important woman in the tribe, once begged Mr. Low to leave any one of his sailors with them.
They spend the greater part of the year here; but in summer they hunt along the foot of the Cordillera: sometimes they travel as far as the Rio Negro 750 miles to the north.
They are well stocked with horses, each man having, according to Mr. Low, six or seven, and all the women, and even children, their one own horse.
In the time of Sarmiento (1580), these Indians had bows and arrows, now long since disused; they then also possessed some horses.
This is a very curious fact, showing the extraordinarily rapid multiplication of horses in South America.
The horse was first landed at Buenos Ayres in 1537, and the colony being then for a time deserted, the horse ran wild; [2] in 1580, only forty-three years afterwards, we hear of them at the Strait of Magellan!
Mr. Low informs me, that a neighbouring tribe of foot-Indians is now changing into horse-Indians: the tribe at Gregory Bay giving them their worn-out horses, and sending in winter a few of their best skilled men to hunt for them.
June 1st.
--We anchored in the fine bay of Port Famine.
It was now the beginning of winter, and I never saw a more cheerless prospect; the dusky woods, piebald with snow, could be only seen indistinctly, through a drizzling hazy atmosphere.
We were, however, lucky in getting two fine days.
On one of these, Mount Sarmiento, a distant mountain 6800 feet high, presented a very noble spectacle.
I was frequently surprised in the scenery of Tierra del Fuego, at the little apparent elevation of mountains really lofty.
I suspect it is owing to a cause which would not at first be imagined, namely, that the whole mass, from the summit to the water's edge, is generally in full view.
I remember having seen a mountain, first from the Beagle Channel, where the whole sweep from the summit to the base was full in view, and then from Ponsonby Sound across several successive ridges; and it was curious to observe in the latter case, as each
Before reaching Port Famine, two men were seen running along the shore and hailing the ship.
A boat was sent for them.
They turned out to be two sailors who had run away from a sealing-vessel, and had joined the Patagonians.
These Indians had treated them with their usual disinterested hospitality.
They had parted company through accident, and were then proceeding to Port Famine in hopes of finding some ship.
I dare say they were worthless vagabonds, but I never saw more miserable-looking ones.
They had been living for some days on mussel-shells and berries, and their tattered clothes had been burnt by sleeping so near their fires.
They had been exposed night and day, without any shelter, to the late incessant gales, with rain, sleet, and snow, and yet they were in good health.
During our stay at Port Famine, the Fuegians twice came and plagued us.
As there were many instruments, clothes, and men on shore, it was thought necessary to frighten them away.
The first time a few great guns were fired, when they were far distant.
It was most ludicrous to watch through a glass the Indians, as often as the shot struck the water, take up stones, and, as a bold defiance, throw them towards the ship, though about a mile and a half distant!
A boat was sent with orders to fire a few musket-shots wide of them.
The Fuegians hid themselves behind the trees, and for every discharge of the muskets they fired their arrows; all, however, fell short of the boat, and the officer as he pointed at them laughed.
This made the Fuegians frantic with passion, and they shook their mantles in vain rage.
At last, seeing the balls cut and strike the trees, they ran away, and we were left in peace and quietness.
During the former voyage the Fuegians were here very troublesome, and to frighten them a rocket was fired at night over their wigwams; it answered effectually, and one of the officers told me that the clamour first raised, and the barking of the dogs, was
The next morning not a single Fuegian was in the neighbourhood.
When the Beagle was here in the month of February, I started one morning at four o'clock to ascend Mount Tarn, which is 2600 feet high, and is the most elevated point in this immediate district.
We went in a boat to the foot of the mountain (but unluckily not to the best part), and then began our ascent.
The forest commences at the line of high-water mark, and during the first two hours I gave over all hopes of reaching the summit.
So thick was the wood, that it was necessary to have constant recourse to the compass; for every landmark, though in a mountainous country, was completely shut out.
In the deep ravines, the death-like scene of desolation exceeded all description; outside it was blowing a gale, but in these hollows, not even a breath of wind stirred the leaves of the tallest trees.
So gloomy, cold, and wet was every part, that not even the fungi, mosses, or ferns could flourish.
In the valleys it was scarcely possible to crawl along, they were so completely barricaded by great mouldering trunks, which had fallen down in every direction.
When passing over these natural bridges, one's course was often arrested by sinking knee deep into the rotten wood; at other times, when attempting to lean against a firm tree, one was startled by finding a mass of decayed matter ready to fall at the
We at last found ourselves among the stunted trees, and then soon reached the bare ridge, which conducted us to the summit.
Here was a view characteristic of Tierra del Fuego; irregular chains of hills, mottled with patches of snow, deep yellowish-green valleys, and arms of the sea intersecting the land in many directions.
The strong wind was piercingly cold, and the atmosphere rather hazy, so that we did not stay long on the top of the mountain.
Our descent was not quite so laborious as our ascent, for the weight of the body forced a passage, and all the slips and falls were in the right direction.
I have already mentioned the sombre and dull character of the evergreen forests, [3] in which two or three species of trees grow, to the exclusion of all others.
Above the forest land, there are many dwarf alpine plants, which all spring from the mass of peat, and help to compose it: these plants are very remarkable from their close alliance with the species growing on the mountains of Europe, though so many
The central part of Tierra del Fuego, where the clay-slate formation occurs, is most favourable to the growth of trees; on the outer coast the poorer granitic soil, and a situation more exposed to the violent winds, do not allow of their attaining any
Near Port Famine I have seen more large trees than anywhere else: I measured a Winter's Bark which was four feet six inches in girth, and several of the beech were as much as thirteen feet.
Captain King also mentions a beech which was seven feet in diameter, seventeen feet above the roots.
There is one vegetable production deserving notice from its importance as an article of food to the Fuegians.
It is a globular, bright-yellow fungus, which grows in vast numbers on the beech-trees.
When young it is elastic and turgid, with [picture] a smooth surface; but when mature it shrinks, becomes tougher, and has its entire surface deeply pitted or honey-combed, as represented in the accompanying woodcut.
This fungus belongs to a new and curious genus, [4] I found a second species on another species of beech in Chile: and Dr. Hooker informs me, that just lately a third species has been discovered on a third species of beech in Van Diernan's Land.
How singular is this relationship between parasitical fungi and the trees on which they grow, in distant parts of the world!
In Tierra del Fuego the fungus in its tough and mature state is collected in large quantities by the women and children, and is eaten un-cooked.
It has a mucilaginous, slightly sweet taste, with a faint smell like that of a mushroom.
With the exception of a few berries, chiefly of a dwarf arbutus, the natives eat no vegetable food besides this fungus.
In New Zealand, before the introduction of the potato, the roots of the fern were largely consumed; at the present time, I believe, Tierra del Fuego is the only country in the world where a cryptogamic plant affords a staple article of food.
The zoology of Tierra del Fuego, as might have been expected from the nature of its climate and vegetation, is very poor.
Of mammalia, besides whales and seals, there is one bat, a kind of mouse (Reithrodon chinchilloides), two true mice, a ctenomys allied to or identical with the tucutuco, two foxes (Canis Magellanicus and C. Azarae), a sea-otter, the guanaco, and a deer.
Most of these animals inhabit only the drier eastern parts of the country; and the deer has never been seen south of the Strait of Magellan.
Observing the general correspondence of the cliffs of soft sandstone, mud, and shingle, on the opposite sides of the Strait, and on some intervening islands, one is strongly tempted to believe that the land was once joined, and thus allowed animals so
The correspondence of the cliffs is far from proving any junction; because such cliffs generally are formed by the intersection of sloping deposits, which, before the elevation of the land, had been accumulated near the then existing shores.
It is, however, a remarkable coincidence, that in the two large islands cut off by the Beagle Channel from the rest of Tierra del Fuego, one has cliffs composed of matter that may be called stratified alluvium, which front similar ones on the opposite side
The gloomy woods are inhabited by few birds: occasionally the plaintive note of a white-tufted tyrant-flycatcher (Myiobius albiceps) may be heard, concealed near the summit of the most lofty trees; and more rarely the loud strange cry of a black
A little, dusky-coloured wren (Scytalopus Magellanicus) hops in a skulking manner among the entangled mass of the fallen and decaying trunks.
But the creeper (Oxyurus tupinieri) is the commonest bird in the country.
Throughout the beech forests, high up and low down, in the most gloomy, wet, and impenetrable ravines, it may be met with.
This little bird no doubt appears more numerous than it really is, from its habit of following with seeming curiosity any person who enters these silent woods: continually uttering a harsh twitter, it flutters from tree to tree, within a few feet of the
It is far from wishing for the modest concealment of the true creeper (Certhia familiaris); nor does it, like that bird, run up the trunks of trees, but industriously, after the manner of a willow-wren, hops about, and searches for insects on every twig
In the more open parts, three or four species of finches, a thrush, a starling (or Icterus), two Opetiorhynchi, and several hawks and owls occur.
The absence of any species whatever in the whole class of Reptiles, is a marked feature in the zoology of this country, as well as in that of the Falkland Islands.
I do not ground this statement merely on my own observation, but I heard it from the Spanish inhabitants of the latter place, and from Jemmy Button with regard to Tierra del Fuego.
On the banks of the Santa Cruz, in 50 degs.
south, I saw a frog; and it is not improbable that these animals, as well as lizards, may be found as far south as the Strait of Magellan, where the country retains the character of Patagonia; but within the damp and cold limit of Tierra del Fuego not one
That the climate would not have suited some of the orders, such as lizards, might have been foreseen; but with respect to frogs, this was not so obvious.
Beetles occur in very small numbers: it was long before I could believe that a country as large as Scotland, covered with vegetable productions and with a variety of stations, could be so unproductive.
The few which I found were alpine species (Harpalidae and Heteromidae) living under stones.
The vegetable-feeding Chrysomelidae, so eminently characteristic of the Tropics, are here almost entirely absent; [5] I saw very few flies, butterflies, or bees, and no crickets or Orthoptera.
In the pools of water I found but a few aquatic beetles, and not any fresh-water shells: Succinea at first appears an exception; but here it must be called a terrestrial shell, for it lives on the damp herbage far from the water.
Land-shells could be procured only in the same alpine situations with the beetles.
I have already contrasted the climate as well as the general appearance of Tierra del Fuego with that of Patagonia; and the difference is strongly exemplified in the entomology.
I do not believe they have one species in common; certainly the general character of the insects is widely different.
If we turn from the land to the sea, we shall find the latter as abundantly stocked with living creatures as the former is poorly so.
In all parts of the world a rocky and partially protected shore perhaps supports, in a given space, a greater number of individual animals than any other station.
There is one marine production which, from its importance, is worthy of a particular history.
It is the kelp, or Macrocystis pyrifera.
This plant grows on every rock from low-water mark to a great depth, both on the outer coast and within the channels.
[6] I believe, during the voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, not one rock near the surface was discovered which was not buoyed by this floating weed.
The good service it thus affords to vessels navigating near this stormy land is evident; and it certainly has saved many a one from being wrecked.
I know few things more surprising than to see this plant growing and flourishing amidst those great breakers of the western ocean, which no mass of rock, let it be ever so hard, can long resist.
The stem is round, slimy, and smooth, and seldom has a diameter of so much as an inch.
A few taken together are sufficiently strong to support the weight of the large loose stones, to which in the inland channels they grow attached; and yet some of these stones were so heavy that when drawn to the surface, they could scarcely be lifted into
Captain Cook, in his second voyage, says, that this plant at Kerguelen Land rises from a greater depth than twenty-four fathoms; "and as it does not grow in a perpendicular direction, but makes a very acute angle with the bottom, and much of it afterwards
I do not suppose the stem of any other plant attains so great a length as three hundred and sixty feet, as stated by Captain Cook.
Captain Fitz Roy, moreover, found it growing [7] up from the greater depth of forty-five fathoms.
The beds of this sea-weed, even when of not great breadth, make excellent natural floating breakwaters.
It is quite curious to see, in an exposed harbour, how soon the waves from the open sea, as they travel through the straggling stems, sink in height, and pass into smooth water.
The number of living creatures of all Orders, whose existence intimately depends on the kelp, is wonderful.
A great volume might be written, describing the inhabitants of one of these beds of sea-weed.
Almost all the leaves, excepting those that float on the surface, are so thickly incrusted with corallines as to be of a white colour.
We find exquisitely delicate structures, some inhabited by simple hydra-like polypi, others by more organized kinds, and beautiful compound Ascidiae.
On the leaves, also, various patelliform shells, Trochi, uncovered molluscs, and some bivalves are attached.
Innumerable crustacea frequent every part of the plant.
On shaking the great entangled roots, a pile of small fish, shells, cuttle-fish, crabs of all orders, sea-eggs, star-fish, beautiful Holuthuriae, Planariae, and crawling nereidous animals of a multitude of forms, all fall out together.
Often as I recurred to a branch of the kelp, I never failed to discover animals of new and curious structures.
In Chiloe, where the kelp does not thrive very well, the numerous shells, corallines, and crustacea are absent; but there yet remain a few of the Flustraceae, and some compound Ascidiae; the latter, however, are of different species from those in Tierra
I can only compare these great aquatic forests of the southern hemisphere with the terrestrial ones in the intertropical regions.
Yet if in any country a forest was destroyed, I do not believe nearly so many species of animals would perish as would here, from the destruction of the kelp.
Amidst the leaves of this plant numerous species of fish live, which nowhere else could find food or shelter; with their destruction the many cormorants and other fishing birds, the otters, seals, and porpoises, would soon perish also; and lastly, the
June 8th.
--We weighed anchor early in the morning and left Port Famine.
Captain Fitz Roy determined to leave the Strait of Magellan by the Magdalen Channel, which had not long been discovered.
Our course lay due south, down that gloomy passage which I have before alluded to as appearing to lead to another and worse world.
The wind was fair, but the atmosphere was very thick; so that we missed much curious scenery.
The dark ragged clouds were rapidly driven over the mountains, from their summits nearly down to their bases.
The glimpses which we caught through the dusky mass were highly interesting; jagged points, cones of snow, blue glaciers, strong outlines, marked on a lurid sky, were seen at different distances and heights.
In the midst of such scenery we anchored at Cape Turn, close to Mount Sarmiento, which was then hidden in the clouds.
At the base of the lofty and almost perpendicular sides of our little cove there was one deserted wigwam, and it alone reminded us that man sometimes wandered into these desolate regions.
But it would be difficult to imagine a scene where he seemed to have fewer claims or less authority.
The inanimate works of nature--rock, ice, snow, wind, and water--all warring with each other, yet combined against man--here reigned in absolute sovereignty.
June 9th.
--In the morning we were delighted by seeing the veil of mist gradually rise from Sarmiento, and display it to our view.
This mountain, which is one of the highest in Tierra del Fuego, has an altitude of 6800 feet.
Its base, for about an eighth of its total height, is clothed by dusky woods, and above this a field of snow extends to the summit.
These vast piles of snow, which never melt, and seem destined to last as long as the world holds together, present a noble and even sublime spectacle.
The outline of the mountain was admirably clear and defined.
Owing to the abundance of light reflected from the white and glittering surface, no shadows were cast on any part; and those lines which intersected the sky could alone be distinguished: hence the mass stood out in the boldest relief.
Several glaciers descended in a winding course from the upper great expanse of snow to the sea-coast: they may be likened to great frozen Niagaras; and perhaps these cataracts of blue ice are full as beautiful as the moving ones of water.
By night we reached the western part of the channel; but the water was so deep that no anchorage could be found.
We were in consequence obliged to stand off and on in this narrow arm of the sea, during a pitch-dark night of fourteen hours long.
June 10th.
--In the morning we made the best of our way into the open Pacific.
The western coast generally consists of low, rounded, quite barren hills of granite and greenstone.
Sir J. Narborough called one part South Desolation, because it is "so desolate a land to behold:" and well indeed might he say so.
Outside the main islands, there are numberless scattered rocks on which the long swell of the open ocean incessantly rages.
We passed out between the East and West Furies; and a little farther northward there are so many breakers that the sea is called the Milky Way.
One sight of such a coast is enough to make a landsman dream for a week about shipwrecks, peril, and death; and with this sight we bade farewell for ever to Tierra del Fuego.
The following discussion on the climate of the southern parts of the continent with relation to its productions, on the snow-line, on the extraordinarily low descent of the glaciers, and on the zone of perpetual congelation in the antarctic islands, may be
I shall, however, here give only an abstract, and must refer for details to the Thirteenth Chapter and the Appendix of the former edition of this work.
On the Climate and Productions of Tierra del Fuego and of the South-west Coast.
--The following table gives the mean temperature of Tierra del Fuego, the Falkland Islands, and, for comparison, that of Dublin:-- Summer Winter Mean of Summer Latitude Temp.
Temp.
and Winter --------------------------------------------------------------- Tierra del Fuego 53 38' S. 50 33.
08 41.
54 Falkland Islands 51 38' S. 51 -- -- Dublin 53 21' N. 59.
54 39.
2 49.
37 Hence we see that the central part of Tierra del Fuego is colder in winter, and no less than 9.
5 degs.
less hot in summer, than Dublin.
According to von Buch, the mean temperature of July (not the hottest month in the year) at Saltenfiord in Norway, is as high as 57.
8 degs.
, and this place is actually 13 degs.
nearer the pole than Port Famine!
[8] Inhospitable as this climate appears to our feelings evergreen trees flourish luxuriantly under it.
Humming-birds may be seen sucking the flowers, and parrots feeding on the seeds of the Winter's Bark, in lat.
55 degs.
S. I have already remarked to what a degree the sea swarms with living creatures; and the shells (such as the Patellae, Fissurellae, Chitons, and Barnacles), according to Mr. G. B. Sowerby, are of a much larger size and of a more vigorous growth, than the
A large Voluta is abundant in southern Tierra del Fuego and the Falkland Islands.
At Bahia Blanca, in lat.
39 degs.
S., the most abundant shells were three species of Oliva (one of large size), one or two Volutas, and a Terebra.
Now, these are amongst the best characterized tropical forms.
It is doubtful whether even one small species of Oliva exists on the southern shores of Europe, and there are no species of the two other genera.
If a geologist were to find in lat 39 degs.
on the coast of Portugal a bed containing numerous shells belonging to three species of Oliva, to a Voluta and Terebra, he would probably assert that the climate at the period of their existence must have been tropical; but judging from South America, such
The equable, humid, and windy climate of Tierra del Fuego extends, with only a small increase of heat, for many degrees along the west coast of the continent.
The forests for 600 miles northward of Cape Horn, have a very similar aspect.
As a proof of the equable climate, even for 300 or 400 miles still further northward, I may mention that in Chiloe (corresponding in latitude with the northern parts of Spain) the peach seldom produces fruit, whilst strawberries and apples thrive to
Even the crops of barley and wheat [9] are often brought into the houses to be dried and ripened.
At Valdivia (in the same latitude of 40 degs.
, with Madrid) grapes and figs ripen, but are not common; olives seldom ripen even partially, and oranges not at all.
These fruits, in corresponding latitudes in Europe, are well known to succeed to perfection; and even in this continent, at the Rio Negro, under nearly the same parallel with Valdivia, sweet potatoes (convolvulus) are cultivated; and grapes, figs, olives,
Although the humid and equable climate of Chiloe, and of the coast northward and southward of it, is so unfavourable to our fruits, yet the native forests, from lat.
45 to 38 degs.
, almost rival in luxuriance those of the glowing intertropical regions.
Stately trees of many kinds, with smooth and highly coloured barks, are loaded by parasitical monocotyledonous plants; large and elegant ferns are numerous, and arborescent grasses entwine the trees into one entangled mass to the height of thirty or forty
Palm-trees grow in lat 37 degs.
; an arborescent grass, very like a bamboo, in 40 degs.
; and another closely allied kind, of great length, but not erect, flourishes even as far south as 45 degs.
S. An equable climate, evidently due to the large area of sea compared with the land, seems to extend over the greater part of the southern hemisphere; and, as a consequence, the vegetation partakes of a semi-tropical character.
Tree-ferns thrive luxuriantly in Van Diemen's Land (lat.
45 degs.
), and I measured one trunk no less than six feet in circumference.
An arborescent fern was found by Forster in New Zealand in 46 degs.
, where orchideous plants are parasitical on the trees.
In the Auckland Islands, ferns, according to Dr. Dieffenbach [10] have trunks so thick and high that they may be almost called tree-ferns; and in these islands, and even as far south as lat.
55 degs.
in the Macquarrie Islands, parrots abound.
On the Height of the Snow-line, and on the Descent of the Glaciers in South America.
--For the detailed authorities for the following table, I must refer to the former edition:-- Height in feet Latitude of Snow-line Observer ---------------------------------------------------------------- Equatorial region; mean result 15,748 Humboldt.
Bolivia, lat.
16 to 18 degs.
S. 17,000 Pentland.
Central Chile, lat.
33 degs.
S. 14,500 - 15,000 Gillies, and the Author.
Chiloe, lat.
41 to 43 degs.
S. 6,000 Officers of the Beagle and the Author.
Tierra del Fuego, 54 degs.
S. 3,500 - 4,000 King.
As the height of the plane of perpetual snow seems chiefly to be determined by the extreme heat of the summer, rather than by the mean temperature of the year, we ought not to be surprised at its descent in the Strait of Magellan, where the summer is so
67 and 70 degs.
N., that is, about 14 degs.
nearer the pole, to meet with perpetual snow at this low level.
The difference in height, namely, about 9000 feet, between the snow-line on the Cordillera behind Chiloe (with its highest points ranging from only 5600 to 7500 feet) and in central Chile [11] (a distance of only 9 degs.
of latitude), is truly wonderful.
The land from the southward of Chiloe to near Concepcion (lat.
37 degs.
) is hidden by one dense forest dripping with moisture.
The sky is cloudy, and we have seen how badly the fruits of southern Europe succeed.
In central Chile, on the other hand, a little northward of Concepcion, the sky is generally clear, rain does not fall for the seven summer months, and southern European fruits succeed admirably; and even the sugar-cane has been cultivated.
[12] No doubt the plane of perpetual snow undergoes the above remarkable flexure of 9000 feet, unparalleled in other parts of the world, not far from the latitude of Concepcion, where the land ceases to be covered with forest-trees; for trees in South
The descent of glaciers to the sea must, I conceive, mainly depend (subject, of course, to a proper supply of snow in the upper region) on the lowness of the line of perpetual snow on steep mountains near the coast.
As the snow-line is so low in Tierra del Fuego, we might have expected that many of the glaciers would have reached the sea.
Nevertheless, I was astonished when I first saw a range, only from 3000 to 4000 feet in height, in the latitude of Cumberland, with every valley filled with streams of ice descending to the sea-coast.
Almost every arm of the sea, which penetrates to the interior higher chain, not only in Tierra del Fuego, but on the coast for 650 miles northwards, is terminated by "tremendous and astonishing glaciers," as described by one of the officers on the survey.
Great masses of ice frequently fall from these icy cliffs, and the crash reverberates like the broadside of a man-of-war through the lonely channels.
These falls, as noticed in the last chapter, produce great waves which break on the adjoining coasts.
It is known that earthquakes frequently cause masses of earth to fall from sea-cliffs: how terrific, then, would be the effect of a severe shock (and such occur here [13]) on a body like a glacier, already in motion, and traversed by fissures!
I can readily believe that the water would be fairly beaten back out of the deepest channel, and then, returning with an overwhelming force, would whirl about huge masses of rock like so much chaff.
In Eyre's Sound, in the latitude of Paris, there are immense glaciers, and yet the loftiest neighbouring mountain is only 6200 feet high.
In this Sound, about fifty icebergs were seen at one time floating outwards, and one of them must have been at least 168 feet in total height.
Some of the icebergs were loaded with blocks of no inconsiderable size, of granite and other rocks, different from the clay-slate of the surrounding mountains.
The glacier furthest from the pole, surveyed during the voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, is in lat.
46 degs.
50', in the Gulf of Penas.
It is 15 miles long, and in one part 7 broad and descends to the sea-coast.
But even a few miles northward of this glacier, in Laguna de San [picture] Rafael, some Spanish missionaries [14] encountered "many icebergs, some great, some small, and others middle-sized," in a narrow arm of the sea, on the 22nd of the month
In Europe, the most southern glacier which comes down to the sea is met with, according to Von Buch, on the coast of Norway, in lat.
67 degs.
Now, this is more than 20 degs.
of latitude, or 1230 miles, nearer the pole than the Laguna de San Rafael.
The position of the glaciers at this place and in the Gulf of Penas may be put even in a more striking point of view, for they descend to the sea-coast within 7.
5 degs.
of latitude, or 450 miles, of a harbour, where three species of Oliva, a Voluta, and a Terebra, are the commonest shells, within less than 9 degs.
from where palms grow, within 4.
5 degs.
of a region where the jaguar and puma range over the plains, less than 2.
5 degs.
from arborescent grasses, and (looking to the westward in the same hemisphere) less than 2 degs.
from orchideous parasites, and within a single degree of tree-ferns!
These facts are of high geological interest with respect to the climate of the northern hemisphere at the period when boulders were transported.
I will not here detail how simply the theory of icebergs being charged with fragments of rock, explain the origin and position of the gigantic boulders of eastern Tierra del Fuego, on the high plain of Santa Cruz, and on the island of Chiloe.
In Tierra del Fuego, the greater number of boulders lie on the lines of old sea-channels, now converted into dry valleys by the elevation of the land.
They are associated with a great unstratified formation of mud and sand, containing rounded and angular fragments of all sizes, which has originated [15] in the repeated ploughing up of the sea-bottom by the stranding of icebergs, and by the matter
Few geologists now doubt that those erratic boulders which lie near lofty mountains have been pushed forward by the glaciers themselves, and that those distant from mountains, and embedded in subaqueous deposits, have been conveyed thither either on
The connection between the transportal of boulders and the presence of ice in some form, is strikingly shown by their geographical distribution over the earth.
In South America they are not found further than 48 degs.
of latitude, measured from the southern pole; in North America it appears that the limit of their transportal extends to 53.
5 degs.
from the northern pole; but in Europe to not more than 40 degs.
of latitude, measured from the same point.
On the other hand, in the intertropical parts of America, Asia, and Africa, they have never been observed; nor at the Cape of Good Hope, nor in Australia.
[16] On the Climate and Productions of the Antarctic Islands.
--Considering the rankness of the vegetation in Tierra del Fuego, and on the coast northward of it, the condition of the islands south and south-west of America is truly surprising.
Sandwich Land, in the latitude of the north part of Scotland, was found by Cook, during the hottest month of the year, "covered many fathoms thick with everlasting snow;" and there seems to be scarcely any vegetation.
Georgia, an island 96 miles long and 10 broad, in the latitude of Yorkshire, "in the very height of summer, is in a manner wholly covered with frozen snow".
It can boast only of moss, some tufts of grass, and wild burnet; it has only one land-bird (Anthus correndera), yet Iceland, which is 10 degs.
nearer the pole, has, according to Mackenzie, fifteen land-birds.
The South Shetland Islands, in the same latitude as the southern half of Norway, possess only some lichens, moss, and a little grass; and Lieut.
Kendall [17] found the bay, in which he was at anchor, beginning to freeze at a period corresponding with our 8th of September.
The soil here consists of ice and volcanic ashes interstratified; and at a little depth beneath the surface it must remain perpetually congealed, for Lieut.
Kendall found the body of a foreign sailor which had long been buried, with the flesh and all the features perfectly preserved.
It is a singular fact, that on the two great continents in the northern hemisphere (but not in the broken land of Europe between them ), we have the zone of perpetually frozen under-soil in a low latitude--namely, in 56 degs.
in North America at the depth of three feet, [18] and in 62 degs.
in Siberia at the depth of twelve to fifteen feet--as the result of a directly opposite condition of things to those of the southern hemisphere.
On the northern continents, the winter is rendered excessively cold by the radiation from a large area of land into a clear sky, nor is it moderated by the warmth-bringing currents of the sea; the short summer, on the other hand, is hot.
In the Southern Ocean the winter is not so excessively cold, but the summer is far less hot, for the clouded sky seldom allows the sun to warm the ocean, itself a bad absorbent of heat: and hence the mean temperature of the year, which regulates the zone
It is evident that a rank vegetation, which does not so much require heat as it does protection from intense cold, would approach much nearer to this zone of perpetual congelation under the equable climate of the southern hemisphere, than under the extreme
The case of the sailor's body perfectly preserved in the icy soil of the South Shetland Islands (lat.
62 to 63 degs.
S.), in a rather lower latitude than that (lat.
64 degs.
N.) under which Pallas found the frozen rhinoceros in Siberia, is very interesting.
Although it is a fallacy, as I have endeavoured to show in a former chapter, to suppose that the larger quadrupeds require a luxuriant vegetation for their support, nevertheless it is important to find in the South Shetland Islands a frozen under-soil
The perfect preservation of the carcasses of the Siberian elephants and rhinoceroses is certainly one of the most wonderful facts in geology; but independently of the imagined difficulty of supplying them with food from the adjoining countries, the whole
The plains of Siberia, like those of the Pampas, appear to have been formed under the sea, into which rivers brought down the bodies of many animals; of the greater number of these, only the skeletons have been preserved, but of others the perfect carcass.
Now, it is known that in the shallow sea on the Arctic coast of America the bottom freezes, [19] and does not thaw in spring so soon as the surface of the land, moreover at greater depths, where the bottom of the sea does not freeze the mud a few feet
, as in the case on the land with the soil at the depth of a few feet.
At still greater depths, the temperature of the mud and water would probably not be low enough to preserve the flesh; and hence, carcasses drifted beyond the shallow parts near an Arctic coast, would have only their skeletons preserved: now in the extreme
On the other hand, a carcass washed by a flood into a shallow part of the Arctic Sea, would be preserved for an indefinite period, if it were soon afterwards covered with mud sufficiently thick to prevent the heat of the summer-water penetrating to it; and
Recapitulation.
--I will recapitulate the principal facts with regard to the climate, ice-action, and organic productions of the southern hemisphere, transposing the places in imagination to Europe, with which we are so much better acquainted.
Then, near Lisbon, the commonest sea-shells, namely, three species of Oliva, a Voluta, and a Terebra, would have a tropical character.
In the southern provinces of France, magnificent forests, intwined by arborescent grasses and with the trees loaded with parasitical plants, would hide the face of the land.
The puma and the jaguar would haunt the Pyrenees.
In the latitude of Mont Blanc, but on an island as far westward as Central North America, tree-ferns and parasitical Orchideae would thrive amidst the thick woods.
Even as far north as central Denmark, humming-birds would be seen fluttering about delicate flowers, and parrots feeding amidst the evergreen woods; and in the sea there, we should have a Voluta, and all the shells of large size and vigorous growth.
Nevertheless, on some islands only 360 miles northward of our new Cape Horn in Denmark, a carcass buried in the soil (or if washed into a shallow sea, and covered up with mud) would be preserved perpetually frozen.
If some bold navigator attempted to penetrate northward of these islands, he would run a thousand dangers amidst gigantic icebergs, on some of which he would see great blocks of rock borne far away from their original site.
Another island of large size in the latitude of southern Scotland, but twice as far to the west, would be "almost wholly covered with everlasting snow," and would have each bay terminated by ice-cliffs, whence great masses would be yearly detached: this
From our new Cape Horn in Denmark, a chain of mountains, scarcely half the height of the Alps, would run in a straight line due southward; and on its western flank every deep creek of the sea, or fiord, would end in "bold and astonishing glaciers".
These lonely channels would frequently reverberate with the falls of ice, and so often would great waves rush along their coasts; numerous icebergs, some as tall as cathedrals, and occasionally loaded with "no inconsiderable blocks of rock," would be
Lastly, some missionaries attempting to penetrate a long arm of the sea, would behold the not lofty surrounding mountains, sending down their many grand icy streams to the sea-coast, and their progress in the boats would be checked by the innumerable
[21] [1] The south-westerly breezes are generally very dry.
January 29th, being at anchor under Cape Gregory: a very hard gale from W. by S., clear sky with few cumuli; temperature 57 degs.
, dew-point 36 degs.
,--difference 21 degs.
On January 15th, at Port St. Julian: in the morning, light winds with much rain, followed by a very heavy squall with rain,--settled into heavy gale with large cumuli,--cleared up, blowing very strong from S.S.W. Temperature 60 degs.
, dew-point 42 degs.
,--difference 18 degs.
[2] Rengger, Natur.
der Saeugethiere von Paraguay.
S. 334.
[3] Captain Fitz Roy informs me that in April (our October), the leaves of those trees which grow near the base of the mountains change colour, but not those on the more elevated parts.
I remember having read some observations, showing that in England the leaves fall earlier in a warm and fine autumn than in a late and cold one, The change in the colour being here retarded in the more elevated, and therefore colder situations, must be
The trees of Tierra del Fuego during no part of the year entirely shed their leaves.
[4] Described from my specimens and notes by the Rev.
J. M. Berkeley, in the Linnean Transactions (vol.
xix.
p.
37), under the name of Cyttaria Darwinii; the Chilean species is the C. Berteroii.
This genus is allied to Bulgaria.
[5] I believe I must except one alpine Haltica, and a single specimen of a Melasoma.
Mr. Waterhouse informs me, that of the Harpalidae there are eight or nine species--the forms of the greater number being very peculiar; of Heteromera, four or five species; of Rhyncophora, six or seven; and of the following families one species in each:
The species in the other orders are even fewer.
In all the orders, the scarcity of the individuals is even more remarkable than that of the species.
Most of the Coleoptera have been carefully described by Mr. Waterhouse in the Annals of Nat.
Hist.
[6] Its geographical range is remarkably wide; it is found from the extreme southern islets near Cape Horn, as far north on the eastern coast (according to information given me by Mr. Stokes) as lat.
43 degs.
,--but on the western coast, as Dr. Hooker tells me, it extends to the R. San Francisco in California, and perhaps even to Kamtschatka.
We thus have an immense range in latitude; and as Cook, who must have been well acquainted with the species, found it at Kerguelen Land, no less than 140 degs.
in longitude.
[7] Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, vol.
i.
p.
363.
--It appears that sea-weed grows extremely quick.
--Mr. Stephenson found (Wilson's Voyage round Scotland, vol.
ii.
p.
228) that a rock uncovered only at spring-tides, which had been chiselled smooth in November, on the following May, that is, within six months afterwards, was thickly covered with Fucus digitatus two feet, and F. esculentus six feet, in length.
[8] With regard to Tierra del Fuego, the results are deduced from the observations of Capt.
King (Geographical Journal, 1830), and those taken on board the Beagle.
For the Falkland Islands, I am indebted to Capt.
Sulivan for the mean of the mean temperature (reduced from careful observations at midnight, 8 A.M., noon, and 8 P.M.) of the three hottest months, viz.
, December, January, and February.
The temperature of Dublin is taken from Barton.
[9] Agueros, Descrip.
Hist.
de la Prov.
de Chiloe, 1791, p.
94.
[10] See the German Translation of this Journal; and for the other facts, Mr. Brown's Appendix to Flinders's Voyage.
[11] On the Cordillera of central Chile, I believe the snow-line varies exceedingly in height in different summers.
I was assured that during one very dry and long summer, all the snow disappeared from Aconcagua, although it attains the prodigious height of 23,000 feet.
It is probable that much of the snow at these great heights is evaporated rather than thawed.
[12] Miers's Chile, vol.
i.
p.
415.
It is said that the sugar-cane grew at Ingenio, lat.
32 to 33 degs.
, but not in sufficient quantity to make the manufacture profitable.
In the valley of Quillota, south of Ingenio, I saw some large date palm trees.
[13] Bulkeley's and Cummin's Faithful Narrative of the Loss of the Wager.
The earthquake happened August 25, 1741.
[14] Agueros, Desc.
Hist.
de Chiloe, p.
227.
[15] Geological Transactions, vol.
vi.
p.
415.
[16] I have given details (the first, I believe, published) on this subject in the first edition, and in the Appendix to it.
I have there shown that the apparent exceptions to the absence of erratic boulders in certain countries, are due to erroneous observations; several statements there given I have since found confirmed by various authors.
[17] Geographical Journal, 1830, pp.
65, 66.
[18] Richardson's Append.
to Back's Exped.
, and Humboldt's Fragm.
Asiat.
, tom.
ii.
p.
386.
[19] Messrs.
Dease and Simpson, in Geograph.
Journ.
, vol.
viii.
pp.
218 and 220.
[20] Cuvier (Ossemens Fossiles, tom.
i.
p.
151), from Billing's Voyage.
[21] In the former edition and Appendix, I have given some facts on the transportal of erratic boulders and icebergs in the Atlantic Ocean.
This subject has lately been treated excellently by Mr. Hayes, in the Boston Journal (vol.
iv.
p.
426).
The author does not appear aware of a case published by me (Geographical Journal, vol.
ix.
p.
528) of a gigantic boulder embedded in an iceberg in the Antarctic Ocean, almost certainly one hundred miles distant from any land, and perhaps much more distant.
In the Appendix I have discussed at length the probability (at that time hardly thought of) of icebergs, when stranded, grooving and polishing rocks, like glaciers.
This is now a very commonly received opinion; and I cannot still avoid the suspicion that it is applicable even to such cases as that of the Jura.
Dr. Richardson has assured me that the icebergs off North America push before them pebbles and sand, and leave the submarine rocky flats quite bare; it is hardly possible to doubt that such ledges must be polished and scored in the direction of the set of
Since writing that Appendix, I have seen in North Wales (London Phil.
Mag.
, vol.
xxi.
p.
180) the adjoining action of glaciers and floating icebergs.
CHAPTER XII CENTRAL CHILE Valparaiso--Excursion to the Foot of the Andes--Structure of the Land--Ascend the Bell of Quillota--Shattered Masses of Greenstone--Immense Valleys--Mines--State of Miners--Santiago--Hot-baths of
JULY 23rd.
--The Beagle anchored late at night in the bay of Valparaiso, the chief seaport of Chile.
When morning came, everything appeared delightful.
After Tierra del Fuego, the climate felt quite delicious--the atmosphere so dry, and the heavens so clear and blue with the sun shining brightly, that all nature seemed sparkling with life.
The view from the anchorage is very pretty.
The town is built at the very foot of a range of hills, about 1600 feet high, and rather steep.
From its position, it consists of one long, straggling street, which runs parallel to the beach, and wherever a ravine comes down, the houses are piled up on each side of it.
The rounded hills, being only partially protected by a very scanty vegetation, are worn into numberless little gullies, which expose a singularly bright red soil.
From this cause, and from the low whitewashed houses with tile roofs, the view reminded me of St. Cruz in Teneriffe.
In a north-westerly direction there are some fine glimpses of the Andes: but these mountains appear much grander when viewed from the neighbouring hills: the great distance at which they are situated can then more readily be perceived.
The volcano of Aconcagua is particularly magnificent.
This huge and irregularly conical mass has an elevation greater than that of Chimborazo; for, from measurements made by the officers in the Beagle, its height is no less than 23,000 feet.
The Cordillera, however, viewed from this point, owe the greater part of their beauty to the atmosphere through which they are seen.
When the sun was setting in the Pacific, it was admirable to watch how clearly their rugged outlines could be distinguished, yet how varied and how delicate were the shades of their colour.
I had the good fortune to find living here Mr. Richard Corfield, an old schoolfellow and friend, to whose hospitality and kindness I was greatly indebted, in having afforded me a most pleasant residence during the Beagle's stay in Chile.
The immediate neighbourhood of Valparaiso is not very productive to the naturalist.
During the long summer the wind blows steadily from the southward, and a little off shore, so that rain never falls; during the three winter months, however, it is sufficiently abundant.
The vegetation in consequence is very scanty: except in some deep valleys, there are no trees, and only a little grass and a few low bushes are scattered over the less steep parts of the hills.
When we reflect, that at the distance of 350 miles to the south, this side of the Andes is completely hidden by one impenetrable forest, the contrast is very remarkable.
I took several long walks while collecting objects of natural history.
The country is pleasant for exercise.
There are many very beautiful flowers; and, as in most other dry climates, the plants and shrubs possess strong and peculiar odours--even one's clothes by brushing through them became scented.
I did not cease from wonder at finding each succeeding day as fine as the foregoing.
What a difference does climate make in the enjoyment of life!
How opposite are the sensations when viewing black mountains half enveloped in clouds, and seeing another range through the light blue haze of a fine day!
The one for a time may be very sublime; the other is all gaiety and happy life.
August 14th.
--I set out on a riding excursion, for the purpose of geologizing the basal parts of the Andes, which alone at this time of the year are not shut up by the winter snow.
Our first day's ride was northward along the sea-coast.
After dark we reached the Hacienda of Quintero, the estate which formerly belonged to Lord Cochrane.
My object in coming here was to see the great beds of shells, which stand some yards above the level of the sea, and are burnt for lime.
The proofs of the elevation of this whole line of coast are unequivocal: at the height of a few hundred feet old-looking shells are numerous, and I found some at 1300 feet.
These shells either lie loose on the surface, or are embedded in a reddish-black vegetable mould.
I was much surprised to find under the microscope that this vegetable mould is really marine mud, full of minute particles of organic bodies.
15th.
--We returned towards the valley of Quillota.
The country was exceedingly pleasant; just such as poets would call pastoral: green open lawns, separated by small valleys with rivulets, and the cottages, we may suppose of the shepherds scattered on the hill-sides.
We were obliged to cross the ridge of the Chilicauquen.
At its base there were many fine evergreen forest-trees, but these flourished only in the ravines, where there was running water.
Any person who had seen only the country near Valparaiso, would never have imagined that there had been such picturesque spots in Chile.
As soon as we reached the brow of the Sierra, the valley of Quillota was immediately under our feet.
The prospect was one of remarkable artificial luxuriance.
The valley is very broad and quite flat, and is thus easily irrigated in all parts.
The little square gardens are crowded with orange and olive trees, and every sort of vegetable.
On each side huge bare mountains rise, and this from the contrast renders the patchwork valley the more pleasing.
Whoever called "Valparaiso" the "Valley of Paradise," must have been thinking of Quillota.
We crossed over to the Hacienda de San Isidro, situated at the very foot of the Bell Mountain.
Chile, as may be seen in the maps, is a narrow strip of land between the Cordillera and the Pacific; and this strip is itself traversed by several mountain-lines, which in this part run parallel to the great range.
Between these outer lines and the main Cordillera, a succession of level basins, generally opening into each other by narrow passages, extend far to the southward: in these, the principal towns are situated, as San Felipe, Santiago, San Fernando.
These basins or plains, together with the transverse flat valleys (like that of Quillota) which connect them with the coast, I have no doubt are the bottoms of ancient inlets and deep bays, such as at the present day intersect every part of Tierra del
Chile must formerly have resembled the latter country in the configuration of its land and water.
The resemblance was occasionally shown strikingly when a level fog-bank covered, as with a mantle, all the lower parts of the country: the white vapour curling into the ravines, beautifully represented little coves and bays; and here and there a solitary
The contrast of these flat valleys and basins with the irregular mountains, gave the scenery a character which to me was new and very interesting.
From the natural slope to seaward of these plains, they are very easily irrigated, and in consequence singularly fertile.
Without this process the land would produce scarcely anything, for during the whole summer the sky is cloudless.
The mountains and hills are dotted over with bushes and low trees, and excepting these the vegetation is very scanty.
Each landowner in the valley possesses a certain portion of hill-country, where his half-wild cattle, in considerable numbers, manage to find sufficient pasture.
Once every year there is a grand "rodeo," when all the cattle are driven down, counted, and marked, and a certain number separated to be fattened in the irrigated fields.
Wheat is extensively cultivated, and a good deal of Indian corn: a kind of bean is, however, the staple article of food for the common labourers.
The orchards produce an overflowing abundance of peaches figs, and grapes.
With all these advantages, the inhabitants of the country ought to be much more prosperous than they are.
16th.
--The mayor-domo of the Hacienda was good enough to give me a guide and fresh horses; and in the morning we set out to ascend the Campana, or Bell Mountain, which is 6400 feet high.
The paths were very bad, but both the geology and scenery amply repaid the trouble.
We reached by the evening, a spring called the Agua del Guanaco, which is situated at a great height.
This must be an old name, for it is very many years since a guanaco drank its waters.
During the ascent I noticed that nothing but bushes grew on the northern slope, whilst on the southern slope there was a bamboo about fifteen feet high.
In a few places there were palms, and I was surprised to see one at an elevation of at least 4500 feet.
These palms are, for their family, ugly trees.
Their stem is very large, and of a curious form, being thicker in the middle than at the base or top.
They are excessively numerous in some parts of Chile, and valuable on account of a sort of treacle made from the sap.
On one estate near Petorca they tried to count them, but failed, after having numbered several hundred thousand.
Every year in the early spring, in August, very many are cut down, and when the trunk is lying on the ground, the crown of leaves is lopped off.
The sap then immediately begins to flow from the upper end, and continues so doing for some months: it is, however, necessary that a thin slice should be shaved off from that end every morning, so as to expose a fresh surface.
A good tree will give ninety gallons, and all this must have been contained in the vessels of the apparently dry trunk.
It is said that the sap flows much more quickly on those days when the sun is powerful; and likewise, that it is absolutely necessary to take care, in cutting down the tree, that it should fall with its head upwards on the side of the hill; for if it falls
The sap is concentrated by boiling, and is then called treacle, which it very much resembles in taste.
We unsaddled our horses near the spring, and prepared to pass the night.
The evening was fine, and the atmosphere so clear, that the masts of the vessels at anchor in the bay of Valparaiso, although no less than twenty-six geographical miles distant, could be distinguished clearly as little black streaks.
A ship doubling the point under sail, appeared as a bright white speck.
Anson expresses much surprise, in his voyage, at the distance at which his vessels were discovered from the coast; but he did not sufficiently allow for the height of the land, and the great transparency of the air.
The setting of the sun was glorious; the valleys being black whilst the snowy peaks of the Andes yet retained a ruby tint.
When it was dark, we made a fire beneath a little arbour of bamboos, fried our charqui (or dried slips of beef), took our mate, and were quite comfortable.
There is an inexpressible charm in thus living in the open air.
The evening was calm and still;--the shrill noise of the mountain bizcacha, and the faint cry of a goatsucker, were occasionally to be heard.
Besides these, few birds, or even insects, frequent these dry, parched mountains.
August 17th.
--In the morning we climbed up the rough mass of greenstone which crowns the summit.
This rock, as frequently happens, was much shattered and broken into huge angular fragments.
I observed, however, one remarkable circumstance, namely, that many of the surfaces presented every degree of freshness some appearing as if broken the day before, whilst on others lichens had either just become, or had long grown, attached.
I so fully believed that this was owing to the frequent earthquakes, that I felt inclined to hurry from below each loose pile.
As one might very easily be deceived in a fact of this kind, I doubted its accuracy, until ascending Mount Wellington, in Van Diemen's Land, where earthquakes do not occur; and there I saw the summit of the mountain similarly composed and similarly
We spent the day on the summit, and I never enjoyed one more thoroughly.
Chile, bounded by the Andes and the Pacific, was seen as in a map.
The pleasure from the scenery, in itself beautiful, was heightened by the many reflections which arose from the mere view of the Campana range with its lesser parallel ones, and of the broad valley of Quillota directly intersecting them.
Who can avoid wondering at the force which has upheaved these mountains, and even more so at the countless ages which it must have required to have broken through, removed, and levelled whole masses of them?
It is well in this case to call to mind the vast shingle and sedimentary beds of Patagonia, which, if heaped on the Cordillera, would increase its height by so many thousand feet.
When in that country, I wondered how any mountain-chain could have supplied such masses, and not have been utterly obliterated.
We must not now reverse the wonder, and doubt whether all-powerful time can grind down mountains--even the gigantic Cordillera--into-gravel and mud.
The appearance of the Andes was different from that which I had expected.
The lower line of the snow was of course horizontal, and to this line the even summits of the range seemed quite parallel.
Only at long intervals, a group of points or a single cone showed where a volcano had existed, or does now exist.
Hence the range resembled a great solid wall, surmounted here and there by a tower, and making a most perfect barrier to the country.
Almost every part of the hill had been drilled by attempts to open gold-mines: the rage for mining has left scarcely a spot in Chile unexamined.
I spent the evening as before, talking round the fire with my two companions.
The Guasos of Chile, who correspond to the Gauchos of the Pampas, are, however, a very different set of beings.
Chile is the more civilized of the two countries, and the inhabitants, in consequence, have lost much individual character.
Gradations in rank are much more strongly marked: the Guaso does not by any means consider every man his equal; and I was quite surprised to find that my companions did not like to eat at the same time with myself.
This feeling of inequality is a necessary consequence of the existence of an aristocracy of wealth.
It is said that some few of the greater landowners possess from five to ten thousand pounds sterling per annum: an inequality of riches which I believe is not met with in any of the cattle-breeding countries eastward of the Andes.
A traveller does not here meet that unbounded hospitality which refuses all payment, but yet is so kindly offered that no scruples can be raised in accepting it.
Almost every house in Chile will receive you for the night, but a trifle is expected to be given in the morning; even a rich man will accept two or three shillings.
The Gaucho, although he may be a cutthroat, is a gentleman; the Guaso is in few respects better, but at the same time a vulgar, ordinary fellow.
The two men, although employed much in the same manner, are different in their habits and attire; and the peculiarities of each are universal in their respective countries.
The Gaucho seems part of his horse, and scorns to exert himself except when on his back: the Guaso may be hired to work as a labourer in the fields.
The former lives entirely on animal food; the latter almost wholly on vegetable.
We do not here see the white boots, the broad drawers and scarlet chilipa; the picturesque costume of the Pampas.
Here, common trousers are protected by black and green worsted leggings.
The poncho, however, is common to both.
The chief pride of the Guaso lies in his spurs, which are absurdly large.
I measured one which was six inches in the _diameter_ of the rowel, and the rowel itself contained upwards of thirty points.
The stirrups are on the same scale, each consisting of a square, carved block of wood, hollowed out, yet weighing three or four pounds.
The Guaso is perhaps more expert with the lazo than the Gaucho; but, from the nature of the country, he does not know the use of the bolas.
August 18th.
--We descended the mountain, and passed some beautiful little spots, with rivulets and fine trees.
Having slept at the same hacienda as before, we rode during the two succeeding days up the valley, and passed through Quillota, which is more like a collection of nursery-gardens than a town.
The orchards were beautiful, presenting one mass of peach-blossoms.
I saw, also, in one or two places the date-palm; it is a most stately tree; and I should think a group of them in their native Asiatic or African deserts must be superb.
We passed likewise San Felipe, a pretty straggling town like Quillota.
The valley in this part expands into one of those great bays or plains, reaching to the foot of the Cordillera, which have been mentioned as forming so curious a part of the scenery of Chile.
In the evening we reached the mines of Jajuel, situated in a ravine at the flank of the great chain.
I stayed here five days.
My host the superintendent of the mine, was a shrewd but rather ignorant Cornish miner.
He had married a Spanish woman, and did not mean to return home; but his admiration for the mines of Cornwall remained unbounded.
Amongst many other questions, he asked me, "Now that George Rex is dead, how many more of the family of Rexes are yet alive"?
This Rex certainly must be a relation of the great author Finis, who wrote all books!
These mines are of copper, and the ore is all shipped to Swansea, to be smelted.
Hence the mines have an aspect singularly quiet, as compared to those in England: here no smoke, furnaces, or great steam-engines, disturb the solitude of the surrounding mountains.
The Chilian government, or rather the old Spanish law, encourages by every method the searching for mines.
The discoverer may work a mine on any ground, by paying five shillings; and before paying this he may try, even in the garden of another man, for twenty days.
It is now well known that the Chilian method of mining is the cheapest.
My host says that the two principal improvements introduced by foreigners have been, first, reducing by previous roasting the copper pyrites--which, being the common ore in Cornwall, the English miners were astounded on their arrival to find thrown away as
I have actually seen mules carrying to the coast, for transportation to England, a cargo of such cinders.
But the first case is much the most curious.
The Chilian miners were so convinced that copper pyrites contained not a particle of copper, that they laughed at the Englishmen for their ignorance, who laughed in turn, and bought their richest veins for a few dollars.
It is very odd that, in a country where mining had been extensively carried on for many years, so simple a process as gently roasting the ore to expel the sulphur previous to smelting it, had never been discovered.
A few improvements have likewise been introduced in some of the simple machinery; but even to the present day, water is removed from some mines by men carrying it up the shaft in leathern bags!
The labouring men work very hard.
They have little time allowed for their meals, and during summer and winter they begin when it is light, and leave off at dark.
They are paid one pound sterling a month, and their food is given them: this for breakfast consists of sixteen figs and two small loaves of bread; for dinner, boiled beans; for supper, broken roasted wheat grain.
They scarcely ever taste meat; as, with the twelve pounds per annum, they have to clothe themselves, and support their families.
The miners who work in the mine itself have twenty-five shillings per month, and are allowed a little charqui.
But these men come down from their bleak habitations only once in every fortnight or three weeks.
During my stay here I thoroughly enjoyed scrambling about these huge mountains.
The geology, as might have been expected, was very interesting.
The shattered and baked rocks, traversed by innumerable dykes of greenstone, showed what commotions had formerly taken place.
The scenery was much the same as that near the Bell of Quillota--dry barren mountains, dotted at intervals by bushes with a scanty foliage.
The cactuses, or rather opuntias were here very numerous.
I measured one of a spherical figure, which, including the spines, was six feet and four inches in circumference.
The height of the common cylindrical, branching kind, is from twelve to fifteen feet, and the girth (with spines) of the branches between three and four feet.
A heavy fall of snow on the mountains prevented me during the last two days, from making some interesting excursions.
I attempted to reach a lake which the inhabitants, from some unaccountable reason, believe to be an arm of the sea.
During a very dry season, it was proposed to attempt cutting a channel from it for the sake of the water, but the padre, after a consultation, declared it was too dangerous, as all Chile would be inundated, if, as generally supposed, the lake was connected
We ascended to a great height, but becoming involved in the snow-drifts failed in reaching this wonderful lake, and had some difficulty in returning.
I thought we should have lost our horses; for there was no means of guessing how deep the drifts were, and the animals, when led, could only move by jumping.
The black sky showed that a fresh snow-storm was gathering, and we therefore were not a little glad when we escaped.
By the time we reached the base the storm commenced, and it was lucky for us that this did not happen three hours earlier in the day.
August 26th.
--We left Jajuel and again crossed the basin of San Felipe.
The day was truly Chilian: glaringly bright, and the atmosphere quite clear.
The thick and uniform covering of newly fallen snow rendered the view of the volcano of Aconcagua and the main chain quite glorious.
We were now on the road to Santiago, the capital of Chile.
We crossed the Cerro del Talguen, and slept at a little rancho.
The host, talking about the state of Chile as compared to other countries, was very humble: "Some see with two eyes, and some with one, but for my part I do not think that Chile sees with any".
August 27th.
--After crossing many low hills we descended into the small land-locked plain of Guitron.
In the basins, such as this one, which are elevated from one thousand to two thousand feet above the sea, two species of acacia, which are stunted in their forms, and stand wide apart from each other, grow in large numbers.
These trees are never found near the sea-coast; and this gives another characteristic feature to the scenery of these basins.
We crossed a low ridge which separates Guitron from the great plain on which Santiago stands.
The view was here pre-eminently striking: the dead level surface, covered in parts by woods of acacia, and with the city in the distance, abutting horizontally against the base of the Andes, whose snowy peaks were bright with the evening sun.
At the first glance of this view, it was quite evident that the plain represented the extent of a former inland sea.
As soon as we gained the level road we pushed our horses into a gallop, and reached the city before it was dark.
I stayed a week in Santiago, and enjoyed myself very much.
In the morning I rode to various places on the plain, and in the evening dined with several of the English merchants, whose hospitality at this place is well known.
A never-failing source of pleasure was to ascend the little hillock of rock (St. Lucia) which projects in the middle of the city.
The scenery certainly is most striking, and, as I have said, very peculiar.
I am informed that this same character is common to the cities on the great Mexican platform.
Of the town I have nothing to say in detail: it is not so fine or so large as Buenos Ayres, but is built after the same model.
I arrived here by a circuit to the north; so I resolved to return to Valparaiso by a rather longer excursion to the south of the direct road.
September 5th.
--By the middle of the day we arrived at one of the suspension bridges, made of hide, which cross the Maypu, a large turbulent river a few leagues southward of Santiago.
These bridges are very poor affairs.
The road, following the curvature of the suspending ropes, is made of bundles of sticks placed close together.
It was full of holes, and oscillated rather fearfully, even with the weight of a man leading his horse.
In the evening we reached a comfortable farm-house, where there were several very pretty senoritas.
They were much horrified at my having entered one of their churches out of mere curiosity.
They asked me, "Why do you not become a Christian--for our religion is certain"?
I assured them I was a sort of Christian; but they would not hear of it--appealing to my own words, "Do not your padres, your very bishops, marry"?
The absurdity of a bishop having a wife particularly struck them: they scarcely knew whether to be most amused or horror-struck at such an enormity.
6th.
--We proceeded due south, and slept at Rancagua.
The road passed over the level but narrow plain, bounded on one side by lofty hills, and on the other by the Cordillera.
The next day we turned up the valley of the Rio Cachapual, in which the hot-baths of Cauquenes, long celebrated for their medicinal properties, are situated.
The suspension bridges, in the less frequented parts, are generally taken down during the winter when the rivers are low.
Such was the case in this valley, and we were therefore obliged to cross the stream on horseback.
This is rather disagreeable, for the foaming water, though not deep, rushes so quickly over the bed of large rounded stones, that one's head becomes quite confused, and it is difficult even to perceive whether the horse is moving onward or standing still.
In summer, when the snow melts, the torrents are quite impassable; their strength and fury are then extremely great, as might be plainly seen by the marks which they had left.
We reached the baths in the evening, and stayed there five days, being confined the two last by heavy rain.
The buildings consist of a square of miserable little hovels, each with a single table and bench.
They are situated in a narrow deep valley just without the central Cordillera.
It is a quiet, solitary spot, with a good deal of wild beauty.
The mineral springs of Cauquenes burst forth on a line of dislocation, crossing a mass of stratified rock, the whole of which betrays the action of heat.
A considerable quantity of gas is continually escaping from the same orifices with the water.
Though the springs are only a few yards apart, they have very different temperature; and this appears to be the result of an unequal mixture of cold water: for those with the lowest temperature have scarcely any mineral taste.
After the great earthquake of 1822 the springs ceased, and the water did not return for nearly a year.
They were also much affected by the earthquake of 1835; the temperature being suddenly changed from 118 to 92 degs.
[1] It seems probable that mineral waters rising deep from the bowels of the earth, would always be more deranged by subterranean disturbances than those nearer the surface.
The man who had charge of the baths assured me that in summer the water is hotter and more plentiful than in winter.
The former circumstance I should have expected, from the less mixture, during the dry season, of cold water; but the latter statement appears very strange and contradictory.
The periodical increase during the summer, when rain never falls, can, I think, only be accounted for by the melting of the snow: yet the mountains which are covered by snow during that season, are three or four leagues distant from the springs.
I have no reason to doubt the accuracy of my informer, who, having lived on the spot for several years, ought to be well acquainted with the circumstance,--which, if true, certainly is very curious: for we must suppose that the snow-water, being conducted
One day I rode up the valley to the farthest inhabited spot.
Shortly above that point, the Cachapual divides into two deep tremendous ravines, which penetrate directly into the great range.
I scrambled up a peaked mountain, probably more than six thousand feet high.
Here, as indeed everywhere else, scenes of the highest interest presented themselves.
It was by one of these ravines, that Pincheira entered Chile and ravaged the neighbouring country.
This is the same man whose attack on an estancia at the Rio Negro I have described.
He was a renegade half-caste Spaniard, who collected a great body of Indians together and established himself by a stream in the Pampas, which place none of the forces sent after him could ever discover.
From this point he used to sally forth, and crossing the Cordillera by passes hitherto unattempted, he ravaged the farm-houses and drove the cattle to his secret rendezvous.
Pincheira was a capital horseman, and he made all around him equally good, for he invariably shot any one who hesitated to follow him.
It was against this man, and other wandering Indian tribes, that Rosas waged the war of extermination.
September 13th.
--We left the baths of Cauquenes, and, rejoining the main road, slept at the Rio Clara.
From this place we rode to the town of San Fernando.
Before arriving there, the last land-locked basin had expanded into a great plain, which extended so far to the south, that the snowy summits of the more distant Andes were seen as if above the horizon of the sea.
San Fernando is forty leagues from Santiago; and it was my farthest point southward; for we here turned at right angles towards the coast.
We slept at the gold-mines of Yaquil, which are worked by Mr. Nixon, an American gentleman, to whose kindness I was much indebted during the four days I stayed at his house.
The next morning we rode to the mines, which are situated at the distance of some leagues, near the summit of a lofty hill.
On the way we had a glimpse of the lake Tagua-tagua, celebrated for its floating islands, which have been described by M. Gay.
[2] They are composed of the stalks of various dead plants intertwined together, and on the surface of which other living ones take root.
Their form is generally circular, and their thickness from four to six feet, of which the greater part is immersed in the water.
As the wind blows, they pass from one side of the lake to the other, and often carry cattle and horses as passengers.
When we arrived at the mine, I was struck by the pale appearance of many of the men, and inquired from Mr. Nixon respecting their condition.
The mine is 450 feet deep, and each man brings up about 200 pounds weight of stone.
With this load they have to climb up the alternate notches cut in the trunks of trees, placed in a zigzag line up the shaft.
Even beardless young men, eighteen and twenty years old, with little muscular development of their bodies (they are quite naked excepting drawers) ascend with this great load from nearly the same depth.
A strong man, who is not accustomed to this labour, perspires most profusely, with merely carrying up his own body.
With this very severe labour, they live entirely on boiled beans and bread.
They would prefer having bread alone; but their masters, finding that they cannot work so hard upon this, treat them like horses, and make them eat the beans.
Their pay is here rather more than at the mines of Jajuel, being from 24 to 28 shillings per month.
They leave the mine only once in three weeks; when they stay with their families for two days.
One of the rules of this mine sounds very harsh, but answers pretty well for the master.
The only method of stealing gold is to secrete pieces of the ore, and take them out as occasion may offer.
Whenever the major-domo finds a lump thus hidden, its full value is stopped out of the wages of all the men; who thus, without they all combine, are obliged to keep watch over each other.
When the ore is brought to the mill, it is ground into an impalpable powder; the process of washing removes all the lighter particles, and amalgamation finally secures the gold-dust.
The washing, when described, sounds a very simple process; but it is beautiful to see how the exact adaptation of the current of water to the specific gravity of the gold, so easily separates the powdered matrix from the metal.
The mud which passes from the mills is collected into pools, where it subsides, and every now and then is cleared out, and thrown into a common heap.
A great deal of chemical action then commences, salts of various kinds effloresce on the surface, and the mass becomes hard.
After having been left for a year or two, and then rewashed, it yields gold; and this process may be repeated even six or seven times; but the gold each time becomes less in quantity, and the intervals required (as the inhabitants say, to generate the
There can be no doubt that the chemical action, already mentioned, each time liberates fresh gold from some combination.
The discovery of a method to effect this before the first grinding would without doubt raise the value of gold-ores many fold.
It is curious to find how the minute particles of gold, being scattered about and not corroding, at last accumulate in some quantity.
A short time since a few miners, being out of work, obtained permission to scrape the ground round the house and mills; they washed the earth thus got together, and so procured thirty dollars' worth of gold.
This is an exact counterpart of what takes place in nature.
Mountains suffer degradation and wear away, and with them the metallic veins which they contain.
The hardest rock is worn into impalpable mud, the ordinary metals oxidate, and both are removed; but gold, platina, and a few others are nearly indestructible, and from their weight, sinking to the bottom, are left behind.
After whole mountains have passed through this grinding mill, and have been washed by the hand of nature, the residue becomes metalliferous, and man finds it worth his while to complete the task of separation.
Bad as the above treatment of the miners appears, it is gladly accepted of by them; for the condition of the labouring agriculturists is much worse.
Their wages are lower, and they live almost exclusively on beans.
This poverty must be chiefly owing to the feudal-like system on which the land is tilled: the landowner gives a small plot of ground to the labourer for building on and cultivating, and in return has his services (or those of a proxy) for every day of his
Until a father has a grown-up son, who can by his labour pay the rent, there is no one, except on occasional days, to take care of his own patch of ground.
Hence extreme poverty is very common among the labouring classes in this country.
There are some old Indian ruins in this neighbourhood, and I was shown one of the perforated stones, which Molina mentions as being found in many places in considerable numbers.
They are of a circular flattened form, from five to six inches in diameter, with a hole passing quite through the centre.
It has generally been supposed that they were used as heads to clubs, although their form does not appear at all well adapted for that purpose.
Burchell [3] states that some of the tribes in Southern Africa dig up roots by the aid of a stick pointed at one end, the force and weight of which are increased by a round stone with a hole in it, into which the other end is firmly wedged.
It appears probable that the Indians of Chile formerly used some such rude agricultural instrument.
One day, a German collector in natural history, of the name of Renous, called, and nearly at the same time an old Spanish lawyer.
I was amused at being told the conversation which took place between them.
Renous speaks Spanish so well, that the old lawyer mistook him for a Chilian.
Renous alluding to me, asked him what he thought of the King of England sending out a collector to their country, to pick up lizards and beetles, and to break stones?
The old gentleman thought seriously for some time, and then said, "It is not well,--_hay un gato encerrado aqui_ (there is a cat shut up here).
No man is so rich as to send out people to pick up such rubbish.
I do not like it: if one of us were to go and do such things in England, do not you think the King of England would very soon send us out of his country"?
And this old gentleman, from his profession, belongs to the better informed and more intelligent classes!
Renous himself, two or three years before, left in a house at San Fernando some caterpillars, under charge of a girl to feed, that they might turn into butterflies.
This was rumoured through the town, and at last the padres and governor consulted together, and agreed it must be some heresy.
Accordingly, when Renous returned, he was arrested.
September 19th.
--We left Yaquil, and followed the flat valley, formed like that of Quillota, in which the Rio Tinderidica flows.
Even at these few miles south of Santiago the climate is much damper; in consequence there are fine tracts of pasturage, which are not irrigated.
(20th.
) We followed this valley till it expanded into a great plain, which reaches from the sea to the mountains west of Rancagua.
We shortly lost all trees and even bushes; so that the inhabitants are nearly as badly off for firewood as those in the Pampas.
Never having heard of these plains, I was much surprised at meeting with such scenery in Chile.
The plains belong to more than one series of different elevations, and they are traversed by broad flat-bottomed valleys; both of which circumstances, as in Patagonia, bespeak the action of the sea on gently rising land.
In the steep cliffs bordering these valleys, there are some large caves, which no doubt were originally formed by the waves: one of these is celebrated under the name of Cueva del Obispo; having formerly been consecrated.
During the day I felt very unwell, and from that time till the end of October did not recover.
September 22nd.
--We continued to pass over green plains without a tree.
The next day we arrived at a house near Navedad, on the sea-coast, where a rich Haciendero gave us lodgings.
I stayed here the two ensuing days, and although very unwell, managed to collect from the tertiary formation some marine shells.
24th.
--Our course was now directed towards Valparaiso, which with great difficulty I reached on the 27th, and was there confined to my bed till the end of October.
During this time I was an inmate in Mr. Corfield's house, whose kindness to me I do not know how to express.
I will here add a few observations on some of the animals and birds of Chile.
The Puma, or South American Lion, is not uncommon.
This animal has a wide geographical range; being found from the equatorial forests, throughout the deserts of Patagonia as far south as the damp and cold latitudes (53 to 54 degs.
) of Tierra del Fuego.
I have seen its footsteps in the Cordillera of central Chile, at an elevation of at least 10,000 feet.
In La Plata the puma preys chiefly on deer, ostriches, bizcacha, and other small quadrupeds; it there seldom attacks cattle or horses, and most rarely man.
In Chile, however, it destroys many young horses and cattle, owing probably to the scarcity of other quadrupeds: I heard, likewise, of two men and a woman who had been thus killed.
It is asserted that the puma always kills its prey by springing on the shoulders, and then drawing back the head with one of its paws, until the vertebrae break: I have seen in Patagonia the skeletons of guanacos, with their necks thus dislocated.
The puma, after eating its fill, covers the carcass with many large bushes, and lies down to watch it.
This habit is often the cause of its being discovered; for the condors wheeling in the air every now and then descend to partake of the feast, and being angrily driven away, rise all together on the wing.
The Chileno Guaso then knows there is a lion watching his prey--the word is given--and men and dogs hurry to the chase.
Sir F. Head says that a Gaucho in the pampas, upon merely seeing some condors wheeling in the air, cried "A lion"!
I could never myself meet with any one who pretended to such powers of discrimination.
It is asserted that, if a puma has once been betrayed by thus watching the carcass, and has then been hunted, it never resumes this habit; but that, having gorged itself, it wanders far away.
The puma is easily killed.
In an open country, it is first entangled with the bolas, then lazoed, and dragged along the ground till rendered insensible.
At Tandeel (south of the plata), I was told that within three months one hundred were thus destroyed.
In Chile they are generally driven up bushes or trees, and are then either shot, or baited to death by dogs.
The dogs employed in this chase belong to a particular breed, called Leoneros: they are weak, slight animals, like long-legged terriers, but are born with a particular instinct for this sport.
The puma is described as being very crafty: when pursued, it often returns on its former track, and then suddenly making a spring on one side, waits there till the dogs have passed by.
It is a very silent animal, uttering no cry even when wounded, and only rarely during the breeding season.
Of birds, two species of the genus Pteroptochos (megapodius and albicollis of Kittlitz) are perhaps the most conspicuous.
The former, called by the Chilenos "el Turco," is as large as a fieldfare, to which bird it has some alliance; but its legs are much longer, tail shorter, and beak stronger: its colour is a reddish brown.
The Turco is not uncommon.
It lives on the ground, sheltered among the thickets which are scattered over the dry and sterile hills.
With its tail erect, and stilt-like legs, it may be seen every now and then popping from one bush to another with uncommon quickness.
It really requires little imagination to believe that the bird is ashamed of itself, and is aware of its most ridiculous figure.
On first seeing it, one is tempted to exclaim, "A vilely stuffed specimen has escaped from some museum, and has come to life again"!
It cannot be made to take flight without the greatest trouble, nor does it run, but only hops.
The various loud cries which it utters when concealed amongst the bushes, are as strange as its appearance.
It is said to build its nest in a deep hole beneath the ground.
I dissected several specimens: the gizzard, which was very muscular, contained beetles, vegetable fibres, and pebbles.
From this character, from the length of its legs, scratching feet, membranous covering to the nostrils, short and arched wings, this bird seems in a certain degree to connect the thrushes with the gallinaceous order.
The second species (or P. albicollis) is allied to the first in its general form.
It is called Tapacolo, or "cover your posterior;" and well does the shameless little bird deserve its name; for it carries its tail more than erect, that is, inclined backwards towards its head.
It is very common, and frequents the bottoms of hedge-rows, and the bushes scattered over the barren hills, where scarcely another bird can exist.
In its general manner of feeding, of quickly hopping out of the thickets and back again, in its desire of concealment, unwillingness to take flight, and nidification, it bears a close resemblance to the Turco; but its appearance is not quite so ridiculous.
The Tapacolo is very crafty: when frightened by any person, it will remain motionless at the bottom of a bush, and will then, after a little while, try with much address to crawl away on the opposite side.
It is also an active bird, and continually making a noise: these noises are various and strangely odd; some are like the cooing of doves, others like the bubbling of water, and many defy all similes.
The country people say it changes its cry five times in the year--according to some change of season, I suppose.
[4] Two species of humming-birds are common; Trochilus forficatus is found over a space of 2500 miles on the west coast, from the hot dry country of Lima, to the forests of Tierra del Fuego--where it may be seen flitting about in snow-storms.
In the wooded island of Chiloe, which has an extremely humid climate, this little bird, skipping from side to side amidst the dripping foliage, is perhaps more abundant than almost any other kind.
I opened the stomachs of several specimens, shot in different parts of the continent, and in all, remains of insects were as numerous as in the stomach of a creeper.
When this species migrates in the summer southward, it is replaced by the arrival of another species coming from the north.
This second kind (Trochilus gigas) is a very large bird for the delicate family to which it belongs: when on the wing its appearance is singular.
Like others of the genus, it moves from place to place with a rapidity which may be compared to that of Syrphus amongst flies, and Sphinx among moths; but whilst hovering over a flower, it flaps its wings with a very slow and powerful movement, totally
I never saw any other bird where the force of its wings appeared (as in a butterfly) so powerful in proportion to the weight of its body.
When hovering by a flower, its tail is constantly expanded and shut like a fan, the body being kept in a nearly vertical position.
This action appears to steady and support the bird, between the slow movements of its wings.
Although flying from flower to flower in search of food, its stomach generally contained abundant remains of insects, which I suspect are much more the object of its search than honey.
The note of this species, like that of nearly the whole family, is extremely shrill.
[1] Caldeleugh, in Philosoph.
Transact.
for 1836.
[2] Annales des Sciences Naturelles, March, 1833.
M. Gay, a zealous and able naturalist, was then occupied in studying every branch of natural history throughout the kingdom of Chile.
[3] Burchess's Travels, vol.
ii.
p.
45.
[4] It is a remarkable fact, that Molina, though describing in detail all the birds and animals of Chile, never once mentions this genus, the species of which are so common, and so remarkable in their habits.
Was he at a loss how to classify them, and did he consequently think that silence was the more prudent course?
It is one more instance of the frequency of omissions by authors, on those very subjects where it might have been least expected.
CHAPTER XIII CHILOE AND CHONOS ISLANDS Chiloe--General Aspect--Boat Excursion--Native Indians--Castro--Tame Fox--Ascend San Pedro--Chonos Archipelago--Peninsula of Tres Montes--Granitic Range--Boat-wrecked Sailors--Low's Harbour--Wild Potato--Formation of
NOVEMBER 10th.
--The Beagle sailed from Valparaiso to the south, for the purpose of surveying the southern part of Chile, the island of Chiloe, and the broken land called the Chonos Archipelago, as far south as the Peninsula of Tres Montes.
On the 21st we anchored in the bay of S. Carlos, the capital of Chiloe.
This island is about ninety miles long, with a breadth of rather less than thirty.
The land is hilly, but not mountainous, and is covered by one great forest, except where a few green patches have been cleared round the thatched cottages.
From a distance the view somewhat resembles that of Tierra del Fuego; but the woods, when seen nearer, are incomparably more beautiful.
Many kinds of fine evergreen trees, and plants with a tropical character, here take the place of the gloomy beech of the southern shores.
In winter the climate is detestable, and in summer it is only a little better.
I should think there are few parts of the world, within the temperate regions, where so much rain falls.
The winds are very boisterous, and the sky almost always clouded: to have a week of fine weather is something wonderful.
It is even difficult to get a single glimpse of the Cordillera: during our first visit, once only the volcano of Osorno stood out in bold relief, and that was before sunrise; it was curious to watch, as the sun rose, the outline gradually fading away in
The inhabitants, from their complexion and low stature; appear to have three-fourths of Indian blood in their veins.
They are an humble, quiet, industrious set of men.
Although the fertile soil, resulting from the decomposition of the volcanic rocks, supports a rank vegetation, yet the climate is not favourable to any production which requires much sunshine to ripen it.
There is very little pasture for the larger quadrupeds; and in consequence, the staple articles of food are pigs, potatoes, and fish.
The people all dress in strong woollen garments, which each family makes for itself, and dyes with indigo of a dark blue colour.
The arts, however, are in the rudest state;--as may be seen in their strange fashion of ploughing, their method of spinning, grinding corn, and in the construction of their boats.
The forests are so impenetrable, that the land is nowhere cultivated except near the coast and on the adjoining islets.
Even where paths exist, they are scarcely passable from the soft and swampy state of the soil.
The inhabitants, like those of Tierra del Fuego, move about chiefly on the beach or in boats.
Although with plenty to eat, the people are very poor: there is no demand for labour, and consequently the lower orders cannot scrape together money sufficient to purchase even the smallest luxuries.
There is also a great deficiency of a circulating medium.
I have seen a man bringing on his back a bag of charcoal, with which to buy some trifle, and another carrying a plank to exchange for a bottle of wine.
Hence every tradesman must also be a merchant, and again sell the goods which he takes in exchange.
November 24th.
--The yawl and whale-boat were sent under the command of Mr. (now Captain) Sulivan, to survey the eastern or inland coast of Chiloe; and with orders to meet the Beagle at the southern extremity of the island; to which point she would proceed by the
I accompanied this expedition, but instead of going in the boats the first day, I hired horses to take me to Chacao, at the northern extremity of the island.
The road followed the coast; every now and then crossing promontories covered by fine forests.
In these shaded paths it is absolutely necessary that the whole road should be made of logs of wood, which are squared and placed by the side of each other.
From the rays of the sun never penetrating the evergreen foliage, the ground is so damp and soft, that except by this means neither man nor horse would be able to pass along.
I arrived at the village of Chacao shortly after the tents belonging to the boats were pitched for the night.
The land in this neighbourhood has been extensively cleared, and there were many quiet and most picturesque nooks in the forest.
Chacao was formerly the principal port in the island; but many vessels having been lost, owing to the dangerous currents and rocks in the straits, the Spanish government burnt the church, and thus arbitrarily compelled the greater number of inhabitants to
We had not long bivouacked, before the barefooted son of the governor came down to reconnoitre us.
Seeing the English flag hoisted at the yawl's mast-head, he asked with the utmost indifference, whether it was always to fly at Chacao.
In several places the inhabitants were much astonished at the appearance of men-of-war's boats, and hoped and believed it was the forerunner of a Spanish fleet, coming to recover the island from the patriot government of Chile.
All the men in power, however, had been informed of our intended visit, and were exceedingly civil.
While we were eating our supper, the governor paid us a visit.
He had been a lieutenant-colonel in the Spanish service, but now was miserably poor.
He gave us two sheep, and accepted in return two cotton handkerchiefs, some brass trinkets, and a little tobacco.
25th.
--Torrents of rain: we managed, however, to run down the coast as far as Huapi-lenou.
The whole of this eastern side of Chiloe has one aspect; it is a plain, broken by valleys and divided into little islands, and the whole thickly covered with one impervious blackish-green forest.
On the margins there are some cleared spaces, surrounding the high-roofed cottages.
26th--The day rose splendidly clear.
The volcano of Orsono was spouting out volumes of smoke.
This most beautiful mountain, formed like a perfect cone, and white with snow, stands out in front of the Cordillera.
Another great volcano, with a saddle-shaped summit, also emitted from its immense crater little jets of steam.
Subsequently we saw the lofty-peaked Corcovado--well deserving the name of "el famoso Corcovado".
Thus we beheld, from one point of view, three great active volcanoes, each about seven thousand feet high.
In addition to this, far to the south, there were other lofty cones covered with snow, which, although not known to be active, must be in their origin volcanic.
The line of the Andes is not, in this neighbourhood, nearly so elevated as in Chile; neither does it appear to form so perfect a barrier between the regions of the earth.
This great range, although running in a straight north and south line, owing to an optical deception, always appeared more or less curved; for the lines drawn from each peak to the beholder's eye, necessarily converged like the radii of a semicircle, and
Landing at midday, we saw a family of pure Indian extraction.
The father was singularly like York Minster; and some of the younger boys, with their ruddy complexions, might have been mistaken for Pampas Indians.
Everything I have seen, convinces me of the close connexion of the different American tribes, who nevertheless speak distinct languages.
This party could muster but little Spanish, and talked to each other in their own tongue.
It is a pleasant thing to see the aborigines advanced to the same degree of civilization, however low that may be, which their white conquerors have attained.
More to the south we saw many pure Indians: indeed, all the inhabitants of some of the islets retain their Indian surnames.
In the census of 1832, there were in Chiloe and its dependencies forty-two thousand souls; the greater number of these appear to be of mixed blood.
Eleven thousand retain their Indian surnames, but it is probable that not nearly all of these are of a pure breed.
Their manner of life is the same with that of the other poor inhabitants, and they are all Christians; but it is said that they yet retain some strange superstitious ceremonies, and that they pretend to hold communication with the devil in certain caves.
Formerly, every one convicted of this offence was sent to the Inquisition at Lima.
Many of the inhabitants who are not included in the eleven thousand with Indian surnames, cannot be distinguished by their appearance from Indians.
Gomez, the governor of Lemuy, is descended from noblemen of Spain on both sides; but by constant intermarriages with the natives the present man is an Indian.
On the other hand the governor of Quinchao boasts much of his purely kept Spanish blood.
We reached at night a beautiful little cove, north of the island of Caucahue.
The people here complained of want of land.
This is partly owing to their own negligence in not clearing the woods, and partly to restrictions by the government, which makes it necessary, before buying ever so small a piece, to pay two shillings to the surveyor for measuring each quadra (150 yards
After his valuation the land must be put up three times to auction, and if no one bids more, the purchaser can have it at that rate.
All these exactions must be a serious check to clearing the ground, where the inhabitants are so extremely poor.
In most countries, forests are removed without much difficulty by the aid of fire; but in Chiloe, from the damp nature of the climate, and the sort of trees, it is necessary first to cut them down.
This is a heavy drawback to the prosperity of Chiloe.
In the time of the Spaniards the Indians could not hold land; and a family, after having cleared a piece of ground, might be driven away, and the property seized by the government.
The Chilian authorities are now performing an act of justice by making retribution to these poor Indians, giving to each man, according to his grade of life, a certain portion of land.
The value of uncleared ground is very little.
The government gave Mr. Douglas (the present surveyor, who informed me of these circumstances) eight and a half square miles of forest near S. Carlos, in lieu of a debt; and this he sold for 350 dollars, or about 70 pounds sterling.
The two succeeding days were fine, and at night we reached the island of Quinchao.
This neighbourhood is the most cultivated part of the Archipelago; for a broad strip of land on the coast of the main island, as well as on many of the smaller adjoining ones, is almost completely cleared.
Some of the farm-houses seemed very comfortable.
I was curious to ascertain how rich any of these people might be, but Mr. Douglas says that no one can be considered as possessing a regular income.
One of the richest landowners might possibly accumulate, in a long industrious life, as much as 1000 pounds sterling; but should this happen, it would all be stowed away in some secret corner, for it is the custom of almost every family to have a jar or
November 30th.
--Early on Sunday morning we reached Castro, the ancient capital of Chiloe, but now a most forlorn and deserted place.
The usual quadrangular arrangement of Spanish towns could be traced, but the streets and plaza were coated with fine green turf, on which sheep were browsing.
The church, which stands in the middle, is entirely built of plank, and has a picturesque and venerable appearance.
The poverty of the place may be conceived from the fact, that although containing some hundreds of inhabitants, one of our party was unable anywhere to purchase either a pound of sugar or an ordinary knife.
No individual possessed either a watch or a clock; and an old man, who was supposed to have a good idea of time, was employed to strike the church bell by guess.
The arrival of our boats was a rare event in this quiet retired corner of the world; and nearly all the inhabitants came down to the beach to see us pitch our tents.
They were very civil, and offered us a house; and one man even sent us a cask of cider as a present.
In the afternoon we paid our respects to the governor--a quiet old man, who, in his appearance and manner of life, was scarcely superior to an English cottager.
At night heavy rain set in, which was hardly sufficient to drive away from our tents the large circle of lookers-on.
An Indian family, who had come to trade in a canoe from Caylen, bivouacked near us.
They had no shelter during the rain.
In the morning I asked a young Indian, who was wet to the skin, how he had passed the night.
He seemed perfectly content, and answered, "Muy bien, senor".
December 1st.
--We steered for the island of Lemuy.
I was anxious to examine a reported coal-mine which turned out to be lignite of little value, in the sandstone (probably of an ancient tertiary epoch) of which these islands are composed.
When we reached Lemuy we had much difficulty in finding any place to pitch our tents, for it was spring-tide, and the land was wooded down to the water's edge.
In a short time we were surrounded by a large group of the nearly pure Indian inhabitants.
They were much surprised at our arrival, and said one to the other, "This is the reason we have seen so many parrots lately; the cheucau (an odd red-breasted little bird, which inhabits the thick forest, and utters very peculiar noises) has not cried
They were soon anxious for barter.
Money was scarcely worth anything, but their eagerness for tobacco was something quite extraordinary.
After tobacco, indigo came next in value; then capsicum, old clothes, and gunpowder.
The latter article was required for a very innocent purpose: each parish has a public musket, and the gunpowder was wanted for making a noise on their saint or feast days.
The people here live chiefly on shell-fish and potatoes.
At certain seasons they catch also, in "corrales," or hedges under water, many fish which are left on the mud-banks as the tide falls.
They occasionally possess fowls, sheep, goats, pigs, horses, and cattle; the order in which they are here mentioned, expressing their respective numbers.
I never saw anything more obliging and humble than the manners of these people.
They generally began with stating that they were poor natives of the place, and not Spaniards and that they were in sad want of tobacco and other comforts.
At Caylen, the most southern island, the sailors bought with a stick of tobacco, of the value of three-halfpence, two fowls, one of which, the Indian stated, had skin between its toes, and turned out to be a fine duck; and with some cotton handkerchiefs,
The yawl at this place was anchored some way from the shore, and we had fears for her safety from robbers during the night.
Our pilot, Mr. Douglas, accordingly told the constable of the district that we always placed sentinels with loaded arms and not understanding Spanish, if we saw any person in the dark, we should assuredly shoot him.
The constable, with much humility, agreed to the perfect propriety of this arrangement, and promised us that no one should stir out of his house during that night.
During the four succeeding days we continued sailing southward.
The general features of the country remained the same, but it was much less thickly inhabited.
On the large island of Tanqui there was scarcely one cleared spot, the trees on every side extending their branches over the sea-beach.
I one day noticed, growing on the sandstone cliffs, some very fine plants of the panke (Gunnera scabra), which somewhat resembles the rhubarb on a gigantic scale.
The inhabitants eat the stalks, which are subacid, and tan leather with the roots, and prepare a black dye from them.
The leaf is nearly circular, but deeply indented on its margin.
I measured one which was nearly eight feet in diameter, and therefore no less than twenty-four in circumference!
The stalk is rather more than a yard high, and each plant sends out four or five of these enormous leaves, presenting together a very noble appearance.
December 6th.
--We reached Caylen, called "el fin del Cristiandad".
In the morning we stopped for a few minutes at a house on the northern end of Laylec, which was the extreme point of South American Christendom, and a miserable hovel it was.
The latitude is 43 degs.
10', which is two degrees farther south than the Rio Negro on the Atlantic coast.
These extreme Christians were very poor, and, under the plea of their situation, begged for some tobacco.
As a proof of the poverty of these Indians, I may mention that shortly before this, we had met a man, who had travelled three days and a half on foot, and had as many to return, for the sake of recovering the value of a small axe and a few fish.
How very difficult it must be to buy the smallest article, when such trouble is taken to recover so small a debt.
In the evening we reached the island of San Pedro, where we found the Beagle at anchor.
In doubling the point, two of the officers landed to take a round of angles with the theodolite.
A fox (Canis fulvipes), of a kind said to be peculiar to the island, and very rare in it, and which is a new species, was sitting on the rocks.
He was so intently absorbed in watching the work of the officers, that I was able, by quietly walking up behind, to knock him on the head with my geological hammer.
This fox, more curious or more scientific, but less wise, than the generality of his brethren, is now mounted in the museum of the Zoological Society.
We stayed three days in this harbour, on one of which Captain Fitz Roy, with a party, attempted to ascend to the summit of San Pedro.
The woods here had rather a different appearance from those on the northern part of the island.
The rock, also, being micaceous slate, there was no beach, but the steep sides dipped directly beneath the water.
The general aspect in consequence was more like that of Tierra del Fuego than of Chiloe.
In vain we tried to gain the summit: the forest was so impenetrable, that no one who has not beheld it can imagine so entangled a mass of dying and dead trunks.
I am sure that often, for more than ten minutes together, our feet never touched the ground, and we were frequently ten or fifteen feet above it, so that the seamen as a joke called out the soundings.
At other times we crept one after another on our hands and knees, under the rotten trunks.
In the lower part of the mountain, noble trees of the Winter's Bark, and a laurel like the sassafras with fragrant leaves, and others, the names of which I do not know, were matted together by a trailing bamboo or cane.
Here we were more like fishes struggling in a net than any other animal.
On the higher parts, brushwood takes the place of larger trees, with here and there a red cedar or an alerce pine.
I was also pleased to see, at an elevation of a little less than 1000 feet, our old friend the southern beech.
They were, however, poor stunted trees, and I should think that this must be nearly their northern limit.
We ultimately gave up the attempt in despair.
December 10th.
--The yawl and whale-boat, with Mr. Sulivan, proceeded on their survey, but I remained on board the Beagle, which the next day left San Pedro for the southward.
On the 13th we ran into an opening in the southern part of Guayatecas, or the Chonos Archipelago; and it was fortunate we did so, for on the following day a storm, worthy of Tierra del Fuego, raged with great fury.
White massive clouds were piled up against a dark blue sky, and across them black ragged sheets of vapour were rapidly driven.
The successive mountain ranges appeared like dim shadows, and the setting sun cast on the woodland a yellow gleam, much like that produced by the flame of spirits of wine.
The water was white with the flying spray, and the wind lulled and roared again through the rigging: it was an ominous, sublime scene.
During a few minutes there was a bright rainbow, and it was curious to observe the effect of the spray, which being carried along the surface of the water, changed the ordinary semicircle into a circle--a band of prismatic colours being continued, from
We stayed here three days.
The weather continued bad: but this did not much signify, for the surface of the land in all these islands is all but impassable.
The coast is so very rugged that to attempt to walk in that direction requires continued scrambling up and down over the sharp rocks of mica-slate; and as for the woods, our faces, hands, and shin-bones all bore witness to the maltreatment we received, in
December 18th.
--We stood out to sea.
On the 20th we bade farewell to the south, and with a fair wind turned the ship's head northward.
From Cape Tres Montes we sailed pleasantly along the lofty weather-beaten coast, which is remarkable for the bold outline of its hills, and the thick covering of forest even on the almost precipitous flanks.
The next day a harbour was discovered, which on this dangerous coast might be of great service to a distressed vessel.
It can easily be recognized by a hill 1600 feet high, which is even more perfectly conical than the famous sugar-loaf at Rio de Janeiro.
The next day, after anchoring, I succeeded in reaching the summit of this hill.
It was a laborious undertaking, for the sides were so steep that in some parts it was necessary to use the trees as ladders.
There were also several extensive brakes of the Fuchsia, covered with its beautiful drooping flowers, but very difficult to crawl through.
In these wild countries it gives much delight to gain the summit of any mountain.
There is an indefinite expectation of seeing something very strange, which, however often it may be balked, never failed with me to recur on each successive attempt.
Every one must know the feeling of triumph and pride which a grand view from a height communicates to the mind.
In these little frequented countries there is also joined to it some vanity, that you perhaps are the first man who ever stood on this pinnacle or admired this view.
A strong desire is always felt to ascertain whether any human being has previously visited an unfrequented spot.
A bit of wood with a nail in it, is picked up and studied as if it were covered with hieroglyphics.
Possessed with this feeling, I was much interested by finding, on a wild part of the coast, a bed made of grass beneath a ledge of rock.
Close by it there had been a fire, and the man had used an axe.
The fire, bed, and situation showed the dexterity of an Indian; but he could scarcely have been an Indian, for the race is in this part extinct, owing to the Catholic desire of making at one blow Christians and Slaves.
I had at the time some misgivings that the solitary man who had made his bed on this wild spot, must have been some poor shipwrecked sailor, who, in trying to travel up the coast, had here laid himself down for his dreary night.
December 28th.
--The weather continued very bad, but it at last permitted us to proceed with the survey.
The time hung heavy on our hands, as it always did when we were delayed from day to day by successive gales of wind.
In the evening another harbour was discovered, where we anchored.
Directly afterwards a man was seen waving a shirt, and a boat was sent which brought back two seamen.
A party of six had run away from an American whaling vessel, and had landed a little to the southward in a boat, which was shortly afterwards knocked to pieces by the surf.
They had now been wandering up and down the coast for fifteen months, without knowing which way to go, or where they were.
What a singular piece of good fortune it was that this harbour was now discovered!
Had it not been for this one chance, they might have wandered till they had grown old men, and at last have perished on this wild coast.
Their sufferings had been very great, and one of their party had lost his life by falling from the cliffs.
They were sometimes obliged to separate in search of food, and this explained the bed of the solitary man.
Considering what they had undergone, I think they had kept a very good reckoning of time, for they had lost only four days.
December 30th.
--We anchored in a snug little cove at the foot of some high hills, near the northern extremity of Tres Montes.
After breakfast the next morning, a party ascended one of these mountains, which was 2400 feet high.
The scenery was remarkable The chief part of the range was composed of grand, solid, abrupt masses of granite, which appeared as if they had been coeval with the beginning of the world.
The granite was capped with mica-slate, and this in the lapse of ages had been worn into strange finger-shaped points.
These two formations, thus differing in their outlines, agree in being almost destitute of vegetation.
This barrenness had to our eyes a strange appearance, from having been so long accustomed to the sight of an almost universal forest of dark-green trees.
I took much delight in examining the structure of these mountains.
The complicated and lofty ranges bore a noble aspect of durability--equally profitless, however, to man and to all other animals.
Granite to the geologist is classic ground: from its widespread limits, and its beautiful and compact texture, few rocks have been more anciently recognised.
Granite has given rise, perhaps, to more discussion concerning its origin than any other formation.
We generally see it constituting the fundamental rock, and, however formed, we know it is the deepest layer in the crust of this globe to which man has penetrated.
The limit of man's knowledge in any subject possesses a high interest, which is perhaps increased by its close neighbourhood to the realms of imagination.
January 1st 1835.
--The new year is ushered in with the ceremonies proper to it in these regions.
She lays out no false hopes: a heavy north-western gale, with steady rain, bespeaks the rising year.
Thank God, we are not destined here to see the end of it, but hope then to be in the Pacific Ocean, where a blue sky tells one there is a heaven,--a something beyond the clouds above our heads.
The north-west winds prevailing for the next four days, we only managed to cross a great bay, and then anchored in another secure harbour.
I accompanied the Captain in a boat to the head of a deep creek.
On the way the number of seals which we saw was quite astonishing: every bit of flat rock, and parts of the beach, were covered with them.
There appeared to be of a loving disposition, and lay huddled together, fast asleep, like so many pigs; but even pigs would have been ashamed of their dirt, and of the foul smell which came from them.
Each herd was watched by the patient but inauspicious eyes of the turkey-buzzard.
This disgusting bird, with its bald scarlet head, formed to wallow in putridity, is very common on the west coast, and their attendance on the seals shows on what they rely for their food.
We found the water (probably only that of the surface) nearly fresh: this was caused by the number of torrents which, in the form of cascades, came tumbling over the bold granite mountains into the sea.
The fresh water attracts the fish, and these bring many terns, gulls, and two kinds of cormorant.
We saw also a pair of the beautiful black-necked swans, and several small sea-otters, the fur of which is held in such high estimation.
In returning, we were again amused by the impetuous manner in which the heap of seals, old and young, tumbled into the water as the boat passed.
They did not remain long under water, but rising, followed us with outstretched necks, expressing great wonder and curiosity.
7th.
--Having run up the coast, we anchored near the northern end of the Chonos Archipelago, in Low's Harbour, where we remained a week.
The islands were here, as in Chiloe, composed of a stratified, soft, littoral deposit; and the vegetation in consequence was beautifully luxuriant.
The woods came down to the sea-beach, just in the manner of an evergreen shrubbery over a gravel walk.
We also enjoyed from the anchorage a splendid view of four great snowy cones of the Cordillera, including "el famoso Corcovado;" the range itself had in this latitude so little height, that few parts of it appeared above the tops of the neighbouring
We found here a party of five men from Caylen, "el fin del Cristiandad," who had most adventurously crossed in their miserable boat-canoe, for the purpose of fishing, the open space of sea which separates Chonos from Chiloe.
These islands will, in all probability, in a short time become peopled like those adjoining the coast of Chiloe.
The wild potato grows on these islands in great abundance, on the sandy, shelly soil near the sea-beach.
The tallest plant was four feet in height.
The tubers were generally small, but I found one, of an oval shape, two inches in diameter: they resembled in every respect, and had the same smell as English potatoes; but when boiled they shrunk much, and were watery and insipid, without any bitter
They are undoubtedly here indigenous: they grow as far south, according to Mr. Low, as lat.
50 degs.
, and are called Aquinas by the wild Indians of that part: the Chilotan Indians have a different name for them.
Professor Henslow, who has examined the dried specimens which I brought home, says that they are the same with those described by Mr. Sabine [1] from Valparaiso, but that they form a variety which by some botanists has been considered as specifically
It is remarkable that the same plant should be found on the sterile mountains of central Chile, where a drop of rain does not fall for more than six months, and within the damp forests of these southern islands.
In the central parts of the Chonos Archipelago (lat.
45 degs.
), the forest has very much the same character with that along the whole west coast, for 600 miles southward to Cape Horn.
The arborescent grass of Chiloe is not found here; while the beech of Tierra del Fuego grows to a good size, and forms a considerable proportion of the wood; not, however, in the same exclusive manner as it does farther southward.
Cryptogamic plants here find a most congenial climate.
In the Strait of Magellan, as I have before remarked, the country appears too cold and wet to allow of their arriving at perfection; but in these islands, within the forest, the number of species and great abundance of mosses, lichens, and small ferns, is
[2] In Tierra del Fuego trees grow only on the hill-sides; every level piece of land being invariably covered by a thick bed of peat; but in Chiloe flat land supports the most luxuriant forests.
Here, within the Chonos Archipelago, the nature of the climate more closely approaches that of Tierra del Fuego than that of northern Chiloe; for every patch of level ground is covered by two species of plants (Astelia pumila and Donatia magellanica),
In Tierra del Fuego, above the region of woodland, the former of these eminently sociable plants is the chief agent in the production of peat.
Fresh leaves are always succeeding one to the other round the central tap-root, the lower ones soon decay, and in tracing a root downwards in the peat, the leaves, yet holding their place, can be observed passing through every stage of decomposition, till
The Astelia is assisted by a few other plants,--here and there a small creeping Myrtus (M.
nummularia), with a woody stem like our cranberry and with a sweet berry,--an Empetrum (E.
rubrum), like our heath,--a rush (Juncus grandiflorus), are nearly the only ones that grow on the swampy surface.
These plants, though possessing a very close general resemblance to the English species of the same genera, are different.
In the more level parts of the country, the surface of the peat is broken up into little pools of water, which stand at different heights, and appear as if artificially excavated.
Small streams of water, flowing underground, complete the disorganization of the vegetable matter, and consolidate the whole.
The climate of the southern part of America appears particularly favourable to the production of peat.
In the Falkland Islands almost every kind of plant, even the coarse grass which covers the whole surface of the land, becomes converted into this substance: scarcely any situation checks its growth; some of the beds are as much as twelve feet thick, and
Although every plant lends its aid, yet in most parts the Astelia is the most efficient.
It is rather a singular circumstance, as being so very different from what occurs in Europe, that I nowhere saw moss forming by its decay any portion of the peat in South America.
With respect to the northern limit, at which the climate allows of that peculiar kind of slow decomposition which is necessary for its production, I believe that in Chiloe (lat.
41 to 42 degs.
), although there is much swampy ground, no well-characterized peat occurs: but in the Chonos Islands, three degrees farther southward, we have seen that it is abundant.
On the eastern coast in La Plata (lat.
35 degs.
) I was told by a Spanish resident who had visited Ireland, that he had often sought for this substance, but had never been able to find any.
He showed me, as the nearest approach to it which he had discovered, a black peaty soil, so penetrated with roots as to allow of an extremely slow and imperfect combustion.
The zoology of these broken islets of the Chonos Archipelago is, as might have been expected, very poor.
Of quadrupeds two aquatic kinds are common.
The Myopotamus Coypus (like a beaver, but with a round tail) is well known from its fine fur, which is an object of trade throughout the tributaries of La Plata.
It here, however, exclusively frequents salt water; which same circumstance has been mentioned as sometimes occurring with the great rodent, the Capybara.
A small sea-otter is very numerous; this animal does not feed exclusively on fish, but, like the seals, draws a large supply from a small red crab, which swims in shoals near the surface of the water.
Mr. Bynoe saw one in Tierra del Fuego eating a cuttle-fish; and at Low's Harbour, another was killed in the act of carrying to its hole a large volute shell.
At one place I caught in a trap a singular little mouse (M.
brachiotis); it appeared common on several of the islets, but the Chilotans at Low's Harbour said that it was not found in all.
What a succession of chances, [3] or what changes of level must have been brought into play, thus to spread these small animals throughout this broken archipelago!
In all parts of Chiloe and Chonos, two very strange birds occur, which are allied to, and replace, the Turco and Tapacolo of central Chile.
One is called by the inhabitants "Cheucau" (Pteroptochos rubecula): it frequents the most gloomy and retired spots within the damp forests.
Sometimes, although its cry may be heard close at hand, let a person watch ever so attentively he will not see the cheucau; at other times, let him stand motionless and the red-breasted little bird will approach within a few feet in the most familiar
It then busily hops about the entangled mass of rotting cones and branches, with its little tail cocked upwards.
The cheucau is held in superstitious fear by the Chilotans, on account of its strange and varied cries.
There are three very distinct cries: One is called "chiduco," and is an omen of good; another, "huitreu," which is extremely unfavourable; and a third, which I have forgotten.
These words are given in imitation of the noises; and the natives are in some things absolutely governed by them.
The Chilotans assuredly have chosen a most comical little creature for their prophet.
An allied species, but rather larger, is called by the natives "Guid-guid" (Pteroptochos Tarnii), and by the English the barking-bird.
This latter name is well given; for I defy any one at first to feel certain that a small dog is not yelping somewhere in the forest.
Just as with the cheucau, a person will sometimes hear the bark close by, but in vain many endeavour by watching, and with still less chance by beating the bushes, to see the bird; yet at other times the guid-guid fearlessly comes near.
Its manner of feeding and its general habits are very similar to those of the cheucau.
On the coast, [4] a small dusky-coloured bird (Opetiorhynchus Patagonicus) is very common.
It is remarkable from its quiet habits; it lives entirely on the sea-beach, like a sandpiper.
Besides these birds only few others inhabit this broken land.
In my rough notes I describe the strange noises, which, although frequently heard within these gloomy forests, yet scarcely disturb the general silence.
The yelping of the guid-guid, and the sudden whew-whew of the cheucau, sometimes come from afar off, and sometimes from close at hand; the little black wren of Tierra del Fuego occasionally adds its cry; the creeper (Oxyurus) follows the intruder screaming
From the great preponderance in most countries of certain common genera of birds, such as the finches, one feels at first surprised at meeting with the peculiar forms above enumerated, as the commonest birds in any district.
In central Chile two of them, namely, the Oxyurus and Scytalopus, occur, although most rarely.
When finding, as in this case, animals which seem to play so insignificant a part in the great scheme of nature, one is apt to wonder why they were created.
But it should always be recollected, that in some other country perhaps they are essential members of society, or at some former period may have been so.
If America south of 37 degs.
were sunk beneath the waters of the ocean, these two birds might continue to exist in central Chile for a long period, but it is very improbable that their numbers would increase.
We should then see a case which must inevitably have happened with very many animals.
These southern seas are frequented by several species of Petrels: the largest kind, Procellaria gigantea, or nelly (quebrantahuesos, or break-bones, of the Spaniards), is a common bird, both in the inland channels and on the open sea.
In its habits and manner of flight, there is a very close resemblance with the albatross; and as with the albatross, a person may watch it for hours together without seeing on what it feeds.
The "break-bones" is, however, a rapacious bird, for it was observed by some of the officers at Port St. Antonio chasing a diver, which tried to escape by diving and flying, but was continually struck down, and at last killed by a blow on its head.
At Port St. Julian these great petrels were seen killing and devouring young gulls.
A second species (Puffinus cinereus), which is common to Europe, Cape Horn, and the coast of Peru, is of much smaller size than the P. gigantea, but, like it, of a dirty black colour.
It generally frequents the inland sounds in very large flocks: I do not think I ever saw so many birds of any other sort together, as I once saw of these behind the island of Chiloe.
Hundreds of thousands flew in an irregular line for several hours in one direction.
When part of the flock settled on the water the surface was blackened, and a noise proceeded from them as of human beings talking in the distance.
There are several other species of petrels, but I will only mention one other kind, the Pelacanoides Berardi which offers an example of those extraordinary cases, of a bird evidently belonging to one well-marked family, yet both in its habits and structure
This bird never leaves the quiet inland sounds.
When disturbed it dives to a distance, and on coming to the surface, with the same movement takes flight.
After flying by a rapid movement of its short wings for a space in a straight line, it drops, as if struck dead, and dives again.
The form of its beak and nostrils, length of foot, and even the colouring of its plumage, show that this bird is a petrel: on the other hand, its short wings and consequent little power of flight, its form of body and shape of tail, the absence of a hind
It would undoubtedly be mistaken for an auk, when seen from a distance, either on the wing, or when diving and quietly swimming about the retired channels of Tierra del Fuego.
[1] Horticultural Transact.
, vol.
v.
p.
249.
Mr. Caldeleugh sent home two tubers, which, being well manured, even the first season produced numerous potatoes and an abundance of leaves.
See Humboldt's interesting discussion on this plant, which it appears was unknown in Mexico,--in Polit.
Essay on New Spain, book iv.
chap.
ix.
[2] By sweeping with my insect-net, I procured from these situations a considerable number of minute insects, of the family of Staphylinidae, and others allied to Pselaphus, and minute Hymenoptera.
But the most characteristic family in number, both of individuals and species, throughout the more open parts of Chiloe and Chonos is that of Telephoridae.
[3] It is said that some rapacious birds bring their prey alive to their nests.
If so, in the course of centuries, every now and then, one might escape from the young birds.
Some such agency is necessary, to account for the distribution of the smaller gnawing animals on islands not very near each other.
[4] I may mention, as a proof of how great a difference there is between the seasons of the wooded and the open parts of this coast, that on September 20th, in lat.
34 degs.
, these birds had young ones in the nest, while among the Chonos Islands, three months later in the summer, they were only laying, the difference in latitude between these two places being about 700 miles.
CHAPTER XIV CHILOE AND CONCEPCION: GREAT EARTHQUAKE San Carlos, Chiloe--Osorno in eruption, contemporaneously with Aconcagua and Coseguina--Ride to Cucao--Impenetrable Forests--Valdivia Indians--Earthquake--Concepcion--Great Earthquake--Rocks
ON JANUARY the 15th we sailed from Low's Harbour, and three days afterwards anchored a second time in the bay of S. Carlos in Chiloe.
On the night of the 19th the volcano of Osorno was in action.
At midnight the sentry observed something like a large star, which gradually increased in size till about three o'clock, when it presented a very magnificent spectacle.
By the aid of a glass, dark objects, in constant succession, were seen, in the midst of a great glare of red light, to be thrown up and to fall down.
The light was sufficient to cast on the water a long bright reflection.
Large masses of molten matter seem very commonly to be cast out of the craters in this part of the Cordillera.
I was assured that when the Corcovado is in eruption, great masses are projected upwards and are seen to burst in the air, assuming many fantastical forms, such as trees: their size must be immense, for they can be distinguished from the high land behind
In the morning the volcano became tranquil.
I was surprised at hearing afterwards that Aconcagua in Chile, 480 miles northwards, was in action on the same night; and still more surprised to hear that the great eruption of Coseguina (2700 miles north of Aconcagua), accompanied by an earthquake felt
This coincidence is the more remarkable, as Coseguina had been dormant for twenty-six years; and Aconcagua most rarely shows any signs of action.
It is difficult even to conjecture whether this coincidence was accidental, or shows some subterranean connection.
If Vesuvius, Etna, and Hecla in Iceland (all three relatively nearer each other than the corresponding points in South America), suddenly burst forth in eruption on the same night, the coincidence would be thought remarkable; but it is far more remarkable
Captain Fitz Roy being anxious that some bearings should be taken on the outer coast of Chiloe, it was planned that Mr. King and myself should ride to Castro, and thence across the island to the Capella de Cucao, situated on the west coast.
Having hired horses and a guide, we set out on the morning of the 22nd.
We had not proceeded far, before we were joined by a woman and two boys, who were bent on the same journey.
Every one on this road acts on a "hail fellow well met" fashion; and one may here enjoy the privilege, so rare in South America, of travelling without fire-arms.
At first, the country consisted of a succession of hills and valleys: nearer to Castro it became very level.
The road itself is a curious affair; it consists in its whole length, with the exception of very few parts, of great logs of wood, which are either broad and laid longitudinally, or narrow and placed transversely.
In summer the road is not very bad; but in winter, when the wood is rendered slippery from rain, travelling is exceedingly difficult.
At that time of the year, the ground on each side becomes a morass, and is often overflowed: hence it is necessary that the longitudinal logs should be fastened down by transverse poles, which are pegged on each side into the earth.
These pegs render a fall from a horse dangerous, as the chance of alighting on one of them is not small.
It is remarkable, however, how active custom has made the Chilotan horses.
In crossing bad parts, where the logs had been displaced, they skipped from one to the other, almost with the quickness and certainty of a dog.
On both hands the road is bordered by the lofty forest-trees, with their bases matted together by canes.
When occasionally a long reach of this avenue could be beheld, it presented a curious scene of uniformity: the white line of logs, narrowing in perspective, became hidden by the gloomy forest, or terminated in a zigzag which ascended some steep hill.
Although the distance from S. Carlos to Castro is only twelve leagues in a straight line, the formation of the road must have been a great labour.
I was told that several people had formerly lost their lives in attempting to cross the forest.
The first who succeeded was an Indian, who cut his way through the canes in eight days, and reached S. Carlos: he was rewarded by the Spanish government with a grant of land.
During the summer, many of the Indians wander about the forests (but chiefly in the higher parts, where the woods are not quite so thick) in search of the half-wild cattle which live on the leaves of the cane and certain trees.
It was one of these huntsmen who by chance discovered, a few years since, an English vessel, which had been wrecked on the outer coast.
The crew were beginning to fail in provisions, and it is not probable that, without the aid of this man, they would ever have extricated themselves from these scarcely penetrable woods.
As it was, one seaman died on the march, from fatigue.
The Indians in these excursions steer by the sun; so that if there is a continuance of cloudy weather, they can not travel.
The day was beautiful, and the number of trees which were in full flower perfumed the air; yet even this could hardly dissipate the effects of the gloomy dampness of the forest.
Moreover, the many dead trunks that stand like skeletons, never fail to give to these primeval woods a character of solemnity, absent in those of countries long civilized.
Shortly after sunset we bivouacked for the night.
Our female companion, who was rather good-looking, belonged to one of the most respectable families in Castro: she rode, however, astride, and without shoes or stockings.
I was surprised at the total want of pride shown by her and her brother.
They brought food with them, but at all our meals sat watching Mr. King and myself whilst eating, till we were fairly shamed into feeding the whole party.
The night was cloudless; and while lying in our beds, we enjoyed the sight (and it is a high enjoyment) of the multitude of stars which illumined the darkness of the forest.
January 23rd.
--We rose early in the morning, and reached the pretty quiet town of Castro by two o'clock.
The old governor had died since our last visit, and a Chileno was acting in his place.
We had a letter of introduction to Don Pedro, whom we found exceedingly hospitable and kind, and more disinterested than is usual on this side of the continent.
The next day Don Pedro procured us fresh horses, and offered to accompany us himself.
We proceeded to the south--generally following the coast, and passing through several hamlets, each with its large barn-like chapel built of wood.
At Vilipilli, Don Pedro asked the commandant to give us a guide to Cucao.
The old gentleman offered to come himself; but for a long time nothing would persuade him that two Englishmen really wished to go to such an out-of-the-way place as Cucao.
We were thus accompanied by the two greatest aristocrats in the country, as was plainly to be seen in the manner of all the poorer Indians towards them.
At Chonchi we struck across the island, following intricate winding paths, sometimes passing through magnificent forests, and sometimes through pretty cleared spots, abounding with corn and potato crops.
This undulating woody country, partially cultivated, reminded me of the wilder parts of England, and therefore had to my eye a most fascinating aspect.
At Vilinco, which is situated on the borders of the lake of Cucao, only a few fields were cleared; and all the inhabitants appeared to be Indians.
This lake is twelve miles long, and runs in an east and west direction.
From local circumstances, the sea-breeze blows very regularly during the day, and during the night it falls calm: this has given rise to strange exaggerations, for the phenomenon, as described to us at S. Carlos, was quite a prodigy.
The road to Cucao was so very bad that we determined to embark in a _periagua_.
The commandant, in the most authoritative manner, ordered six Indians to get ready to pull us over, without deigning to tell them whether they would be paid.
The periagua is a strange rough boat, but the crew were still stranger: I doubt if six uglier little men ever got into a boat together.
They pulled, however, very well and cheerfully.
The stroke-oarsman gabbled Indian, and uttered strange cries, much after the fashion of a pig-driver driving his pigs.
We started with a light breeze against us, but yet reached the Capella de Cucao before it was late.
The country on each side of the lake was one unbroken forest.
In the same periagua with us, a cow was embarked.
To get so large an animal into a small boat appears at first a difficulty, but the Indians managed it in a minute.
They brought the cow alongside the boat, which was heeled towards her; then placing two oars under her belly, with their ends resting on the gunwale, by the aid of these levers they fairly tumbled the poor beast heels over head into the bottom of the boat,
At Cucao we found an uninhabited hovel (which is the residence of the padre when he pays this Capella a visit), where, lighting a fire, we cooked our supper, and were very comfortable.
The district of Cucao is the only inhabited part on the whole west coast of Chiloe.
It contains about thirty or forty Indian families, who are scattered along four or five miles of the shore.
They are very much secluded from the rest of Chiloe, and have scarcely any sort of commerce, except sometimes in a little oil, which they get from seal-blubber.
They are tolerably dressed in clothes of their own manufacture, and they have plenty to eat.
They seemed, however, discontented, yet humble to a degree which it was quite painful to witness.
These feelings are, I think, chiefly to be attributed to the harsh and authoritative manner in which they are treated by their rulers.
Our companions, although so very civil to us, behaved to the poor Indians as if they had been slaves, rather than free men.
They ordered provisions and the use of their horses, without ever condescending to say how much, or indeed whether the owners should be paid at all.
In the morning, being left alone with these poor people, we soon ingratiated ourselves by presents of cigars and mate.
A lump of white sugar was divided between all present, and tasted with the greatest curiosity.
The Indians ended all their complaints by saying, "And it is only because we are poor Indians, and know nothing; but it was not so when we had a King".
The next day after breakfast, we rode a few miles northward to Punta Huantamo.
The road lay along a very broad beach, on which, even after so many fine days, a terrible surf was breaking.
I was assured that after a heavy gale, the roar can be heard at night even at Castro, a distance of no less than twenty-one sea-miles across a hilly and wooded country.
We had some difficulty in reaching the point, owing to the intolerably bad paths; for everywhere in the shade the ground soon becomes a perfect quagmire.
The point itself is a bold rocky hill.
It is covered by a plant allied, I believe, to Bromelia, and called by the inhabitants Chepones.
In scrambling through the beds, our hands were very much scratched.
I was amused by observing the precaution our Indian guide took, in turning up his trousers, thinking that they were more delicate than his own hard skin.
This plant bears a fruit, in shape like an artichoke, in which a number of seed-vessels are packed: these contain a pleasant sweet pulp, here much esteemed.
I saw at Low's Harbour the Chilotans making chichi, or cider, with this fruit: so true is it, as Humboldt remarks, that almost everywhere man finds means of preparing some kind of beverage from the vegetable kingdom.
The savages, however, of Tierra del Fuego, and I believe of Australia, have not advanced thus far in the arts.
The coast to the north of Punta Huantamo is exceedingly rugged and broken, and is fronted by many breakers, on which the sea is eternally roaring.
Mr. King and myself were anxious to return, if it had been possible, on foot along this coast; but even the Indians said it was quite impracticable.
We were told that men have crossed by striking directly through the woods from Cucao to S. Carlos, but never by the coast.
On these expeditions, the Indians carry with them only roasted corn, and of this they eat sparingly twice a day.
26th.
--Re-embarking in the periagua, we returned across the lake, and then mounted our horses.
The whole of Chiloe took advantage of this week of unusually fine weather, to clear the ground by burning.
In every direction volumes of smoke were curling upwards.
Although the inhabitants were so assiduous in setting fire to every part of the wood, yet I did not see a single fire which they had succeeded in making extensive.
We dined with our friend the commandant, and did not reach Castro till after dark.
The next morning we started very early.
After having ridden for some time, we obtained from the brow of a steep hill an extensive view (and it is a rare thing on this road) of the great forest.
Over the horizon of trees, the volcano of Corcovado, and the great flat-topped one to the north, stood out in proud pre-eminence: scarcely another peak in the long range showed its snowy summit.
I hope it will be long before I forget this farewell view of the magnificent Cordillera fronting Chiloe.
At night we bivouacked under a cloudless sky, and the next morning reached S. Carlos.
We arrived on the right day, for before evening heavy rain commenced.
February 4th.
--Sailed from Chiloe.
During the last week I made several short excursions.
One was to examine a great bed of now-existing shells, elevated 350 feet above the level of the sea: from among these shells, large forest-trees were growing.
Another ride was to P. Huechucucuy.
I had with me a guide who knew the country far too well; for he would pertinaciously tell me endless Indian names for every little point, rivulet, and creek.
In the same manner as in Tierra del Fuego, the Indian language appears singularly well adapted for attaching names to the most trivial features of the land.
I believe every one was glad to say farewell to Chiloe; yet if we could forget the gloom and ceaseless rain of winter, Chiloe might pass for a charming island.
There is also something very attractive in the simplicity and humble politeness of the poor inhabitants.
We steered northward along shore, but owing to thick weather did not reach Valdivia till the night of the 8th.
The next morning the boat proceeded to the town, which is distant about ten miles.
We followed the course of the river, occasionally passing a few hovels, and patches of ground cleared out of the otherwise unbroken forest; and sometimes meeting a canoe with an Indian family.
The town is situated on the low banks of the stream, and is so completely buried in a wood of apple-trees that the streets are merely paths in an orchard.
I have never seen any country, where apple-trees appeared to thrive so well as in this damp part of South America: on the borders of the roads there were many young trees evidently self-grown.
In Chiloe the inhabitants possess a marvellously short method of making an orchard.
At the lower part of almost every branch, small, conical, brown, wrinkled points project: these are always ready to change into roots, as may sometimes be seen, where any mud has been accidentally splashed against the tree.
A branch as thick as a man's thigh is chosen in the early spring, and is cut off just beneath a group of these points, all the smaller branches are lopped off, and it is then placed about two feet deep in the ground.
During the ensuing summer the stump throws out long shoots, and sometimes even bears fruit: I was shown one which had produced as many as twenty-three apples, but this was thought very unusual.
In the third season the stump is changed (as I have myself seen) into a well-wooded tree, loaded with fruit.
An old man near Valdivia illustrated his motto, "Necesidad es la madre del invencion," by giving an account of the several useful things he manufactured from his apples.
After making cider, and likewise wine, he extracted from the refuse a white and finely flavoured spirit; by another process he procured a sweet treacle, or, as he called it, honey.
His children and pigs seemed almost to live, during this season of the year, in his orchard.
February 11th.
--I set out with a guide on a short ride, in which, however, I managed to see singularly little, either of the geology of the country or of its inhabitants.
There is not much cleared land near Valdivia: after crossing a river at the distance of a few miles, we entered the forest, and then passed only one miserable hovel, before reaching our sleeping-place for the night.
The short difference in latitude, of 150 miles, has given a new aspect to the forest compared with that of Chiloe.
This is owing to a slightly different proportion in the kinds of trees.
The evergreens do not appear to be quite so numerous, and the forest in consequence has a brighter tint.
As in Chiloe, the lower parts are matted together by canes: here also another kind (resembling the bamboo of Brazil and about twenty feet in height) grows in clusters, and ornaments the banks of some of the streams in a very pretty manner.
It is with this plant that the Indians make their chuzos, or long tapering spears.
Our resting-house was so dirty that I preferred sleeping outside: on these journeys the first night is generally very uncomfortable, because one is not accustomed to the tickling and biting of the fleas.
I am sure, in the morning, there was not a space on my legs the size of a shilling which had not its little red mark where the flea had feasted.
12th.
--We continued to ride through the uncleared forest; only occasionally meeting an Indian on horseback, or a troop of fine mules bringing alerce-planks and corn from the southern plains.
In the afternoon one of the horses knocked up: we were then on a brow of a hill, which commanded a fine view of the Llanos.
The view of these open plains was very refreshing, after being hemmed in and buried in the wilderness of trees.
The uniformity of a forest soon becomes very wearisome.
This west coast makes me remember with pleasure the free, unbounded plains of Patagonia; yet, with the true spirit of contradiction, I cannot forget how sublime is the silence of the forest.
The Llanos are the most fertile and thickly peopled parts of the country, as they possess the immense advantage of being nearly free from trees.
Before leaving the forest we crossed some flat little lawns, around which single trees stood, as in an English park: I have often noticed with surprise, in wooded undulatory districts, that the quite level parts have been destitute of trees.
On account of the tired horse, I determined to stop at the Mission of Cudico, to the friar of which I had a letter of introduction.
Cudico is an intermediate district between the forest and the Llanos.
There are a good many cottages, with patches of corn and potatoes, nearly all belonging to Indians.
The tribes dependent on Valdivia are "reducidos y cristianos".
The Indians farther northward, about Arauco and Imperial, are still very wild, and not converted; but they have all much intercourse with the Spaniards.
The padre said that the Christian Indians did not much like coming to mass, but that otherwise they showed respect for religion.
The greatest difficulty is in making them observe the ceremonies of marriage.
The wild Indians take as many wives as they can support, and a cacique will sometimes have more than ten: on entering his house, the number may be told by that of the separate fires.
Each wife lives a week in turn with the cacique; but all are employed in weaving ponchos, etc.
, for his profit.
To be the wife of a cacique, is an honour much sought after by the Indian women.
The men of all these tribes wear a coarse woolen poncho: those south of Valdivia wear short trousers, and those north of it a petticoat, like the chilipa of the Gauchos.
All have their long hair bound by a scarlet fillet, but with no other covering on their heads.
These Indians are good-sized men; their cheek-bones are prominent, and in general appearance they resemble the great American family to which they belong; but their physiognomy seemed to me to be slightly different from that of any other tribe which I had
Their expression is generally grave, and even austere, and possesses much character: this may pass either for honest bluntness or fierce determination.
The long black hair, the grave and much-lined features, and the dark complexion, called to my mind old portraits of James I. On the road we met with none of that humble politeness so universal in Chiloe.
Some gave their "mari-mari" (good morning) with promptness, but the greater number did not seem inclined to offer any salute.
This independence of manners is probably a consequence of their long wars, and the repeated victories which they alone, of all the tribes in America, have gained over the Spaniards.
I spent the evening very pleasantly, talking with the padre.
He was exceedingly kind and hospitable; and coming from Santiago, had contrived to surround himself with some few comforts.
Being a man of some little education, he bitterly complained of the total want of society.
With no particular zeal for religion, no business or pursuit, how completely must this man's life be wasted!
The next day, on our return, we met seven very wild-looking Indians, of whom some were caciques that had just received from the Chilian government their yearly small stipend for having long remained faithful.
They were fine-looking men, and they rode one after the other, with most gloomy faces.
An old cacique, who headed them, had been, I suppose, more excessively drunk than the rest, for he seemed extremely grave and very crabbed.
Shortly before this, two Indians joined us, who were travelling from a distant mission to Valdivia concerning some lawsuit.
One was a good-humoured old man, but from his wrinkled beardless face looked more like an old woman than a man.
I frequently presented both of them with cigars; and though ready to receive them, and I dare say grateful, they would hardly condescend to thank me.
A Chilotan Indian would have taken off his hat, and given his "Dios le page"!
The travelling was very tedious, both from the badness of the roads, and from the number of great fallen trees, which it was necessary either to leap over or to avoid by making long circuits.
We slept on the road, and next morning reached Valdivia, whence I proceeded on board.
A few days afterwards I crossed the bay with a party of officers, and landed near the fort called Niebla.
The buildings were in a most ruinous state, and the gun-carriages quite rotten.
Mr. Wickham remarked to the commanding officer, that with one discharge they would certainly all fall to pieces.
The poor man, trying to put a good face upon it, gravely replied, "No, I am sure, sir, they would stand two"!
The Spaniards must have intended to have made this place impregnable.
There is now lying in the middle of the courtyard a little mountain of mortar, which rivals in hardness the rock on which it is placed.
It was brought from Chile, and cost 7000 dollars.
The revolution having broken out, prevented its being applied to any purpose, and now it remains a monument of the fallen greatness of Spain.
I wanted to go to a house about a mile and a half distant, but my guide said it was quite impossible to penetrate the wood in a straight line.
He offered, however, to lead me, by following obscure cattle-tracks, the shortest way: the walk, nevertheless, took no less than three hours!
This man is employed in hunting strayed cattle; yet, well as he must know the woods, he was not long since lost for two whole days, and had nothing to eat.
These facts convey a good idea of the impracticability of the forests of these countries.
A question often occurred to me--how long does any vestige of a fallen tree remain?
This man showed me one which a party of fugitive royalists had cut down fourteen years ago; and taking this as a criterion, I should think a bole a foot and a half in diameter would in thirty years be changed into a heap of mould.
February 20th.
--This day has been memorable in the annals of Valdivia, for the most severe earthquake experienced by the oldest inhabitant.
I happened to be on shore, and was lying down in the wood to rest myself.
It came on suddenly, and lasted two minutes, but the time appeared much longer.
The rocking of the ground was very sensible.
The undulations appeared to my companion and myself to come from due east, whilst others thought they proceeded from south-west: this shows how difficult it sometimes is to perceive the directions of the vibrations.
There was no difficulty in standing upright, but the motion made me almost giddy: it was something like the movement of a vessel in a little cross-ripple, or still more like that felt by a person skating over thin ice, which bends under the weight of his
A bad earthquake at once destroys our oldest associations: the earth, the very emblem of solidity, has moved beneath our feet like a thin crust over a fluid;--one second of time has created in the mind a strange idea of insecurity, which hours of
In the forest, as a breeze moved the trees, I felt only the earth tremble, but saw no other effect.
Captain Fitz Roy and some officers were at the town during the shock, and there the scene was more striking; for although the houses, from being built of wood, did not fall, they were violently shaken, and the boards creaked and rattled together.
The people rushed out of doors in the greatest alarm.
It is these accompaniments that create that perfect horror of earthquakes, experienced by all who have thus seen, as well as felt, their effects.
Within the forest it was a deeply interesting, but by no means an awe-exciting phenomenon.
The tides were very curiously affected.
The great shock took place at the time of low water; and an old woman who was on the beach told me that the water flowed very quickly, but not in great waves, to high-water mark, and then as quickly returned to its proper level; this was also evident by
The same kind of quick but quiet movement in the tide happened a few years since at Chiloe, during a slight earthquake, and created much causeless alarm.
In the course of the evening there were many weaker shocks, which seemed to produce in the harbour the most complicated currents, and some of great strength.
March 4th.
--We entered the harbour of Concepcion.
While the ship was beating up to the anchorage, I landed on the island of Quiriquina.
The mayor-domo of the estate quickly rode down to tell me the terrible news of the great earthquake of the 20th:--"That not a house in Concepcion or Talcahuano (the port) was standing; that seventy villages were destroyed; and that a great wave had almost
Of this latter statement I soon saw abundant proofs--the whole coast being strewed over with timber and furniture as if a thousand ships had been wrecked.
Besides chairs, tables, book-shelves, etc.
, in great numbers, there were several roofs of cottages, which had been transported almost whole.
The storehouses at Talcahuano had been burst open, and great bags of cotton, yerba, and other valuable merchandise were scattered on the shore.
During my walk round the island, I observed that numerous fragments of rock, which, from the marine productions adhering to them, must recently have been lying in deep water, had been cast up high on the beach; one of these was six feet long, three broad,
The island itself as plainly showed the overwhelming power of the earthquake, as the beach did that of the consequent great wave.
The ground in many parts was fissured in north and south lines, perhaps caused by the yielding of the parallel and steep sides of this narrow island.
Some of the fissures near the cliffs were a yard wide.
Many enormous masses had already fallen on the beach; and the inhabitants thought that when the rains commenced far greater slips would happen.
The effect of the vibration on the hard primary slate, which composes the foundation of the island, was still more curious: the superficial parts of some narrow ridges were as completely shivered as if they had been blasted by gunpowder.
This effect, which was rendered conspicuous by the fresh fractures and displaced soil, must be confined to near the surface, for otherwise there would not exist a block of solid rock throughout Chile; nor is this improbable, as it is known that the surface
It is, perhaps, owing to this same reason, that earthquakes do not cause quite such terrific havoc within deep mines as would be expected.
I believe this convulsion has been more effectual in lessening the size of the island of Quiriquina, than the ordinary wear-and-tear of the sea and weather during the course of a whole century.
The next day I landed at Talcahuano, and afterwards rode to Concepcion.
Both towns presented the most awful yet interesting spectacle I ever beheld.
To a person who had formerly know them, it possibly might have been still more impressive; for the ruins were so mingled together, and the whole scene possessed so little the air of a habitable place, that it was scarcely possible to imagine its former
The earthquake commenced at half-past eleven o'clock in the forenoon.
If it had happened in the middle of the night, the greater number of the inhabitants (which in this one province must amount to many thousands) must have perished, instead of less than a hundred: as it was, the invariable practice of running out of doors
In Concepcion each house, or row of houses, stood by itself, a heap or line of ruins; but in Talcahuano, owing to the great wave, little more than one layer of bricks, tiles, and timber with here and there part of a wall left standing, could be
From this circumstance Concepcion, although not so completely desolated, was a more terrible, and if I may so call it, picturesque sight.
The first shock was very sudden.
The mayor-domo at Quiriquina told me, that the first notice he received of it, was finding both the horse he rode and himself, rolling together on the ground.
Rising up, he was again thrown down.
He also told me that some cows which were standing on the steep side of the island were rolled into the sea.
The great wave caused the destruction of many cattle; on one low island near the head of the bay, seventy animals were washed off and drowned.
It is generally thought that this has been the worst earthquake ever recorded in Chile; but as the very severe ones occur only after long intervals, this cannot easily be known; nor indeed would a much worse shock have made any difference, for the ruin was
Innumerable small tremblings followed the great earthquake, and within the first twelve days no less than three hundred were counted.
After viewing Concepcion, I cannot understand how the greater number of inhabitants escaped unhurt.
The houses in many parts fell outwards; thus forming in the middle of the streets little hillocks of brickwork and rubbish.
Mr. Rouse, the English consul, told us that he was at breakfast when the first movement warned him to run out.
He had scarcely reached the middle of the courtyard, when one side of his house came thundering down.
He retained presence of mind to remember, that if he once got on the top of that part which had already fallen, he would be safe.
Not being able from the motion of the ground to stand, he crawled up on his hands and knees; and no sooner had he ascended this little eminence, than the other side of the house fell in, the great beams sweeping close in front of his head.
With his eyes blinded, and his mouth choked with the cloud of dust which darkened the sky, at last he gained the street.
As shock succeeded shock, at the interval of a few minutes, no one dared approach the shattered ruins, and no one knew whether his dearest friends and relations were not perishing from the want of help.
Those who had saved any property were obliged to keep a constant watch, for thieves prowled about, and at each little trembling of the ground, with one hand they beat their breasts and cried "Misericordia"!
and then with the other filched what they could from the ruins.
The thatched roofs fell over the fires, and flames burst forth in all parts.
Hundreds knew themselves ruined, and few had the means of providing food for the day.
Earthquakes alone are sufficient to destroy the prosperity of any country.
If beneath England the now inert subterranean forces should exert those powers, which most assuredly in former geological ages they have exerted, how completely would the entire condition of the country be changed!
What would become of the lofty houses, thickly packed cities, great manufactories, the beautiful public and private edifices?
If the new period of disturbance were first to commence by some great earthquake in the dead of the night, how terrific would be the carnage!
England would at once be bankrupt; all papers, records, and accounts would from that moment be lost.
Government being unable to collect the taxes, and failing to maintain its authority, the hand of violence and rapine would remain uncontrolled.
In every large town famine would go forth, pestilence and death following in its train.
Shortly after the shock, a great wave was seen from the distance of three or four miles, approaching in the middle of the bay with a smooth outline; but along the shore it tore up cottages and trees, as it swept onwards with irresistible force.
At the head of the bay it broke in a fearful line of white breakers, which rushed up to a height of 23 vertical feet above the highest spring-tides.
Their force must have been prodigious; for at the Fort a cannon with its carriage, estimated at four tons in weight, was moved 15 feet inwards.
A schooner was left in the midst of the ruins, 200 yards from the beach.
The first wave was followed by two others, which in their retreat carried away a vast wreck of floating objects.
In one part of the bay, a ship was pitched high and dry on shore, was carried off, again driven on shore, and again carried off.
In another part, two large vessels anchored near together were whirled about, and their cables were thrice wound round each other; though anchored at a depth of 36 feet, they were for some minutes aground.
The great wave must have travelled slowly, for the inhabitants of Talcahuano had time to run up the hills behind the town; and some sailors pulled out seaward, trusting successfully to their boat riding securely over the swell, if they could reach it
One old woman with a little boy, four or five years old, ran into a boat, but there was nobody to row it out: the boat was consequently dashed against an anchor and cut in twain; the old woman was drowned, but the child was picked up some hours afterwards
Pools of salt-water were still standing amidst the ruins of the houses, and children, making boats with old tables and chairs, appeared as happy as their parents were miserable.
It was, however, exceedingly interesting to observe, how much more active and cheerful all appeared than could have been expected.
It was remarked with much truth, that from the destruction being universal, no one individual was humbled more than another, or could suspect his friends of coldness--that most grievous result of the loss of wealth.
Mr. Rouse, and a large party whom he kindly took under his protection, lived for the first week in a garden beneath some apple-trees.
At first they were as merry as if it had been a picnic; but soon afterwards heavy rain caused much discomfort, for they were absolutely without shelter.
In Captain Fitz Roy's excellent account of the earthquake, it is said that two explosions, one like a column of smoke and another like the blowing of a great whale, were seen in the bay.
The water also appeared everywhere to be boiling; and it "became black, and exhaled a most disagreeable sulphureous smell".
These latter circumstances were observed in the Bay of Valparaiso during the earthquake of 1822; they may, I think, be accounted for, by the disturbance of the mud at the bottom of the sea containing organic matter in decay.
In the Bay of Callao, during a calm day, I noticed, that as the ship dragged her cable over the bottom, its course was marked by a line of bubbles.
The lower orders in Talcahuano thought that the earthquake was caused by some old Indian women, who two years ago, being offended, stopped the volcano of Antuco.
This silly belief is curious, because it shows that experience has taught them to observe, that there exists a relation between the suppressed action of the volcanos, and the trembling of the ground.
It was necessary to apply the witchcraft to the point where their perception of cause and effect failed; and this was the closing of the volcanic vent.
This belief is the more singular in this particular instance, because, according to Captain Fitz Roy, there is reason to believe that Antuco was noways affected.
The town of Concepcion was built in the usual Spanish fashion, with all the streets running at right angles to each other; one set ranging S.W. by W., and the other set N.W. by N. The walls in the former direction certainly stood better than those in the
This may be illustrated by placing books edgeways on a carpet, and then, after the manner suggested by Michell, imitating the undulations of an earthquake: it will be found that they fall with more or less readiness, according as their direction more or
The fissures in the ground generally, though not uniformly, extended in a S.E. and N.W. direction, and therefore corresponded to the lines of undulation or of principal flexure.
Bearing in mind all these circumstances, which so clearly point to the S.W. as the chief focus of disturbance, it is a very interesting fact that the island of S. Maria, situated in that quarter, was, during the general uplifting of the land, raised to
The different resistance offered by the walls, according to their direction, was well exemplified in the case of the Cathedral.
The side which fronted the N.E. presented a grand pile of ruins, in the midst of which door-cases and masses of timber stood up, as if floating in a stream.
Some of the angular blocks of brickwork were of great dimensions; and they were rolled to a distance on the level plaza, like fragments of rock at the base of some high mountain.
The side walls (running S.W. and N.E.), though exceedingly fractured, yet remained standing; but the vast buttresses (at right angles to them, and therefore parallel to the walls that fell) were in many cases cut clean off, as if by a chisel, and hurled to
Some square ornaments on the coping of these same walls, were moved by the earthquake into a diagonal position.
A similar circumstance was observed after an earthquake at Valparaiso, Calabria, and other places, including some of the ancient Greek temples.
[1] This twisting displacement, at first appears to indicate a vorticose movement beneath each point thus affected; but this is highly improbable.
May it not be caused by a tendency in each stone to arrange itself in some particular position, with respect to the lines of vibration,--in a manner somewhat similar to pins on a sheet of paper when shaken?
Generally speaking, arched doorways or windows stood much better than any other part of the buildings.
Nevertheless, a poor lame old man, who had been in the habit, during trifling shocks, of crawling to a certain doorway, was this time crushed to pieces.
I have not attempted to give any detailed description of the appearance of Concepcion, for I feel that it is quite impossible to convey the mingled feelings which I experienced.
Several of the officers visited it before me, but their strongest language failed to give a just idea of the scene of desolation.
It is a bitter and humiliating thing to see works, which have cost man so much time and labour, overthrown in one minute; yet compassion for the inhabitants was almost instantly banished, by the surprise in seeing a state of things produced in a moment of
In my opinion, we have scarcely beheld, since leaving England, any sight so deeply interesting.
In almost every severe earthquake, the neighbouring waters of the sea are said to have been greatly agitated.
The disturbance seems generally, as in the case of Concepcion, to have been of two kinds: first, at the instant of the shock, the water swells high up on the beach with a gentle motion, and then as quietly retreats; secondly, some time afterwards, the
The first movement seems to be an immediate consequence of the earthquake affecting differently a fluid and a solid, so that their respective levels are slightly deranged: but the second case is a far more important phenomenon.
During most earthquakes, and especially during those on the west coast of America, it is certain that the first great movement of the waters has been a retirement.
Some authors have attempted to explain this, by supposing that the water retains its level, whilst the land oscillates upwards; but surely the water close to the land, even on a rather steep coast, would partake of the motion of the bottom: moreover, as
I suspect (but the subject is a very obscure one) that a wave, however produced, first draws the water from the shore, on which it is advancing to break: I have observed that this happens with the little waves from the paddles of a steam-boat.
It is remarkable that whilst Talcahuano and Callao (near Lima), both situated at the head of large shallow bays, have suffered during every severe earthquake from great waves, Valparaiso, seated close to the edge of profoundly deep water, has never been
From the great wave not immediately following the earthquake, but sometimes after the interval of even half an hour, and from distant islands being affected similarly with the coasts near the focus of the disturbance, it appears that the wave first rises
The most remarkable effect of this earthquake was the permanent elevation of the land, it would probably be far more correct to speak of it as the cause.
There can be no doubt that the land round the Bay of Concepcion was upraised two or three feet; but it deserves notice, that owing to the wave having obliterated the old lines of tidal action on the sloping sandy shores, I could discover no evidence of
At the island of S. Maria (about thirty miles distant) the elevation was greater; on one part, Captain Fitz Roy founds beds of putrid mussel-shells _still adhering to the rocks_, ten feet above high-water mark: the inhabitants had formerly dived at
The elevation of this province is particularly interesting, from its having been the theatre of several other violent earthquakes, and from the vast numbers of sea-shells scattered over the land, up to a height of certainly 600, and I believe, of 1000
At Valparaiso, as I have remarked, similar shells are found at the height of 1300 feet: it is hardly possible to doubt that this great elevation has been effected by successive small uprisings, such as that which accompanied or caused the earthquake of
The island of Juan Fernandez, 360 miles to the N.E., was, at the time of the great shock of the 20th, violently shaken, so that the trees beat against each other, and a volcano burst forth under water close to the shore: these facts are remarkable because
Chiloe, about 340 miles southward of Concepcion, appears to have been shaken more strongly than the intermediate district of Valdivia, where the volcano of Villarica was noways affected, whilst in the Cordillera in front of Chiloe, two of the volcanos
These two volcanos, and some neighbouring ones, continued for a long time in eruption, and ten months afterwards were again influenced by an earthquake at Concepcion.
Some men, cutting wood near the base of one of these volcanos, did not perceive the shock of the 20th, although the whole surrounding Province was then trembling; here we have an eruption relieving and taking the place of an earthquake, as would have
Two years and three-quarters afterwards, Valdivia and Chiloe were again shaken, more violently than on the 20th, and an island in the Chonos Archipelago was permanently elevated more than eight feet.
It will give a better idea of the scale of these phenomena, if (as in the case of the glaciers) we suppose them to have taken place at corresponding distances in Europe:--then would the land from the North Sea to the Mediterranean have been violently
Two years and three-quarters afterwards, France, from its centre to the English Channel, would have been again desolated by an earthquake and an island permanently upraised in the Mediterranean.
The space, from under which volcanic matter on the 20th was actually erupted, is 720 miles in one line, and 400 miles in another line at right angles to the first: hence, in all probability, a subterranean lake of lava is here stretched out, of nearly
From the intimate and complicated manner in which the elevatory and eruptive forces were shown to be connected during this train of phenomena, we may confidently come to the conclusion, that the forces which slowly and by little starts uplift continents,
From many reasons, I believe that the frequent quakings of the earth on this line of coast are caused by the rending of the strata, necessarily consequent on the tension of the land when upraised, and their injection by fluidified rock.
This rending and injection would, if repeated often enough (and we know that earthquakes repeatedly affect the same areas in the same manner), form a chain of hills;--and the linear island of S. Mary, which was upraised thrice the height of the
I believe that the solid axis of a mountain, differs in its manner of formation from a volcanic hill, only in the molten stone having been repeatedly injected, instead of having been repeatedly ejected.
Moreover, I believe that it is impossible to explain the structure of great mountain-chains, such as that of the Cordillera, were the strata, capping the injected axis of plutonic rock, have been thrown on their edges along several parallel and
[2] [1] M. Arago in L'Institut, 1839, p.
337.
See also Miers's Chile, vol.
i.
p.
392; also Lyell's Principles of Geology, chap.
xv.
, book ii.
[2] For a full account of the volcanic phenomena which accompanied the earthquake of the 20th, and for the conclusions deducible from them, I must refer to Volume V. of the Geological Transactions.
CHAPTER XV PASSAGE OF THE CORDILLERA Valparaiso--Portillo Pass--Sagacity of Mules--Mountain-torrents--Mines, how discovered--Proofs of the gradual Elevation of the Cordillera--Effect of Snow on Rocks--Geological Structure of the two main Ranges, their
MARCH 7th, 1835.
--We stayed three days at Concepcion, and then sailed for Valparaiso.
The wind being northerly, we only reached the mouth of the harbour of Concepcion before it was dark.
Being very near the land, and a fog coming on, the anchor was dropped.
Presently a large American whaler appeared alongside of us; and we heard the Yankee swearing at his men to keep quiet, whilst he listened for the breakers.
Captain Fitz Roy hailed him, in a loud clear voice, to anchor where he then was.
The poor man must have thought the voice came from the shore: such a Babel of cries issued at once from the ship--every one hallooing out, "Let go the anchor!
veer cable!
shorten sail"!
It was the most laughable thing I ever heard.
If the ship's crew had been all captains, and no men, there could not have been a greater uproar of orders.
We afterwards found that the mate stuttered: I suppose all hands were assisting him in giving his orders.
On the 11th we anchored at Valparaiso, and two days afterwards I set out to cross the Cordillera.
I proceeded to Santiago, where Mr. Caldcleugh most kindly assisted me in every possible way in making the little preparations which were necessary.
In this part of Chile there are two passes across the Andes to Mendoza: the one most commonly used, namely, that of Aconcagua or Uspallata--is situated some way to the north; the other, called the Portillo, is to the south, and nearer, but more lofty and
March 18th.
--We set out for the Portillo pass.
Leaving Santiago we crossed the wide burnt-up plain on which that city stands, and in the afternoon arrived at the Maypu, one of the principal rivers in Chile.
The valley, at the point where it enters the first Cordillera, is bounded on each side by lofty barren mountains; and although not broad, it is very fertile.
Numerous cottages were surrounded by vines, and by orchards of apple, nectarine, and peach-trees--their boughs breaking with the weight of the beautiful ripe fruit.
In the evening we passed the custom-house, where our luggage was examined.
The frontier of Chile is better guarded by the Cordillera, than by the waters of the sea.
There are very few valleys which lead to the central ranges, and the mountains are quite impassable in other parts by beasts of burden.
The custom-house officers were very civil, which was perhaps partly owing to the passport which the President of the Republic had given me; but I must express my admiration at the natural politeness of almost every Chileno.
In this instance, the contrast with the same class of men in most other countries was strongly marked.
I may mention an anecdote with which I was at the time much pleased: we met near Mendoza a little and very fat negress, riding astride on a mule.
She had a _goitre_ so enormous that it was scarcely possible to avoid gazing at her for a moment; but my two companions almost instantly, by way of apology, made the common salute of the country by taking off their hats.
Where would one of the lower or higher classes in Europe, have shown such feeling politeness to a poor and miserable object of a degraded race?
At night we slept at a cottage.
Our manner of travelling was delightfully independent.
In the inhabited parts we bought a little firewood, hired pasture for the animals, and bivouacked in the corner of the same field with them.
Carrying an iron pot, we cooked and ate our supper under a cloudless sky, and knew no trouble.
My companions were Mariano Gonzales, who had formerly accompanied me in Chile, and an "arriero," with his ten mules and a "madrina".
The madrina (or godmother) is a most important personage: She is an old steady mare, with a little bell round her neck; and wherever she goes, the mules, like good children, follow her.
The affection of these animals for their madrinas saves infinite trouble.
If several large troops are turned into one field to graze, in the morning the muleteers have only to lead the madrinas a little apart, and tinkle their bells; although there may be two or three hundred together, each mule immediately knows the bell of its
It is nearly impossible to lose an old mule; for if detained for several hours by force, she will, by the power of smell, like a dog, track out her companions, or rather the madrina, for, according to the muleteer, she is the chief object of affection.
The feeling, however, is not of an individual nature; for I believe I am right in saying that any animal with a bell will serve as a madrina.
In a troop each animal carries on a level road, a cargo weighing 416 pounds (more than 29 stone), but in a mountainous country 100 pounds less; yet with what delicate slim limbs, without any proportional bulk of muscle, these animals support so great a
The mule always appears to me a most surprising animal.
That a hybrid should possess more reason, memory, obstinacy, social affection, powers of muscular endurance, and length of life, than either of its parents, seems to indicate that art has here outdone nature.
Of our ten animals, six were intended for riding, and four for carrying cargoes, each taking turn about.
We carried a good deal of food in case we should be snowed up, as the season was rather late for passing the Portillo.
March 19th.
--We rode during this day to the last, and therefore most elevated, house in the valley.
The number of inhabitants became scanty; but wherever water could be brought on the land, it was very fertile.
All the main valleys in the Cordillera are characterized by having, on both sides, a fringe or terrace of shingle and sand, rudely stratified, and generally of considerable thickness.
These fringes evidently once extended across the valleys and were united; and the bottoms of the valleys in northern Chile, where there are no streams, are thus smoothly filled up.
On these fringes the roads are generally carried, for their surfaces are even, and they rise, with a very gentle slope up the valleys: hence, also, they are easily cultivated by irrigation.
They may be traced up to a height of between 7000 and 9000 feet, where they become hidden by the irregular piles of debris.
At the lower end or mouths of the valleys, they are continuously united to those land-locked plains (also formed of shingle) at the foot of the main Cordillera, which I have described in a former chapter as characteristic of the scenery of Chile, and which
No one fact in the geology of South America, interested me more than these terraces of rudely-stratified shingle.
They precisely resemble in composition the matter which the torrents in each valley would deposit, if they were checked in their course by any cause, such as entering a lake or arm of the sea; but the torrents, instead of depositing matter, are now
It is impossible here to give the reasons, but I am convinced that the shingle terraces were accumulated, during the gradual elevation of the Cordillera, by the torrents delivering, at successive levels, their detritus on the beachheads of long narrow arms
If this be so, and I cannot doubt it, the grand and broken chain of the Cordillera, instead of having been suddenly thrown up, as was till lately the universal, and still is the common opinion of geologists, has been slowly upheaved in mass, in the same
A multitude of facts in the structure of the Cordillera, on this view receive a simple explanation.
The rivers which flow in these valleys ought rather to be called mountain-torrents.
Their inclination is very great, and their water the colour of mud.
The roar which the Maypu made, as it rushed over the great rounded fragments, was like that of the sea.
Amidst the din of rushing waters, the noise from the stones, as they rattled one over another, was most distinctly audible even from a distance.
This rattling noise, night and day, may be heard along the whole course of the torrent.
The sound spoke eloquently to the geologist; the thousands and thousands of stones, which, striking against each other, made the one dull uniform sound, were all hurrying in one direction.
It was like thinking on time, where the minute that now glides past is irrevocable.
So was it with these stones; the ocean is their eternity, and each note of that wild music told of one more step towards their destiny.
It is not possible for the mind to comprehend, except by a slow process, any effect which is produced by a cause repeated so often, that the multiplier itself conveys an idea, not more definite than the savage implies when he points to the hairs of his
As often as I have seen beds of mud, sand, and shingle, accumulated to the thickness of many thousand feet, I have felt inclined to exclaim that causes, such as the present rivers and the present beaches, could never have ground down and produced such
But, on the other hand, when listening to the rattling noise of these torrents, and calling to mind that whole races of animals have passed away from the face of the earth, and that during this whole period, night and day, these stones have gone rattling
In this part of the valley, the mountains on each side were from 3000 to 6000 or 8000 feet high, with rounded outlines and steep bare flanks.
The general colour of the rock was dullish purple, and the stratification very distinct.
If the scenery was not beautiful, it was remarkable and grand.
We met during the day several herds of cattle, which men were driving down from the higher valleys in the Cordillera.
This sign of the approaching winter hurried our steps, more than was convenient for geologizing.
The house where we slept was situated at the foot of a mountain, on the summit of which are the mines of S. Pedro de Nolasko.
Sir F. Head marvels how mines have been discovered in such extraordinary situations, as the bleak summit of the mountain of S. Pedro de Nolasko.
In the first place, metallic veins in this country are generally harder than the surrounding strata: hence, during the gradual wear of the hills, they project above the surface of the ground.
Secondly, almost every labourer, especially in the northern parts of Chile, understands something about the appearance of ores.
In the great mining provinces of Coquimbo and Copiapo, firewood is very scarce, and men search for it over every hill and dale; and by this means nearly all the richest mines have there been discovered.
Chanuncillo, from which silver to the value of many hundred thousand pounds has been raised in the course of a few years, was discovered by a man who threw a stone at his loaded donkey, and thinking that it was very heavy, he picked it up, and found it
The miners, also, taking a crowbar with them, often wander on Sundays over the mountains.
In this south part of Chile, the men who drive cattle into the Cordillera, and who frequent every ravine where there is a little pasture, are the usual discoverers.
20th.
--As we ascended the valley, the vegetation, with the exception of a few pretty alpine flowers, became exceedingly scanty, and of quadrupeds, birds, or insects, scarcely one could be seen.
The lofty mountains, their summits marked with a few patches of snow, stood well separated from each other, the valleys being filled up with an immense thickness of stratified alluvium.
The features in the scenery of the Andes which struck me most, as contrasted with the other mountain chains with which I am acquainted, were,--the flat fringes sometimes expanding into narrow plains on each side of the valleys,--the bright colours, chiefly
I frequently observed, both in Tierra del Fuego and within the Andes, that where the rock was covered during the greater part of the year with snow, it was shivered in a very extraordinary manner into small angular fragments.
Scoresby [1] has observed the same fact in Spitzbergen.
The case appears to me rather obscure: for that part of the mountain which is protected by a mantle of snow, must be less subject to repeated and great changes of temperature than any other part.
I have sometimes thought, that the earth and fragments of stone on the surface, were perhaps less effectually removed by slowly percolating snow-water [2] than by rain, and therefore that the appearance of a quicker disintegration of the solid rock under
Whatever the cause may be, the quantity of crumbling stone on the Cordillera is very great.
Occasionally in the spring, great masses of this detritus slide down the mountains, and cover the snow-drifts in the valleys, thus forming natural ice-houses.
We rode over one, the height of which was far below the limit of perpetual snow.
As the evening drew to a close, we reached a singular basin-like plain, called the Valle del Yeso.
It was covered by a little dry pasture, and we had the pleasant sight of a herd of cattle amidst the surrounding rocky deserts.
The valley takes its name of Yeso from a great bed, I should think at least 2000 feet thick, of white, and in some parts quite pure, gypsum.
We slept with a party of men, who were employed in loading mules with this substance, which is used in the manufacture of wine.
We set out early in the morning (21st), and continued to follow the course of the river, which had become very small, till we arrived at the foot of the ridge, that separates the waters flowing into the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans.
The road, which as yet had been good with a steady but very gradual ascent, now changed into a steep zigzag track up the great range, dividing the republics of Chile and Mendoza.
I will here give a very brief sketch of the geology of the several parallel lines forming the Cordillera.
Of these lines, there are two considerably higher than the others; namely, on the Chilian side, the Peuquenes ridge, which, where the road crosses it, is 13,210 feet above the sea; and the Portillo ridge, on the Mendoza side, which is 14,305 feet.
The lower beds of the Peuquenes ridge, and of the several great lines to the westward of it, are composed of a vast pile, many thousand feet in thickness, of porphyries which have flowed as submarine lavas, alternating with angular and rounded fragments of
These alternating masses are covered in the central parts, by a great thickness of red sandstone, conglomerate, and calcareous clay-slate, associated with, and passing into, prodigious beds of gypsum.
In these upper beds shells are tolerably frequent; and they belong to about the period of the lower chalk of Europe.
It is an old story, but not the less wonderful, to hear of shells which were once crawling on the bottom of the sea, now standing nearly 14,000 feet above its level.
The lower beds in this great pile of strata, have been dislocated, baked, crystallized and almost blended together, through the agency of mountain masses of a peculiar white soda-granitic rock.
The other main line, namely, that of the Portillo, is of a totally different formation: it consists chiefly of grand bare pinnacles of a red potash-granite, which low down on the western flank are covered by a sandstone, converted by the former heat into a
On the quartz, there rest beds of a conglomerate several thousand feet in thickness, which have been upheaved by the red granite, and dip at an angle of 45 degs.
towards the Peuquenes line.
I was astonished to find that this conglomerate was partly composed of pebbles, derived from the rocks, with their fossil shells, of the Peuquenes range; and partly of red potash-granite, like that of the Portillo.
Hence we must conclude, that both the Peuquenes and Portillo ranges were partially upheaved and exposed to wear and tear, when the conglomerate was forming; but as the beds of the conglomerate have been thrown off at an angle of 45 degs.
by the red Portillo granite (with the underlying sandstone baked by it), we may feel sure, that the greater part of the injection and upheaval of the already partially formed Portillo line, took place after the accumulation of the conglomerate, and long
So that the Portillo, the loftiest line in this part of the Cordillera, is not so old as the less lofty line of the Peuquenes.
Evidence derived from an inclined stream of lava at the eastern base of the Portillo, might be adduced to show, that it owes part of its great height to elevations of a still later date.
Looking to its earliest origin, the red granite seems to have been injected on an ancient pre-existing line of white granite and mica-slate.
In most parts, perhaps in all parts, of the Cordillera, it may be concluded that each line has been formed by repeated upheavals and injections; and that the several parallel lines are of different ages.
Only thus can we gain time, at all sufficient to explain the truly astonishing amount of denudation, which these great, though comparatively with most other ranges recent, mountains have suffered.
Finally, the shells in the Peuquenes or oldest ridge, prove, as before remarked, that it has been upraised 14,000 feet since a Secondary period, which in Europe we are accustomed to consider as far from ancient; but since these shells lived in a moderately
The proof is the same with that by which it was shown, that at a much later period, since the tertiary shells of Patagonia lived, there must have been there a subsidence of several hundred feet, as well as an ensuing elevation.
Daily it is forced home on the mind of the geologist, that nothing, not even the wind that blows, is so unstable as the level of the crust of this earth.
I will make only one other geological remark: although the Portillo chain is here higher than the Peuquenes, the waters draining the intermediate valleys, have burst through it.
The same fact, on a grander scale, has been remarked in the eastern and loftiest line of the Bolivian Cordillera, through which the rivers pass: analogous facts have also been observed in other quarters of the world.
On the supposition of the subsequent and gradual elevation of the Portillo line, this can be understood; for a chain of islets would at first appear, and, as these were lifted up, the tides would be always wearing deeper and broader channels between them.
At the present day, even in the most retired Sounds on the coast of Tierra del Fuego, the currents in the transverse breaks which connect the longitudinal channels, are very strong, so that in one transverse channel even a small vessel under sail was
About noon we began the tedious ascent of the Peuquenes ridge, and then for the first time experienced some little difficulty in our respiration.
The mules would halt every fifty yards, and after resting for a few seconds the poor willing animals started of their own accord again.
The short breathing from the rarefied atmosphere is called by the Chilenos "puna;" and they have most ridiculous notions concerning its origin.
Some say "all the waters here have puna;" others that "where there is snow there is puna;"--and this no doubt is true.
The only sensation I experienced was a slight tightness across the head and chest, like that felt on leaving a warm room and running quickly in frosty weather.
There was some imagination even in this; for upon finding fossil shells on the highest ridge, I entirely forgot the puna in my delight.
Certainly the exertion of walking was extremely great, and the respiration became deep and laborious: I am told that in Potosi (about 13,000 feet above the sea) strangers do not become thoroughly accustomed to the atmosphere for an entire year.
The inhabitants all recommend onions for the puna; as this vegetable has sometimes been given in Europe for pectoral complaints, it may possibly be of real service:--for my part I found nothing so good as the fossil shells!
When about half-way up we met a large party with seventy loaded mules.
It was interesting to hear the wild cries of the muleteers, and to watch the long descending string of the animals; they appeared so diminutive, there being nothing but the black mountains with which they could be compared.
When near the summit, the wind, as generally happens, was impetuous and extremely cold.
On each side of the ridge, we had to pass over broad bands of perpetual snow, which were now soon to be covered by a fresh layer.
When we reached the crest and looked backwards, a glorious view was presented.
The atmosphere resplendently clear; the sky an intense blue; the profound valleys; the wild broken forms: the heaps of ruins, piled up during the lapse of ages; the bright-coloured rocks, contrasted with the quiet mountains of snow, all these together
Neither plant nor bird, excepting a few condors wheeling around the higher pinnacles, distracted my attention from the inanimate mass.
I felt glad that I was alone: it was like watching a thunderstorm, or hearing in full orchestra a chorus of the Messiah.
On several patches of the snow I found the Protococcus nivalis, or red snow, so well known from the accounts of Arctic navigators.
My attention was called to it, by observing the footsteps of the mules stained a pale red, as if their hoofs had been slightly bloody.
I at first thought that it was owing to dust blown from the surrounding mountains of red porphyry; for from the magnifying power of the crystals of snow, the groups of these microscopical plants appeared like coarse particles.
The snow was coloured only where it had thawed very rapidly, or had been accidentally crushed.
A little rubbed on paper gave it a faint rose tinge mingled with a little brick-red.
I afterwards scraped some off the paper, and found that it consisted of groups of little spheres in colourless cases, each of the thousandth part of an inch in diameter.
The wind on the crest of the Peuquenes, as just remarked, is generally impetuous and very cold: it is said [3] to blow steadily from the westward or Pacific side.
As the observations have been chiefly made in summer, this wind must be an upper and return current.
The Peak of Teneriffe, with a less elevation, and situated in lat.
28 degs.
, in like manner falls within an upper return stream.
At first it appears rather surprising, that the trade-wind along the northern parts of Chile and on the coast of Peru, should blow in so very southerly a direction as it does; but when we reflect that the Cordillera, running in a north and south line,
At Mendoza, on the eastern foot of the Andes, the climate is said to be subject to long calms, and to frequent though false appearances of gathering rain-storms: we may imagine that the wind, which coming from the eastward is thus banked up by the line of
Having crossed the Peuquenes, we descended into a mountainous country, intermediate between the two main ranges, and then took up our quarters for the night.
We were now in the republic of Mendoza.
The elevation was probably not under 11,000 feet, and the vegetation in consequence exceedingly scanty.
The root of a small scrubby plant served as fuel, but it made a miserable fire, and the wind was piercingly cold.
Being quite tired with my days work, I made up my bed as quickly as I could, and went to sleep.
About midnight I observed the sky became suddenly clouded: I awakened the arriero to know if there was any danger of bad weather; but he said that without thunder and lightning there was no risk of a heavy snow-storm.
The peril is imminent, and the difficulty of subsequent escape great, to any one overtaken by bad weather between the two ranges.
A certain cave offers the only place of refuge: Mr. Caldcleugh, who crossed on this same day of the month, was detained there for some time by a heavy fall of snow.
Casuchas, or houses of refuge, have not been built in this pass as in that of Uspallata, and, therefore, during the autumn, the Portillo is little frequented.
I may here remark that within the main Cordillera rain never falls, for during the summer the sky is cloudless, and in winter snow-storms alone occur.
At the place where we slept water necessarily boiled, from the diminished pressure of the atmosphere, at a lower temperature than it does in a less lofty country; the case being the converse of that of a Papin's digester.
Hence the potatoes, after remaining for some hours in the boiling water, were nearly as hard as ever.
The pot was left on the fire all night, and next morning it was boiled again, but yet the potatoes were not cooked.
I found out this, by overhearing my two companions discussing the cause, they had come to the simple conclusion, "that the cursed pot [which was a new one] did not choose to boil potatoes".
March 22nd.
--After eating our potatoless breakfast, we travelled across the intermediate tract to the foot of the Portillo range.
In the middle of summer cattle are brought up here to graze; but they had now all been removed: even the greater number of the Guanacos had decamped, knowing well that if overtaken here by a snow-storm, they would be caught in a trap.
We had a fine view of a mass of mountains called Tupungato, the whole clothed with unbroken snow, in the midst of which there was a blue patch, no doubt a glacier;--a circumstance of rare occurrence in these mountains.
Now commenced a heavy and long climb, similar to that of the Peuquenes.
Bold conical hills of red granite rose on each hand; in the valleys there were several broad fields of perpetual snow.
These frozen masses, during the process of thawing, had in some parts been converted into pinnacles or columns, [4] which, as they were high and close together, made it difficult for the cargo mules to pass.
On one of these columns of ice, a frozen horse was sticking as on a pedestal, but with its hind legs straight up in the air.
The animal, I suppose, must have fallen with its head downward into a hole, when the snow was continuous, and afterwards the surrounding parts must have been removed by the thaw.
When nearly on the crest of the Portillo, we were enveloped in a falling cloud of minute frozen spicula.
This was very unfortunate, as it continued the whole day, and quite intercepted our view.
The pass takes its name of Portillo, from a narrow cleft or doorway on the highest ridge, through which the road passes.
From this point, on a clear day, those vast plains which uninterruptedly extend to the Atlantic Ocean can be seen.
We descended to the upper limit of vegetation, and found good quarters for the night under the shelter of some large fragments of rock.
We met here some passengers, who made anxious inquiries about the state of the road.
Shortly after it was dark the clouds suddenly cleared away, and the effect was quite magical.
The great mountains, bright with the full moon, seemed impending over us on all sides, as over a deep crevice: one morning, very early, I witnessed the same striking effect.
As soon as the clouds were dispersed it froze severely; but as there was no wind, we slept very comfortably.
The increased brilliancy of the moon and stars at this elevation, owing to the perfect transparency of the atmosphere, was very remarkable.
Travelers having observed the difficulty of judging heights and distances amidst lofty mountains, have generally attributed it to the absence of objects of comparison.
It appears to me, that it is fully as much owing to the transparency of the air confounding objects at different distances, and likewise partly to the novelty of an unusual degree of fatigue arising from a little exertion,--habit being thus opposed to the
I am sure that this extreme clearness of the air gives a peculiar character to the landscape, all objects appearing to be brought nearly into one plane, as in a drawing or panorama.
The transparency is, I presume, owing to the equable and high state of atmospheric dryness.
This dryness was shown by the manner in which woodwork shrank (as I soon found by the trouble my geological hammer gave me); by articles of food, such as bread and sugar, becoming extremely hard; and by the preservation of the skin and parts of the flesh
To the same cause we must attribute the singular facility with which electricity is excited.
My flannel waistcoat, when rubbed in the dark, appeared as if it had been washed with phosphorus,--every hair on a dog's back crackled;--even the linen sheets, and leathern straps of the saddle, when handled, emitted sparks.
March 23rd.
--The descent on the eastern side of the Cordillera is much shorter or steeper than on the Pacific side; in other words, the mountains rise more abruptly from the plains than from the alpine country of Chile.
A level and brilliantly white sea of clouds was stretched out beneath our feet, shutting out the view of the equally level Pampas.
We soon entered the band of clouds, and did not again emerge from it that day.
About noon, finding pasture for the animals and bushes for firewood at Los Arenales, we stopped for the night.
This was near the uppermost limit of bushes, and the elevation, I suppose, was between seven and eight thousand feet.
I was much struck with the marked difference between the vegetation of these eastern valleys and those on the Chilian side: yet the climate, as well as the kind of soil, is nearly the same, and the difference of longitude very trifling.
The same remark holds good with the quadrupeds, and in a lesser degree with the birds and insects.
I may instance the mice, of which I obtained thirteen species on the shores of the Atlantic, and five on the Pacific, and not one of them is identical.
We must except all those species, which habitually or occasionally frequent elevated mountains; and certain birds, which range as far south as the Strait of Magellan.
This fact is in perfect accordance with the geological history of the Andes; for these mountains have existed as a great barrier since the present races of animals have appeared; and therefore, unless we suppose the same species to have been created in two
In both cases, we must leave out of the question those kinds which have been able to cross the barrier, whether of solid rock or salt-water.
[5] A great number of the plants and animals were absolutely the same as, or most closely allied to, those of Patagonia.
We here have the agouti, bizcacha, three species of armadillo, the ostrich, certain kinds of partridges and other birds, none of which are ever seen in Chile, but are the characteristic animals of the desert plains of Patagonia.
We have likewise many of the same (to the eyes of a person who is not a botanist) thorny stunted bushes, withered grass, and dwarf plants.
Even the black slowly crawling beetles are closely similar, and some, I believe, on rigorous examination, absolutely identical.
It had always been to me a subject of regret, that we were unavoidably compelled to give up the ascent of the S. Cruz river before reaching the mountains: I always had a latent hope of meeting with some great change in the features of the country; but I
March 24th.
--Early in the morning I climbed up a mountain on one side of the valley, and enjoyed a far extended view over the Pampas.
This was a spectacle to which I had always looked forward with interest, but I was disappointed: at the first glance it much resembled a distant view of the ocean, but in the northern parts many irregularities were soon distinguishable.
The most striking feature consisted in the rivers, which, facing the rising sun, glittered like silver threads, till lost in the immensity of the distance.
At midday we descended the valley, and reached a hovel, where an officer and three soldiers were posted to examine passports.
One of these men was a thoroughbred Pampas Indian: he was kept much for the same purpose as a bloodhound, to track out any person who might pass by secretly, either on foot or horseback.
Some years ago, a passenger endeavoured to escape detection, by making a long circuit over a neighbouring mountain; but this Indian, having by chance crossed his track, followed it for the whole day over dry and very stony hills, till at last he came on
We here heard that the silvery clouds, which we had admired from the bright region above, had poured down torrents of rain.
The valley from this point gradually opened, and the hills became mere water-worn hillocks compared to the giants behind: it then expanded into a gently sloping plain of shingle, covered with low trees and bushes.
This talus, although appearing narrow, must be nearly ten miles wide before it blends into the apparently dead level Pampas.
We passed the only house in this neighbourhood, the Estancia of Chaquaio: and at sunset we pulled up in the first snug corner, and there bivouacked.
March 25th.
--I was reminded of the Pampas of Buenos Ayres, by seeing the disk of the rising sun, intersected by an horizon level as that of the ocean.
During the night a heavy dew fell, a circumstance which we did not experience within the Cordillera.
The road proceeded for some distance due east across a low swamp; then meeting the dry plain, it turned to the north towards Mendoza.
The distance is two very long days' journey.
Our first day's journey was called fourteen leagues to Estacado, and the second seventeen to Luxan, near Mendoza.
The whole distance is over a level desert plain, with not more than two or three houses.
The sun was exceedingly powerful, and the ride devoid of all interest.
There is very little water in this "traversia," and in our second day's journey we found only one little pool.
Little water flows from the mountains, and it soon becomes absorbed by the dry and porous soil; so that, although we travelled at the distance of only ten or fifteen miles from the outer range of the Cordillera, we did not cross a single stream.
In many parts the ground was incrusted with a saline efflorescence; hence we had the same salt-loving plants which are common near Bahia Blanca.
The landscape has a uniform character from the Strait of Magellan, along the whole eastern coast of Patagonia, to the Rio Colorado; and it appears that the same kind of country extends inland from this river, in a sweeping line as far as San Luis and
To the eastward of this curved line lies the basin of the comparatively damp and green plains of Buenos Ayres.
The sterile plains of Mendoza and Patagonia consist of a bed of shingle, worn smooth and accumulated by the waves of the sea while the Pampas, covered by thistles, clover, and grass, have been formed by the ancient estuary mud of the Plata.
After our two days' tedious journey, it was refreshing to see in the distance the rows of poplars and willows growing round the village and river of Luxan.
Shortly before we arrived at this place, we observed to the south a ragged cloud of dark reddish-brown colour.
At first we thought that it was smoke from some great fire on the plains; but we soon found that it was a swarm of locusts.
They were flying northward; and with the aid of a light breeze, they overtook us at a rate of ten or fifteen miles an hour.
The main body filled the air from a height of twenty feet, to that, as it appeared, of two or three thousand above the ground; "and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle:" or rather, I should say, like a
The sky, seen through the advanced guard, appeared like a mezzotinto engraving, but the main body was impervious to sight; they were not, however, so thick together, but that they could escape a stick waved backwards and forwards.
When they alighted, they were more numerous than the leaves in the field, and the surface became reddish instead of being green: the swarm having once alighted, the individuals flew from side to side in all directions.
Locusts are not an uncommon pest in this country: already during the season, several smaller swarms had come up from the south, where, as apparently in all other parts of the world, they are bred in the deserts.
The poor cottagers in vain attempted by lighting fires, by shouts, and by waving branches to avert the attack.
This species of locust closely resembles, and perhaps is identical with, the famous Gryllus migratorius of the East.
We crossed the Luxan, which is a river of considerable size, though its course towards the sea-coast is very imperfectly known: it is even doubtful whether, in passing over the plains, it is not evaporated and lost.
We slept in the village of Luxan, which is a small place surrounded by gardens, and forms the most southern cultivated district in the Province of Mendoza; it is five leagues south of the capital.
At night I experienced an attack (for it deserves no less a name) of the _Benchuca_, a species of Reduvius, the great black bug of the Pampas.
It is most disgusting to feel soft wingless insects, about an inch long, crawling over one's body.
Before sucking they are quite thin, but afterwards they become round and bloated with blood, and in this state are easily crushed.
One which I caught at Iquique, (for they are found in Chile and Peru,) was very empty.
When placed on a table, and though surrounded by people, if a finger was presented, the bold insect would immediately protrude its sucker, make a charge, and if allowed, draw blood.
No pain was caused by the wound.
It was curious to watch its body during the act of sucking, as in less than ten minutes it changed from being as flat as a wafer to a globular form.
This one feast, for which the benchuca was indebted to one of the officers, kept it fat during four whole months; but, after the first fortnight, it was quite ready to have another suck.
March 27th.
--We rode on to Mendoza.
The country was beautifully cultivated, and resembled Chile.
This neighbourhood is celebrated for its fruit; and certainly nothing could appear more flourishing than the vineyards and the orchards of figs, peaches, and olives.
We bought water-melons nearly twice as large as a man's head, most deliciously cool and well-flavoured, for a halfpenny apiece; and for the value of threepence, half a wheelbarrowful of peaches.
The cultivated and enclosed part of this province is very small; there is little more than that which we passed through between Luxan and the capital.
The land, as in Chile, owes its fertility entirely to artificial irrigation; and it is really wonderful to observe how extraordinarily productive a barren traversia is thus rendered.
We stayed the ensuing day in Mendoza.
The prosperity of the place has much declined of late years.
The inhabitants say "it is good to live in, but very bad to grow rich in".
The lower orders have the lounging, reckless manners of the Gauchos of the Pampas; and their dress, riding-gear, and habits of life, are nearly the same.
To my mind the town had a stupid, forlorn aspect.
Neither the boasted alameda, nor the scenery, is at all comparable with that of Santiago; but to those who, coming from Buenos Ayres, have just crossed the unvaried Pampas, the gardens and orchards must appear delightful.
Sir F. Head, speaking of the inhabitants, says, "They eat their dinners, and it is so very hot, they go to sleep--and could they do better"?
I quite agree with Sir F. Head: the happy doom of the Mendozinos is to eat, sleep and be idle.
March 29th.
--We set out on our return to Chile, by the Uspallata pass situated north of Mendoza.
We had to cross a long and most sterile traversia of fifteen leagues.
The soil in parts was absolutely bare, in others covered by numberless dwarf cacti, armed with formidable spines, and called by the inhabitants "little lions".
There were, also, a few low bushes.
Although the plain is nearly three thousand feet above the sea, the sun was very powerful; and the heat as well as the clouds of impalpable dust, rendered the travelling extremely irksome.
Our course during the day lay nearly parallel to the Cordillera, but gradually approaching them.
Before sunset we entered one of the wide valleys, or rather bays, which open on the plain: this soon narrowed into a ravine, where a little higher up the house of Villa Vicencio is situated.
As we had ridden all day without a drop of water, both our mules and selves were very thirsty, and we looked out anxiously for the stream which flows down this valley.
It was curious to observe how gradually the water made its appearance: on the plain the course was quite dry; by degrees it became a little damper; then puddles of water appeared; these soon became connected; and at Villa Vicencio there was a nice little
30th.
--The solitary hovel which bears the imposing name of Villa Vicencio, has been mentioned by every traveller who has crossed the Andes.
I stayed here and at some neighbouring mines during the two succeeding days.
The geology of the surrounding country is very curious.
The Uspallata range is separated from the main Cordillera by a long narrow plain or basin, like those so often mentioned in Chile, but higher, being six thousand feet above the sea.
This range has nearly the same geographical position with respect to the Cordillera, which the gigantic Portillo line has, but it is of a totally different origin: it consists of various kinds of submarine lava, alternating with volcanic sandstones and
From this resemblance I expected to find silicified wood, which is generally characteristic of those formations.
I was gratified in a very extraordinary manner.
In the central part of the range, at an elevation of about seven thousand feet, I observed on a bare slope some snow-white projecting columns.
These were petrified trees, eleven being silicified, and from thirty to forty converted into coarsely-crystallized white calcareous spar.
They were abruptly broken off, the upright stumps projecting a few feet above the ground.
The trunks measured from three to five feet each in circumference.
They stood a little way apart from each other, but the whole formed one group.
Mr. Robert Brown has been kind enough to examine the wood: he says it belongs to the fir tribe, partaking of the character of the Araucarian family, but with some curious points of affinity with the yew.
The volcanic sandstone in which the trees were embedded, and from the lower part of which they must have sprung, had accumulated in successive thin layers around their trunks; and the stone yet retained the impression of the bark.
It required little geological practice to interpret the marvellous story which this scene at once unfolded; though I confess I was at first so much astonished that I could scarcely believe the plainest evidence.
I saw the spot where a cluster of fine trees once waved their branches on the shores of the Atlantic, when that ocean (now driven back 700 miles) came to the foot of the Andes.
I saw that they had sprung from a volcanic soil which had been raised above the level of the sea, and that subsequently this dry land, with its upright trees, had been let down into the depths of the ocean.
In these depths, the formerly dry land was covered by sedimentary beds, and these again by enormous streams of submarine lava--one such mass attaining the thickness of a thousand feet; and these deluges of molten stone and aqueous deposits five times
The ocean which received such thick masses, must have been profoundly deep; but again the subterranean forces exerted themselves, and I now beheld the bed of that ocean, forming a chain of mountains more than seven thousand feet in height.
Nor had those antagonistic forces been dormant, which are always at work wearing down the surface of the land; the great piles of strata had been intersected by many wide valleys, and the trees now changed into silex, were exposed projecting from the
Now, all is utterly irreclaimable and desert; even the lichen cannot adhere to the stony casts of former trees.
Vast, and scarcely comprehensible as such changes must ever appear, yet they have all occurred within a period, recent when compared with the history of the Cordillera; and the Cordillera itself is absolutely modern as compared with many of the
April 1st.
--We crossed the Upsallata range, and at night slept at the custom-house--the only inhabited spot on the plain.
Shortly before leaving the mountains, there was a very extraordinary view; red, purple, green, and quite white sedimentary rocks, alternating with black lavas, were broken up and thrown into all kinds of disorder by masses of porphyry of every shade of
It was the first view I ever saw, which really resembled those pretty sections which geologists make of the inside of the earth.
The next day we crossed the plain, and followed the course of the same great mountain stream which flows by Luxan.
Here it was a furious torrent, quite impassable, and appeared larger than in the low country, as was the case with the rivulet of Villa Vicencio.
On the evening of the succeeding day, we reached the Rio de las Vacas, which is considered the worst stream in the Cordillera to cross.
As all these rivers have a rapid and short course, and are formed by the melting of the snow, the hour of the day makes a considerable difference in their volume.
In the evening the stream is muddy and full, but about daybreak it becomes clearer, and much less impetuous.
This we found to be the case with the Rio Vacas, and in the morning we crossed it with little difficulty.
The scenery thus far was very uninteresting, compared with that of the Portillo pass.
Little can be seen beyond the bare walls of the one grand flat-bottomed valley, which the road follows up to the highest crest.
The valley and the huge rocky mountains are extremely barren: during the two previous nights the poor mules had absolutely nothing to eat, for excepting a few low resinous bushes, scarcely a plant can be seen.
In the course of this day we crossed some of the worst passes in the Cordillera, but their danger has been much exaggerated.
I was told that if I attempted to pass on foot, my head would turn giddy, and that there was no room to dismount; but I did not see a place where any one might not have walked over backwards, or got off his mule on either side.
One of the bad passes, called _las Animas_ (the souls), I had crossed, and did not find out till a day afterwards, that it was one of the awful dangers.
No doubt there are many parts in which, if the mule should stumble, the rider would be hurled down a great precipice; but of this there is little chance.
I dare say, in the spring, the "laderas," or roads, which each year are formed anew across the piles of fallen detritus, are very bad; but from what I saw, I suspect the real danger is nothing.
With cargo-mules the case is rather different, for the loads project so far, that the animals, occasionally running against each other, or against a point of rock, lose their balance, and are thrown down the precipices.
In crossing the rivers I can well believe that the difficulty may be very great: at this season there was little trouble, but in the summer they must be very hazardous.
I can quite imagine, as Sir F. Head describes, the different expressions of those who _have_ passed the gulf, and those who _are_ passing.
I never heard of any man being drowned, but with loaded mules it frequently happens.
The arriero tells you to show your mule the best line, and then allow her to cross as she likes: the cargo-mule takes a bad line, and is often lost.
April 4th.
--From the Rio de las Vacas to the Puente del Incas, half a day's journey.
As there was pasture for the mules, and geology for me, we bivouacked here for the night.
When one hears of a natural Bridge, one pictures to one's self some deep and narrow ravine, across which a bold mass of rock has fallen; or a great arch hollowed out like the vault of a cavern.
Instead of this, the Incas Bridge consists of a crust of stratified shingle cemented together by the deposits of the neighbouring hot springs.
It appears, as if the stream had scooped out a channel on one side, leaving an overhanging ledge, which was met by earth and stones falling down from the opposite cliff.
Certainly an oblique junction, as would happen in such a case, was very distinct on one side.
The Bridge of the Incas is by no means worthy of the great monarchs whose name it bears.
5th.
--We had a long day's ride across the central ridge, from the Incas Bridge to the Ojos del Agua, which are situated near the lowest _casucha_ on the Chilian side.
These casuchas are round little towers, with steps outside to reach the floor, which is raised some feet above the ground on account of the snow-drifts.
They are eight in number, and under the Spanish government were kept during the winter well stored with food and charcoal, and each courier had a master-key.
Now they only answer the purpose of caves, or rather dungeons.
Seated on some little eminence, they are not, however, ill suited to the surrounding scene of desolation.
The zigzag ascent of the Cumbre, or the partition of the waters, was very steep and tedious; its height, according to Mr. Pentland, is 12,454 feet.
The road did not pass over any perpetual snow, although there were patches of it on both hands.
The wind on the summit was exceedingly cold, but it was impossible not to stop for a few minutes to admire, again and again, the colour of the heavens, and the brilliant transparency of the atmosphere.
The scenery was grand: to the westward there was a fine chaos of mountains, divided by profound ravines.
Some snow generally falls before this period of the season, and it has even happened that the Cordillera have been finally closed by this time.
But we were most fortunate.
The sky, by night and by day, was cloudless, excepting a few round little masses of vapour, that floated over the highest pinnacles.
I have often seen these islets in the sky, marking the position of the Cordillera, when the far-distant mountains have been hidden beneath the horizon.
April 6th.
--In the morning we found some thief had stolen one of our mules, and the bell of the madrina.
We therefore rode only two or three miles down the valley, and stayed there the ensuing day in hopes of recovering the mule, which the arriero thought had been hidden in some ravine.
The scenery in this part had assumed a Chilian character: the lower sides of the mountains, dotted over with the pale evergreen Quillay tree, and with the great chandelier-like cactus, are certainly more to be admired than the bare eastern valleys; but I
The extreme pleasure, I suspect, is chiefly owing to the prospect of a good fire and of a good supper, after escaping from the cold regions above: and I am sure I most heartily participated in these feelings.
8th.
--We left the valley of the Aconcagua, by which we had descended, and reached in the evening a cottage near the Villa del St. Rosa.
The fertility of the plain was delightful: the autumn being advanced, the leaves of many of the fruit-trees were falling; and of the labourers,--some were busy in drying figs and peaches on the roofs of their cottages, while others were gathering the
It was a pretty scene; but I missed that pensive stillness which makes the autumn in England indeed the evening of the year.
On the 10th we reached Santiago, where I received a very kind and hospitable reception from Mr. Caldcleugh.
My excursion only cost me twenty-four days, and never did I more deeply enjoy an equal space of time.
A few days afterwards I returned to Mr. Corfield's house at Valparaiso.
[1] Scoresby's Arctic Regions, vol.
i.
p.
122.
[2] I have heard it remarked in Shropshire that the water, when the Severn is flooded from long-continued rain, is much more turbid than when it proceeds from the snow melting in the Welsh mountains.
D'Orbigny (tom.
i.
p.
184), in explaining the cause of the various colours of the rivers in South America, remarks that those with blue or clear water have there source in the Cordillera, where the snow melts.
[3] Dr. Gillies in Journ.
of Nat.
and Geograph.
Science, Aug.
, 1830.
This author gives the heights of the Passes.
[4] This structure in frozen snow was long since observed by Scoresby in the icebergs near Spitzbergen, and, lately, with more care, by Colonel Jackson (Journ.
of Geograph.
Soc.
, vol.
v.
p.
12) on the Neva.
Mr. Lyell (Principles, vol.
iv.
p.
360) has compared the fissures by which the columnar structure seems to be determined, to the joints that traverse nearly all rocks, but which are best seen in the non-stratified masses.
I may observe, that in the case of the frozen snow, the columnar structure must be owing to a "metamorphic" action, and not to a process during deposition.
[5] This is merely an illustration of the admirable laws, first laid down by Mr. Lyell, on the geographical distribution of animals, as influenced by geological changes.
The whole reasoning, of course, is founded on the assumption of the immutability of species; otherwise the difference in the species in the two regions might be considered as superinduced during a length of time.
CHAPTER XVI NORTHERN CHILE AND PERU Coast-road to Coquimbo--Great Loads carried by the Miners--Coquimbo--Earthquake--Step-formed Terrace--Absence of recent Deposits--Contemporaneousness of the Tertiary Formations--Excursion up the Valley--Road to
APRIL 27th.
--I set out on a journey to Coquimbo, and thence through Guasco to Copiapo, where Captain Fitz Roy kindly offered to pick me up in the Beagle.
The distance in a straight line along the shore northward is only 420 miles; but my mode of travelling made it a very long journey.
I bought four horses and two mules, the latter carrying the luggage on alternate days.
The six animals together only cost the value of twenty-five pounds sterling, and at Copiapo I sold them again for twenty-three.
We travelled in the same independent manner as before, cooking our own meals, and sleeping in the open air.
As we rode towards the Vino del Mar, I took a farewell view of Valparaiso, and admired its picturesque appearance.
For geological purposes I made a detour from the high road to the foot of the Bell of Quillota.
We passed through an alluvial district rich in gold, to the neighbourhood of Limache, where we slept.
Washing for gold supports the inhabitants of numerous hovels, scattered along the sides of each little rivulet; but, like all those whose gains are uncertain, they are unthrifty in all their habits, and consequently poor.
28th.
--In the afternoon we arrived at a cottage at the foot of the Bell mountain.
The inhabitants were freeholders, which is not very usual in Chile.
They supported themselves on the produce of a garden and a little field, but were very poor.
Capital is here so deficient, that the people are obliged to sell their green corn while standing in the field, in order to buy necessaries for the ensuing year.
Wheat in consequence was dearer in the very district of its production than at Valparaiso, where the contractors live.
The next day we joined the main road to Coquimbo.
At night there was a very light shower of rain: this was the first drop that had fallen since the heavy rain of September 11th and 12th, which detained me a prisoner at the Baths of Cauquenes.
The interval was seven and a half months; but the rain this year in Chile was rather later than usual.
The distant Andes were now covered by a thick mass of snow, and were a glorious sight.
May 2nd.
--The road continued to follow the coast, at no great distance from the sea.
The few trees and bushes which are common in central Chile decreased rapidly in numbers, and were replaced by a tall plant, something like a yucca in appearance.
The surface of the country, on a small scale, was singularly broken and irregular; abrupt little peaks of rock rising out of small plains or basins.
The indented coast and the bottom of the neighbouring sea, studded with breakers, would, if converted into dry land, present similar forms; and such a conversion without doubt has taken place in the part over which we rode.
3rd.
--Quilimari to Conchalee.
The country became more and more barren.
In the valleys there was scarcely sufficient water for any irrigation; and the intermediate land was quite bare, not supporting even goats.
In the spring, after the winter showers, a thin pasture rapidly springs up, and cattle are then driven down from the Cordillera to graze for a short time.
It is curious to observe how the seeds of the grass and other plants seem to accommodate themselves, as if by an acquired habit, to the quantity of rain which falls upon different parts of this coast.
One shower far northward at Copiapo produces as great an effect on the vegetation, as two at Guasco, and three or four in this district.
At Valparaiso a winter so dry as greatly to injure the pasture, would at Guasco produce the most unusual abundance.
Proceeding northward, the quantity of rain does not appear to decrease in strict proportion to the latitude.
At Conchalee, which is only 67 miles north of Valparaiso, rain is not expected till the end of May; whereas at Valparaiso some generally falls early in April: the annual quantity is likewise small in proportion to the lateness of the season at which it
4th.
--Finding the coast-road devoid of interest of any kind, we turned inland towards the mining district and valley of Illapel.
This valley, like every other in Chile, is level, broad, and very fertile: it is bordered on each side, either by cliffs of stratified shingle, or by bare rocky mountains.
Above the straight line of the uppermost irrigating ditch, all is brown as on a high road; while all below is of as bright a green as verdigris, from the beds of alfalfa, a kind of clover.
We proceeded to Los Hornos, another mining district, where the principal hill was drilled with holes, like a great ants'-nest.
The Chilian miners are a peculiar race of men in their habits.
Living for weeks together in the most desolate spots, when they descend to the villages on feast-days, there is no excess of extravagance into which they do not run.
They sometimes gain a considerable sum, and then, like sailors with prize-money, they try how soon they can contrive to squander it.
They drink excessively, buy quantities of clothes, and in a few days return penniless to their miserable abodes, there to work harder than beasts of burden.
This thoughtlessness, as with sailors, is evidently the result of a similar manner of life.
Their daily food is found them, and they acquire no habits of carefulness: moreover, temptation and the means of yielding to it are placed in their power at the same time.
On the other hand, in Cornwall, and some other parts of England, where the system of selling part of the vein is followed, the miners, from being obliged to act and think for themselves, are a singularly intelligent and well-conducted set of men.
The dress of the Chilian miner is peculiar and rather picturesque He wears a very long shirt of some dark-coloured baize, with a leathern apron; the whole being fastened round his waist by a bright-coloured sash.
His trousers are very broad, and his small cap of scarlet cloth is made to fit the head closely.
We met a party of these miners in full costume, carrying the body of one of their companions to be buried.
They marched at a very quick trot, four men supporting the corpse.
One set having run as hard as they could for about two hundred yards, were relieved by four others, who had previously dashed on ahead on horseback.
Thus they proceeded, encouraging each other by wild cries: altogether the scene formed a most strange funeral.
We continued travelling northward, in a zigzag line; sometimes stopping a day to geologize.
The country was so thinly inhabited, and the track so obscure, that we often had difficulty in finding our way.
On the 12th I stayed at some mines.
The ore in this case was not considered particularly good, but from being abundant it was supposed the mine would sell for about thirty or forty thousand dollars (that is, 6000 or 8000 pounds sterling); yet it had been bought by one of the English
8s.
).
The ore is yellow pyrites, which, as I have already remarked, before the arrival of the English, was not supposed to contain a particle of copper.
On a scale of profits nearly as great as in the above instance, piles of cinders, abounding with minute globules of metallic copper, were purchased; yet with these advantages, the mining associations, as is well known, contrived to lose immense sums of
The folly of the greater number of the commissioners and shareholders amounted to infatuation;--a thousand pounds per annum given in some cases to entertain the Chilian authorities; libraries of well-bound geological books; miners brought out for
Yet there can be no doubt, that the same capital well employed in these mines would have yielded an immense return, a confidential man of business, a practical miner and assayer, would have been all that was required.
Captain Head has described the wonderful load which the "Apires," truly beasts of burden, carry up from the deepest mines.
I confess I thought the account exaggerated: so that I was glad to take an opportunity of weighing one of the loads, which I picked out by hazard.
It required considerable exertion on my part, when standing directly over it, to lift it from the ground.
The load was considered under weight when found to be 197 pounds.
The apire had carried this up eighty perpendicular yards,--part of the way by a steep passage, but the greater part up notched poles, placed in a zigzag line up the shaft.
According to the general regulation, the apire is not allowed to halt for breath, except the mine is six hundred feet deep.
The average load is considered as rather more than 200 pounds, and I have been assured that one of 300 pounds (twenty-two stone and a half) by way of a trial has been brought up from the deepest mine!
At this time the apires were bringing up the usual load twelve times in the day; that is 2400 pounds from eighty yards deep; and they were employed in the intervals in breaking and picking ore.
These men, excepting from accidents, are healthy, and appear cheerful.
Their bodies are not very muscular.
They rarely eat meat once a week, and never oftener, and then only the hard dry charqui.
Although with a knowledge that the labour was voluntary, it was nevertheless quite revolting to see the state in which they reached the mouth of the mine; their bodies bent forward, leaning with their arms on the steps, their legs bowed, their muscles
Each time they draw their breath, they utter an articulate cry of "ay-ay," which ends in a sound rising from deep in the chest, but shrill like the note of a fife.
After staggering to the pile of ore, they emptied the "carpacho;" in two or three seconds recovering their breath, they wiped the sweat from their brows, and apparently quite fresh descended the mine again at a quick pace.
This appears to me a wonderful instance of the amount of labour which habit, for it can be nothing else, will enable a man to endure.
In the evening, talking with the _mayor-domo_ of these mines about the number of foreigners now scattered over the whole country, he told me that, though quite a young man, he remembers when he was a boy at school at Coquimbo, a holiday being given to see
He believes that nothing would have induced any boy in the school, himself included, to have gone close to the Englishman; so deeply had they been impressed with an idea of the heresy, contamination, and evil to be derived from contact with such a person.
To this day they relate the atrocious actions of the bucaniers; and especially of one man, who took away the figure of the Virgin Mary, and returned the year after for that of St. Joseph, saying it was a pity the lady should not have a husband.
I heard also of an old lady who, at a dinner at Coquimbo, remarked how wonderfully strange it was that she should have lived to dine in the same room with an Englishman; for she remembered as a girl, that twice, at the mere cry of "Los Ingleses," every
14th.
--We reached Coquimbo, where we stayed a few days.
The town is remarkable for nothing but its extreme quietness.
It is said to contain from 6000 to 8000 inhabitants.
On the morning of the 17th it rained lightly, the first time this year, for about five hours.
The farmers, who plant corn near the sea-coast where the atmosphere is most humid, taking advantage of this shower, would break up the ground; after a second they would put the seed in; and if a third shower should fall, they would reap a good harvest in
It was interesting to watch the effect of this trifling amount of moisture.
Twelve hours afterwards the ground appeared as dry as ever; yet after an interval of ten days, all the hills were faintly tinged with green patches; the grass being sparingly scattered in hair-like fibres a full inch in length.
Before this shower every part of the surface was bare as on a high road.
In the evening, Captain Fitz Roy and myself were dining with Mr. Edwards, an English resident well known for his hospitality by all who have visited Coquimbo, when a sharp earthquake happened.
I heard the forecoming rumble, but from the screams of the ladies, the running of the servants, and the rush of several of the gentlemen to the doorway, I could not distinguish the motion.
Some of the women afterwards were crying with terror, and one gentleman said he should not be able to sleep all night, or if he did, it would only be to dream of falling houses.
The father of this person had lately lost all his property at Talcahuano, and he himself had only just escaped a falling roof at Valparaiso, in 1822.
He mentioned a curious coincidence which then happened: he was playing at cards, when a German, one of the party, got up, and said he would never sit in a room in these countries with the door shut, as owing to his having done so, he had nearly lost his
Accordingly he opened the door; and no sooner had he done this, than he cried out, "Here it comes again"!
and the famous shock commenced.
The whole party escaped.
The danger in an earthquake is not from the time lost in opening the door, but from the chance of its becoming jammed by the movement of the walls.
It is impossible to be much surprised at the fear which natives and old residents, though some of them known to be men of great command of mind, so generally experience during earthquakes.
I think, however, this excess of panic may be partly attributed to a want of habit in governing their fear, as it is not a feeling they are ashamed of.
Indeed, the natives do not like to see a person indifferent.
I heard of two Englishmen who, sleeping in the open air during a smart shock, knowing that there was no danger, did not rise.
The natives cried out indignantly, "Look at those heretics, they do not even get out of their beds"!
I spent some days in examining the step-formed terraces of shingle, first noticed by Captain B. Hall, and believed by Mr. Lyell to have been formed by the sea, during the gradual rising of the land.
This certainly is the true explanation, for I found numerous shells of existing species on these terraces.
Five narrow, gently sloping, fringe-like terraces rise one behind the other, and where best developed are formed of shingle: they front the bay, and sweep up both sides of the valley.
At Guasco, north of Coquimbo, the phenomenon is displayed on a much grander scale, so as to strike with surprise even some of the inhabitants.
The terraces are there much broader, and may be called plains, in some parts there are six of them, but generally only five; they run up the valley for thirty-seven miles from the coast.
These step-formed terraces or fringes closely resemble those in the valley of S. Cruz, and, except in being on a smaller scale, those great ones along the whole coast-line of Patagonia.
They have undoubtedly been formed by the denuding power of the sea, during long periods of rest in the gradual elevation of the continent.
Shells of many existing species not only lie on the surface of the terraces at Coquimbo (to a height of 250 feet), but are embedded in a friable calcareous rock, which in some places is as much as between twenty and thirty feet in thickness, but is of
These modern beds rest on an ancient tertiary formation containing shells, apparently all extinct.
Although I examined so many hundred miles of coast on the Pacific, as well as Atlantic side of the continent, I found no regular strata containing sea-shells of recent species, excepting at this place, and at a few points northward on the road to Guasco.
This fact appears to me highly remarkable; for the explanation generally given by geologists, of the absence in any district of stratified fossiliferous deposits of a given period, namely, that the surface then existed as dry land, is not here applicable;
The explanation, no doubt, must be sought in the fact, that the whole southern part of the continent has been for a long time slowly rising; and therefore that all matter deposited along shore in shallow water, must have been soon brought up and slowly
To show the vast power of the wearing action of sea-beaches, we need only appeal to the great cliffs along the present coast of Patagonia, and to the escarpments or ancient sea-cliffs at different levels, one above another, on that same line of coast.
The old underlying tertiary formation at Coquimbo, appears to be of about the same age with several deposits on the coast of Chile (of which that of Navedad is the principal one), and with the great formation of Patagonia.
Both at Navedad and in Patagonia there is evidence, that since the shells (a list of which has been seen by Professor E. Forbes) there entombed were living, there has been a subsidence of several hundred feet, as well as an ensuing elevation.
It may naturally be asked, how it comes that, although no extensive fossiliferous deposits of the recent period, nor of any period intermediate between it and the ancient tertiary epoch, have been preserved on either side of the continent, yet that at this
I believe the explanation is not difficult, and that it is perhaps applicable to nearly analogous facts observed in other quarters of the world.
Considering the enormous power of denudation which the sea possesses, as shown by numberless facts, it is not probable that a sedimentary deposit, when being upraised, could pass through the ordeal of the beach, so as to be preserved in sufficient masses
This seems to have actually taken place at about the same period in southern Patagonia and Chile, though these places are a thousand miles apart.
Hence, if prolonged movements of approximately contemporaneous subsidence are generally widely extensive, as I am strongly inclined to believe from my examination of the Coral Reefs of the great oceans--or if, confining our view to South America, the
May 21st.
--I set out in company with Don Jose Edwards to the silver-mine of Arqueros, and thence up the valley of Coquimbo.
Passing through a mountainous country, we reached by nightfall the mines belonging to Mr. Edwards.
I enjoyed my night's rest here from a reason which will not be fully appreciated in England, namely, the absence of fleas!
The rooms in Coquimbo swarm with them; but they will not live here at the height of only three or four thousand feet: it can scarcely be the trifling diminution of temperature, but some other cause which destroys these troublesome insects at this place.
The mines are now in a bad state, though they formerly yielded about 2000 pounds in weight of silver a year.
It has been said that "a person with a copper-mine will gain; with silver he may gain; but with gold he is sure to lose".
This is not true: all the large Chilian fortunes have been made by mines of the more precious metals.
A short time since an English physician returned to England from Copiapo, taking with him the profits of one share of a silver-mine, which amounted to about 24,000 pounds sterling.
No doubt a copper-mine with care is a sure game, whereas the other is gambling, or rather taking a ticket in a lottery.
The owners lose great quantities of rich ores; for no precautions can prevent robberies.
I heard of a gentleman laying a bet with another, that one of his men should rob him before his face.
The ore when brought out of the mine is broken into pieces, and the useless stone thrown on one side.
A couple of the miners who were thus employed, pitched, as if by accident, two fragments away at the same moment, and then cried out for a joke "Let us see which rolls furthest".
The owner, who was standing by, bet a cigar with his friend on the race.
The miner by this means watched the very point amongst the rubbish where the stone lay.
In the evening he picked it up and carried it to his master, showing him a rich mass of silver-ore, and saying, "This was the stone on which you won a cigar by its rolling so far".
May 23rd.
--We descended into the fertile valley of Coquimbo, and followed it till we reached an Hacienda belonging to a relation of Don Jose, where we stayed the next day.
I then rode one day's journey further, to see what were declared to be some petrified shells and beans, which latter turned out to be small quartz pebbles.
We passed through several small villages; and the valley was beautifully cultivated, and the whole scenery very grand.
We were here near the main Cordillera, and the surrounding hills were lofty.
In all parts of northern Chile, fruit trees produce much more abundantly at a considerable height near the Andes than in the lower country.
The figs and grapes of this district are famous for their excellence, and are cultivated to a great extent.
This valley is, perhaps, the most productive one north of Quillota.
I believe it contains, including Coquimbo, 25,000 inhabitants.
The next day I returned to the Hacienda, and thence, together with Don Jose, to Coquimbo.
June 2nd.
--We set out for the valley of Guasco, following the coast-road, which was considered rather less desert than the other.
Our first day's ride was to a solitary house, called Yerba Buena, where there was pasture for our horses.
The shower mentioned as having fallen, a fortnight ago, only reached about half-way to Guasco; we had, therefore, in the first part of our journey a most faint tinge of green, which soon faded quite away.
Even where brightest, it was scarcely sufficient to remind one of the fresh turf and budding flowers of the spring of other countries.
While travelling through these deserts one feels like a prisoner shut up in a gloomy court, who longs to see something green and to smell a moist atmosphere.
June 3rd.
--Yerba Buena to Carizal.
During the first part of the day we crossed a mountainous rocky desert, and afterwards a long deep sandy plain, strewed with broken sea-shells.
There was very little water, and that little saline: the whole country, from the coast to the Cordillera, is an uninhabited desert.
I saw traces only of one living animal in abundance, namely, the shells of a Bulimus, which were collected together in extraordinary numbers on the driest spots.
In the spring one humble little plant sends out a few leaves, and on these the snails feed.
As they are seen only very early in the morning, when the ground is slightly damp with dew, the Guascos believe that they are bred from it.
I have observed in other places that extremely dry and sterile districts, where the soil is calcareous, are extraordinarily favourable to land-shells.
At Carizal there were a few cottages, some brackish water, and a trace of cultivation: but it was with difficulty that we purchased a little corn and straw for our horses.
4th.
--Carizal to Sauce.
We continued to ride over desert plains, tenanted by large herds of guanaco.
We crossed also the valley of Chaneral; which, although the most fertile one between Guasco and Coquimbo, is very narrow, and produces so little pasture, that we could not purchase any for our horses.
At Sauce we found a very civil old gentleman, superintendent of a copper-smelting furnace.
As an especial favour, he allowed me to purchase at a high price an armful of dirty straw, which was all the poor horses had for supper after their long day's journey.
Few smelting-furnaces are now at work in any part of Chile; it is found more profitable, on account of the extreme scarcity of firewood, and from the Chilian method of reduction being so unskilful, to ship the ore for Swansea.
The next day we crossed some mountains to Freyrina, in the valley of Guasco.
During each day's ride further northward, the vegetation became more and more scanty; even the great chandelier-like cactus was here replaced by a different and much smaller species.
During the winter months, both in northern Chile and in Peru, a uniform bank of clouds hangs, at no great height, over the Pacific.
From the mountains we had a very striking view of this white and brilliant aerial-field, which sent arms up the valleys, leaving islands and promontories in the same manner, as the sea does in the Chonos archipelago and in Tierra del Fuego.
We stayed two days at Freyrina.
In the valley of Guasco there are four small towns.
At the mouth there is the port, a spot entirely desert, and without any water in the immediate neighbourhood.
Five leagues higher up stands Freyrina, a long straggling village, with decent whitewashed houses.
Again, ten leagues further up Ballenar is situated, and above this Guasco Alto, a horticultural village, famous for its dried fruit.
On a clear day the view up the valley is very fine; the straight opening terminates in the far-distant snowy Cordillera; on each side an infinity of crossing-lines are blended together in a beautiful haze.
The foreground is singular from the number of parallel and step-formed terraces; and the included strip of green valley, with its willow-bushes, is contrasted on both hands with the naked hills.
That the surrounding country was most barren will be readily believed, when it is known that a shower of rain had not fallen during the last thirteen months.
The inhabitants heard with the greatest envy of the rain at Coquimbo; from the appearance of the sky they had hopes of equally good fortune, which, a fortnight afterwards, were realized.
I was at Copiapo at the time; and there the people, with equal envy, talked of the abundant rain at Guasco.
After two or three very dry years, perhaps with not more than one shower during the whole time, a rainy year generally follows; and this does more harm than even the drought.
The rivers swell, and cover with gravel and sand the narrow strips of ground, which alone are fit for cultivation.
The floods also injure the irrigating ditches.
Great devastation had thus been caused three years ago.
June 8th.
--We rode on to Ballenar, which takes its name from Ballenagh in Ireland, the birthplace of the family of O'Higgins, who, under the Spanish government, were presidents and generals in Chile.
As the rocky mountains on each hand were concealed by clouds, the terrace-like plains gave to the valley an appearance like that of Santa Cruz in Patagonia.
After spending one day at Ballenar I set out, on the 10th, for the upper part of the valley of Copiapo.
We rode all day over an uninteresting country.
I am tired of repeating the epithets barren and sterile.
These words, however, as commonly used, are comparative; I have always applied them to the plains of Patagonia, which can boast of spiny bushes and some tufts of grass; and this is absolute fertility, as compared with northern Chile.
Here again, there are not many spaces of two hundred yards square, where some little bush, cactus or lichen, may not be discovered by careful examination; and in the soil seeds lie dormant ready to spring up during the first rainy winter.
In Peru real deserts occur over wide tracts of country.
In the evening we arrived at a valley, in which the bed of the streamlet was damp: following it up, we came to tolerably good water.
During the night, the stream, from not being evaporated and absorbed so quickly, flows a league lower down than during the day.
Sticks were plentiful for firewood, so that it was a good place to bivouac for us; but for the poor animals there was not a mouthful to eat.
June 11th.
--We rode without stopping for twelve hours till we reached an old smelting-furnace, where there was water and firewood; but our horses again had nothing to eat, being shut up in an old courtyard.
The line of road was hilly, and the distant views interesting, from the varied colours of the bare mountains.
It was almost a pity to see the sun shining constantly over so useless a country; such splendid weather ought to have brightened fields and pretty gardens.
The next day we reached the valley of Copiapo.
I was heartily glad of it; for the whole journey was a continued source of anxiety; it was most disagreeable to hear, whilst eating our own suppers, our horses gnawing the posts to which they were tied, and to have no means of relieving their hunger.
To all appearance, however, the animals were quite fresh; and no one could have told that they had eaten nothing for the last fifty-five hours.
I had a letter of introduction to Mr. Bingley, who received me very kindly at the Hacienda of Potrero Seco.
This estate is between twenty and thirty miles long, but very narrow, being generally only two fields wide, one on each side the river.
In some parts the estate is of no width, that is to say, the land cannot be irrigated, and therefore is valueless, like the surrounding rocky desert.
The small quantity of cultivated land in the whole line of valley, does not so much depend on inequalities of level, and consequent unfitness for irrigation, as on the small supply of water.
The river this year was remarkably full: here, high up the valley, it reached to the horse's belly, and was about fifteen yards wide, and rapid; lower down it becomes smaller and smaller, and is generally quite lost, as happened during one period of thirty
The inhabitants watch a storm over the Cordillera with great interest; as one good fall of snow provides them with water for the ensuing year.
This is of infinitely more consequence than rain in the lower country.
Rain, as often as it falls, which is about once in every two or three years, is a great advantage, because the cattle and mules can for some time afterwards find a little pasture in the mountains.
But without snow on the Andes, desolation extends throughout the valley.
It is on record that three times nearly all the inhabitants have been obliged to emigrate to the south.
This year there was plenty of water, and every man irrigated his ground as much as he chose; but it has frequently been necessary to post soldiers at the sluices, to see that each estate took only its proper allowance during so many hours in the week.
The valley is said to contain 12,000 souls, but its produce is sufficient only for three months in the year; the rest of the supply being drawn from Valparaiso and the south.
Before the discovery of the famous silver-mines of Chanuncillo, Copiapo was in a rapid state of decay; but now it is in a very thriving condition; and the town, which was completely overthrown by an earthquake, has been rebuilt.
The valley of Copiapo, forming a mere ribbon of green in a desert, runs in a very southerly direction; so that it is of considerable length to its source in the Cordillera.
The valleys of Guasco and Copiapo may both be considered as long narrow islands, separated from the rest of Chile by deserts of rock instead of by salt water.
Northward of these, there is one other very miserable valley, called Paposo, which contains about two hundred souls; and then there extends the real desert of Atacama--a barrier far worse than the most turbulent ocean.
After staying a few days at Potrero Seco, I proceeded up the valley to the house of Don Benito Cruz, to whom I had a letter of introduction.
I found him most hospitable; indeed it is impossible to bear too strong testimony to the kindness with which travellers are received in almost every part of South America.
The next day I hired some mules to take me by the ravine of Jolquera into the central Cordillera.
On the second night the weather seemed to foretell a storm of snow or rain, and whilst lying in our beds we felt a trifling shock of an earthquake.
The connection between earthquakes and the weather has been often disputed: it appears to me to be a point of great interest, which is little understood.
Humboldt has remarked in one part of the Personal Narrative, [1] that it would be difficult for any person who had long resided in New Andalusia, or in Lower Peru, to deny that there exists some connection between these phenomena: in another part, however
At Guayaquil it is said that a heavy shower in the dry season is invariably followed by an earthquake.
In Northern Chile, from the extreme infrequency of rain, or even of weather foreboding rain, the probability of accidental coincidences becomes very small; yet the inhabitants are here most firmly convinced of some connection between the state of the
there will be plenty of pasture there this year".
To their minds an earthquake foretold rain as surely as rain foretold abundant pasture.
Certainly it did so happen that on the very day of the earthquake, that shower of rain fell, which I have described as in ten days' time producing a thin sprinkling of grass.
At other times rain has followed earthquakes at a period of the year when it is a far greater prodigy than the earthquake itself: this happened after the shock of November, 1822, and again in 1829, at Valparaiso; also after that of September, 1833, at
A person must be somewhat habituated to the climate of these countries to perceive the extreme improbability of rain falling at such seasons, except as a consequence of some law quite unconnected with the ordinary course of the weather.
In the cases of great volcanic eruptions, as that of Coseguina, where torrents of rain fell at a time of the year most unusual for it, and "almost unprecedented in Central America," it is not difficult to understand that the volumes of vapour and clouds of
Humboldt extends this view to the case of earthquakes unaccompanied by eruptions; but I can hardly conceive it possible, that the small quantity of aeriform fluids which then escape from the fissured ground, can produce such remarkable effects.
There appears much probability in the view first proposed by Mr. P. Scrope, that when the barometer is low, and when rain might naturally be expected to fall, the diminished pressure of the atmosphere over a wide extent of country, might well determine the
It is, however, doubtful how far this idea will explain the circumstances of torrents of rain falling in the dry season during several days, after an earthquake unaccompanied by an eruption; such cases seem to bespeak some more intimate connection between
Finding little of interest in this part of the ravine, we retraced our steps to the house of Don Benito, where I stayed two days collecting fossil shells and wood.
Great prostrate silicified trunks of trees, embedded in a conglomerate, were extraordinarily numerous.
I measured one, which was fifteen feet in circumference: how surprising it is that every atom of the woody matter in this great cylinder should have been removed and replaced by silex so perfectly, that each vessel and pore is preserved!
These trees flourished at about the period of our lower chalk; they all belonged to the fir-tribe.
It was amusing to hear the inhabitants discussing the nature of the fossil shells which I collected, almost in the same terms as were used a century ago in Europe,--namely, whether or not they had been thus "born by nature".
My geological examination of the country generally created a good deal of surprise amongst the Chilenos: it was long before they could be convinced that I was not hunting for mines.
This was sometimes troublesome: I found the most ready way of explaining my employment, was to ask them how it was that they themselves were not curious concerning earthquakes and volcanos?
--why some springs were hot and others cold?
--why there were mountains in Chile, and not a hill in La Plata?
These bare questions at once satisfied and silenced the greater number; some, however (like a few in England who are a century behindhand), thought that all such inquiries were useless and impious; and that it was quite sufficient that God had thus made
An order had recently been issued that all stray dogs should be killed, and we saw many lying dead on the road.
A great number had lately gone mad, and several men had been bitten and had died in consequence.
On several occasions hydrophobia has prevailed in this valley.
It is remarkable thus to find so strange and dreadful a disease, appearing time after time in the same isolated spot.
It has been remarked that certain villages in England are in like manner much more subject to this visitation than others.
Dr. Unanue states that hydrophobia was first known in South America in 1803: this statement is corroborated by Azara and Ulloa having never heard of it in their time.
Dr. Unanue says that it broke out in Central America, and slowly travelled southward.
It reached Arequipa in 1807; and it is said that some men there, who had not been bitten, were affected, as were some negroes, who had eaten a bullock which had died of hydrophobia.
At Ica forty-two people thus miserably perished.
The disease came on between twelve and ninety days after the bite; and in those cases where it did come on, death ensued invariably within five days.
After 1808, a long interval ensued without any cases.
On inquiry, I did not hear of hydrophobia in Van Diemen's Land, or in Australia; and Burchell says, that during the five years he was at the Cape of Good Hope, he never heard of an instance of it.
Webster asserts that at the Azores hydrophobia has never occurred; and the same assertion has been made with respect to Mauritius and St. Helena.
[2] In so strange a disease some information might possibly be gained by considering the circumstances under which it originates in distant climates; for it is improbable that a dog already bitten, should have been brought to these distant countries.
At night, a stranger arrived at the house of Don Benito, and asked permission to sleep there.
He said he had been wandering about the mountains for seventeen days, having lost his way.
He started from Guasco, and being accustomed to travelling in the Cordillera, did not expect any difficulty in following the track to Copiapo; but he soon became involved in a labyrinth of mountains, whence he could not escape.
Some of his mules had fallen over precipices, and he had been in great distress.
His chief difficulty arose from not knowing where to find water in the lower country, so that he was obliged to keep bordering the central ranges.
We returned down the valley, and on the 22nd reached the town of Copiapo.
The lower part of the valley is broad, forming a fine plain like that of Quillota.
The town covers a considerable space of ground, each house possessing a garden: but it is an uncomfortable place, and the dwellings are poorly furnished.
Every one seems bent on the one object of making money, and then migrating as quickly as possible.
All the inhabitants are more or less directly concerned with mines; and mines and ores are the sole subjects of conversation.
Necessaries of all sorts are extremely dear; as the distance from the town to the port is eighteen leagues, and the land carriage very expensive.
A fowl costs five or six shillings; meat is nearly as dear as in England; firewood, or rather sticks, are brought on donkeys from a distance of two and three days' journey within the Cordillera; and pasturage for animals is a shilling a day: all this for
June 26th.
--I hired a guide and eight mules to take me into the Cordillera by a different line from my last excursion.
As the country was utterly desert, we took a cargo and a half of barley mixed with chopped straw.
About two leagues above the town a broad valley called the "Despoblado," or uninhabited, branches off from that one by which we had arrived.
Although a valley of the grandest dimensions, and leading to a pass across the Cordillera, yet it is completely dry, excepting perhaps for a few days during some very rainy winter.
The sides of the crumbling mountains were furrowed by scarcely any ravines; and the bottom of the main valley, filled with shingle, was smooth and nearly level.
No considerable torrent could ever have flowed down this bed of shingle; for if it had, a great cliff-bounded channel, as in all the southern valleys, would assuredly have been formed.
I feel little doubt that this valley, as well as those mentioned by travellers in Peru, were left in the state we now see them by the waves of the sea, as the land slowly rose.
I observed in one place, where the Despoblado was joined by a ravine (which in almost any other chain would have been called a grand valley), that its bed, though composed merely of sand and gravel, was higher than that of its tributary.
A mere rivulet of water, in the course of an hour, would have cut a channel for itself; but it was evident that ages had passed away, and no such rivulet had drained this great tributary.
It was curious to behold the machinery, if such a term may be used, for the drainage, all, with the last trifling exception, perfect, yet without any signs of action.
Every one must have remarked how mud-banks, left by the retiring tide, imitate in miniature a country with hill and dale; and here we have the original model in rock, formed as the continent rose during the secular retirement of the ocean, instead of
If a shower of rain falls on the mud-bank, when left dry, it deepens the already-formed shallow lines of excavation; and so it is with the rain of successive centuries on the bank of rock and soil, which we call a continent.
We rode on after it was dark, till we reached a side ravine with a small well, called "Agua amarga".
The water deserved its name, for besides being saline it was most offensively putrid and bitter; so that we could not force ourselves to drink either tea or mate.
I suppose the distance from the river of Copiapo to this spot was at least twenty-five or thirty English miles; in the whole space there was not a single drop of water, the country deserving the name of desert in the strictest sense.
Yet about half way we passed some old Indian ruins near Punta Gorda: I noticed also in front of some of the valleys, which branch off from the Despoblado, two piles of stones placed a little way apart, and directed so as to point up the mouths of these
My companions knew nothing about them, and only answered my queries by their imperturbable "quien sabe"?
I observed Indian ruins in several parts of the Cordillera: the most perfect which I saw, were the Ruinas de Tambillos, in the Uspallata Pass.
Small square rooms were there huddled together in separate groups: some of the doorways were yet standing; they were formed by a cross slab of stone only about three feet high.
Ulloa has remarked on the lowness of the doors in the ancient Peruvian dwellings.
These houses, when perfect, must have been capable of containing a considerable number of persons.
Tradition says, that they were used as halting-places for the Incas, when they crossed the mountains.
Traces of Indian habitations have been discovered in many other parts, where it does not appear probable that they were used as mere resting-places, but yet where the land is as utterly unfit for any kind of cultivation, as it is near the Tambillos or at
In the ravine of Jajuel, near Aconcagua, where there is no pass, I heard of remains of houses situated at a great height, where it is extremely cold and sterile.
At first I imagined that these buildings had been places of refuge, built by the Indians on the first arrival of the Spaniards; but I have since been inclined to speculate on the probability of a small change of climate.
In this northern part of Chile, within the Cordillera, old Indian houses are said to be especially numerous: by digging amongst the ruins, bits of woollen articles, instruments of precious metals, and heads of Indian corn, are not unfrequently discovered:
I am aware that the Peruvian Indians now frequently inhabit most lofty and bleak situations; but at Copiapo I was assured by men who had spent their lives in travelling through the Andes, that there were very many (muchisimas) buildings at heights so great
Nevertheless it is the opinion of the people of the country (although they are much puzzled by the circumstance), that, from the appearance of the houses, the Indians must have used them as places of residence.
In this valley, at Punta Gorda, the remains consisted of seven or eight square little rooms, which were of a similar form with those at Tambillos, but built chiefly of mud, which the present inhabitants cannot, either here or, according to Ulloa, in Peru,
They were situated in the most conspicuous and defenceless position, at the bottom of the flat broad valley.
There was no water nearer than three or four leagues, and that only in very small quantity, and bad: the soil was absolutely sterile; I looked in vain even for a lichen adhering to the rocks.
At the present day, with the advantage of beasts of burden, a mine, unless it were very rich, could scarcely be worked here with profit.
Yet the Indians formerly chose it as a place of residence!
If at the present time two or three showers of rain were to fall annually, instead of one, as now is the case during as many years, a small rill of water would probably be formed in this great valley; and then, by irrigation (which was formerly so well
I have convincing proofs that this part of the continent of South America has been elevated near the coast at least from 400 to 500, and in some parts from 1000 to 1300 feet, since the epoch of existing shells; and further inland the rise possibly may have
As the peculiarly arid character of the climate is evidently a consequence of the height of the Cordillera, we may feel almost sure that before the later elevations, the atmosphere could not have been so completely drained of its moisture as it now is; and
On this notion of a change of climate since the buildings were inhabited, the ruins must be of extreme antiquity, but I do not think their preservation under the Chilian climate any great difficulty.
We must also admit on this notion (and this perhaps is a greater difficulty) that man has inhabited South America for an immensely long period, inasmuch as any change of climate effected by the elevation of the land must have been extremely gradual.
At Valparaiso, within the last 220 years, the rise has been somewhat less than 19 feet: at Lima a sea-beach has certainly been upheaved from 80 to 90 feet, within the Indo-human period: but such small elevations could have had little power in deflecting
Dr. Lund, however, found human skeletons in the caves of Brazil, the appearance of which induced him to believe that the Indian race has existed during a vast lapse of time in South America.
When at Lima, I conversed on these subjects [3] with Mr. Gill, a civil engineer, who had seen much of the interior country.
He told me that a conjecture of a change of climate had sometimes crossed his mind; but that he thought that the greater portion of land, now incapable of cultivation, but covered with Indian ruins, had been reduced to this state by the water-conduits,
I may here mention, that the Peruvians actually carried their irrigating streams in tunnels through hills of solid rock.
Mr. Gill told me, he had been employed professionally to examine one: he found the passage low, narrow, crooked, and not of uniform breadth, but of very considerable length.
Is it not most wonderful that men should have attempted such operations, without the use of iron or gunpowder?
Mr. Gill also mentioned to me a most interesting, and, as far as I am aware, quite unparalleled case, of a subterranean disturbance having changed the drainage of a country.
Travelling from Casma to Huaraz (not very far distant from Lima), he found a plain covered with ruins and marks of ancient cultivation but now quite barren.
Near it was the dry course of a considerable river, whence the water for irrigation had formerly been conducted.
There was nothing in the appearance of the water-course to indicate that the river had not flowed there a few years previously; in some parts, beds of sand and gravel were spread out; in others, the solid rock had been worn into a broad channel, which in
It is self-evident that a person following up the course of a stream, will always ascend at a greater or less inclination: Mr. Gill, therefore, was much astonished, when walking up the bed of this ancient river, to find himself suddenly going down hill.
He imagined that the downward slope had a fall of about 40 or 50 feet perpendicular.
We here have unequivocal evidence that a ridge had been uplifted right across the old bed of a stream.
From the moment the river-course was thus arched, the water must necessarily have been thrown back, and a new channel formed.
From that moment, also, the neighbouring plain must have lost its fertilizing stream, and become a desert.
June 27th.
--We set out early in the morning, and by midday reached the ravine of Paypote, where there is a tiny rill of water, with a little vegetation, and even a few algarroba trees, a kind of mimosa.
From having firewood, a smelting-furnace had formerly been built here: we found a solitary man in charge of it, whose sole employment was hunting guanacos.
At night it froze sharply; but having plenty of wood for our fire, we kept ourselves warm.
28th.
--We continued gradually ascending, and the valley now changed into a ravine.
During the day we saw several guanacos, and the track of the closely-allied species, the Vicuna: this latter animal is pre-eminently alpine in its habits; it seldom descends much below the limit of perpetual snow, and therefore haunts even a more lofty and
The only other animal which we saw in any number was a small fox: I suppose this animal preys on the mice and other small rodents, which, as long as there is the least vegetation, subsist in considerable numbers in very desert places.
In Patagonia, even on the borders of the salinas, where a drop of fresh water can never be found, excepting dew, these little animals swarm.
Next to lizards, mice appear to be able to support existence on the smallest and driest portions of the earth--even on islets in the midst of great oceans.
The scene on all sides showed desolation, brightened and made palpable by a clear, unclouded sky.
For a time such scenery is sublime, but this feeling cannot last, and then it becomes uninteresting.
We bivouacked at the foot of the "primera linea," or the first line of the partition of waters.
The streams, however, on the east side do not flow to the Atlantic, but into an elevated district, in the middle of which there is a large saline, or salt lake; thus forming a little Caspian Sea at the height, perhaps, of ten thousand feet.
Where we slept, there were some considerable patches of snow, but they do not remain throughout the year.
The winds in these lofty regions obey very regular laws.
Ivery day a fresh breeze blows up the valley, and at night, an hour or two after sunset, the air from the cold regions above descends as through a funnel.
This night it blew a gale of wind, and the temperature must have been considerably below the freezing-point, for water in a vessel soon became a block of ice.
No clothes seemed to oppose any obstacle to the air; I suffered very much from the cold, so that I could not sleep, and in the morning rose with my body quite dull and benumbed.
In the Cordillera further southward, people lose their lives from snow-storms; here, it sometimes happens from another cause.
My guide, when a boy of fourteen years old, was passing the Cordillera with a party in the month of May; and while in the central parts, a furious gale of wind arose, so that the men could hardly cling on their mules, and stones were flying along the
The day was cloudless, and not a speck of snow fell, but the temperature was low.
It is probable that the thermometer could not have stood very many degrees below the freezing-point, but the effect on their bodies, ill protected by clothing, must have been in proportion to the rapidity of the current of cold air.
The gale lasted for more than a day; the men began to lose their strength, and the mules would not move onwards.
My guide's brother tried to return, but he perished, and his body was found two years afterwards.
Lying by the side of his mule near the road, with the bridle still in his hand.
Two other men in the party lost their fingers and toes; and out of two hundred mules and thirty cows, only fourteen mules escaped alive.
Many years ago the whole of a large party are supposed to have perished from a similar cause, but their bodies to this day have never been discovered.
The union of a cloudless sky, low temperature, and a furious gale of wind, must be, I should think, in all parts of the world an unusual occurrence.
June 29th--We gladly travelled down the valley to our former night's lodging, and thence to near the Agua amarga.
On July 1st we reached the valley of Copiapo.
The smell of the fresh clover was quite delightful, after the scentless air of the dry, sterile Despoblado.
Whilst staying in the town I heard an account from several of the inhabitants, of a hill in the neighbourhood which they called "El Bramador,"--the roarer or bellower.
I did not at the time pay sufficient attention to the account; but, as far as I understood, the hill was covered by sand, and the noise was produced only when people, by ascending it, put the sand in motion.
The same circumstances are described in detail on the authority of Seetzen and Ehrenberg, [4] as the cause of the sounds which have been heard by many travellers on Mount Sinai near the Red Sea.
One person with whom I conversed had himself heard the noise: he described it as very surprising; and he distinctly stated that, although he could not understand how it was caused, yet it was necessary to set the sand rolling down the acclivity.
A horse walking over dry coarse sand, causes a peculiar chirping noise from the friction of the particles; a circumstance which I several times noticed on the coast of Brazil.
Three days afterwards I heard of the Beagle's arrival at the Port, distant eighteen leagues from the town.
There is very little land cultivated down the valley; its wide expanse supports a wretched wiry grass, which even the donkeys can hardly eat.
This poorness of the vegetation is owing to the quantity of saline matter with which the soil is impregnated.
The Port consists of an assemblage of miserable little hovels, situated at the foot of a sterile plain.
At present, as the river contains water enough to reach the sea, the inhabitants enjoy the advantage of having fresh water within a mile and a half.
On the beach there were large piles of merchandise, and the little place had an air of activity.
In the evening I gave my adios, with a hearty good-will, to my companion Mariano Gonzales, with whom I had ridden so many leagues in Chile.
The next morning the Beagle sailed for Iquique.
July 12th.
--We anchored in the port of Iquique, in lat.
20 degs.
12', on the coast of Peru.
The town contains about a thousand inhabitants, and stands on a little plain of sand at the foot of a great wall of rock, 2000 feet in height, here forming the coast.
The whole is utterly desert.
A light shower of rain falls only once in very many years; and the ravines consequently are filled with detritus, and the mountain-sides covered by piles of fine white sand, even to a height of a thousand feet.
During this season of the year a heavy bank of clouds, stretched over the ocean, seldom rises above the wall of rocks on the coast.
The aspect of the place was most gloomy; the little port, with its few vessels, and small group of wretched houses, seemed overwhelmed and out of all proportion with the rest of the scene.
The inhabitants live like persons on board a ship: every necessary comes from a distance: water is brought in boats from Pisagua, about forty miles northward, and is sold at the rate of nine reals (4s.
6d.
) an eighteen-gallon cask: I bought a wine-bottle full for threepence.
In like manner firewood, and of course every article of food, is imported.
Very few animals can be maintained in such a place: on the ensuing morning I hired with difficulty, at the price of four pounds sterling, two mules and a guide to take me to the nitrate of soda works.
These are at present the support of Iquique.
This salt was first exported in 1830: in one year an amount in value of one hundred thousand pounds sterling, was sent to France and England.
It is principally used as a manure and in the manufacture of nitric acid: owing to its deliquescent property it will not serve for gunpowder.
Formerly there were two exceedingly rich silver-mines in this neighbourhood, but their produce is now very small.
Our arrival in the offing caused some little apprehension.
Peru was in a state of anarchy; and each party having demanded a contribution, the poor town of Iquique was in tribulation, thinking the evil hour was come.
The people had also their domestic troubles; a short time before, three French carpenters had broken open, during the same night, the two churches, and stolen all the plate: one of the robbers, however, subsequently confessed, and the plate was recovered.
The convicts were sent to Arequipa, which though the capital of this province, is two hundred leagues distant, the government there thought it a pity to punish such useful workmen, who could make all sorts of furniture; and accordingly liberated them.
Things being in this state, the churches were again broken open, but this time the plate was not recovered.
The inhabitants became dreadfully enraged, and declaring that none but heretics would thus "eat God Almighty," proceeded to torture some Englishmen, with the intention of afterwards shooting them.
At last the authorities interfered, and peace was established.
13th.
--In the morning I started for the saltpetre-works, a distance of fourteen leagues.
Having ascended the steep coast-mountains by a zigzag sandy track, we soon came in view of the mines of Guantajaya and St. Rosa.
These two small villages are placed at the very mouths of the mines; and being perched up on hills, they had a still more unnatural and desolate appearance than the town of Iquique.
We did not reach the saltpetre-works till after sunset, having ridden all day across an undulating country, a complete and utter desert.
The road was strewed with the bones and dried skins of many beasts of burden which had perished on it from fatigue.
Excepting the Vultur aura, which preys on the carcasses, I saw neither bird, quadruped, reptile, nor insect.
On the coast-mountains, at the height of about 2000 feet where during this season the clouds generally hang, a very few cacti were growing in the clefts of rock; and the loose sand was strewed over with a lichen, which lies on the surface quite unattached.
This plant belongs to the genus Cladonia, and somewhat resembles the reindeer lichen.
In some parts it was in sufficient quantity to tinge the sand, as seen from a distance, of a pale yellowish colour.
Further inland, during the whole ride of fourteen leagues, I saw only one other vegetable production, and that was a most minute yellow lichen, growing on the bones of the dead mules.
This was the first true desert which I had seen: the effect on me was not impressive; but I believe this was owing to my having become gradually accustomed to such scenes, as I rode northward from Valparaiso, through Coquimbo, to Copiapo.
The appearance of the country was remarkable, from being covered by a thick crust of common salt, and of a stratified saliferous alluvium, which seems to have been deposited as the land slowly rose above the level of the sea.
The salt is white, very hard, and compact: it occurs in water worn nodules projecting from the agglutinated sand, and is associated with much gypsum.
The appearance of this superficial mass very closely resembled that of a country after snow, before the last dirty patches are thawed.
The existence of this crust of a soluble substance over the whole face of the country, shows how extraordinarily dry the climate must have been for a long period.
At night I slept at the house of the owner of one of the saltpetre mines.
The country is here as unproductive as near the coast; but water, having rather a bitter and brackish taste, can be procured by digging wells.
The well at this house was thirty-six yards deep: as scarcely any rain falls, it is evident the water is not thus derived; indeed if it were, it could not fail to be as salt as brine, for the whole surrounding country is incrusted with various saline
We must therefore conclude that it percolates under ground from the Cordillera, though distant many leagues.
In that direction there are a few small villages, where the inhabitants, having more water, are enabled to irrigate a little land, and raise hay, on which the mules and asses, employed in carrying the saltpetre, are fed.
The nitrate of soda was now selling at the ship's side at fourteen shillings per hundred pounds: the chief expense is its transport to the sea-coast.
The mine consists of a hard stratum, between two and three feet thick, of the nitrate mingled with a little of the sulphate of soda and a good deal of common salt.
It lies close beneath the surface, and follows for a length of one hundred and fifty miles the margin of a grand basin or plain; this, from its outline, manifestly must once have been a lake, or more probably an inland arm of the sea, as may be inferred
The surface of the plain is 3300 feet above the Pacific.
19th.
--We anchored in the Bay of Callao, the seaport of Lima, the capital of Peru.
We stayed here six weeks but from the troubled state of public affairs, I saw very little of the country.
During our whole visit the climate was far from being so delightful, as it is generally represented.
A dull heavy bank of clouds constantly hung over the land, so that during the first sixteen days I had only one view of the Cordillera behind Lima.
These mountains, seen in stages, one above the other, through openings in the clouds, had a very grand appearance.
It is almost become a proverb, that rain never falls in the lower part of Peru.
Yet this can hardly be considered correct; for during almost every day of our visit there was a thick drizzling mist, which was sufficient to make the streets muddy and one's clothes damp: this the people are pleased to call Peruvian dew.
That much rain does not fall is very certain, for the houses are covered only with flat roofs made of hardened mud; and on the mole shiploads of wheat were piled up, being thus left for weeks together without any shelter.
I cannot say I liked the very little I saw of Peru: in summer, however, it is said that the climate is much pleasanter.
In all seasons, both inhabitants and foreigners suffer from severe attacks of ague.
This disease is common on the whole coast of Peru, but is unknown in the interior.
The attacks of illness which arise from miasma never fail to appear most mysterious.
So difficult is it to judge from the aspect of a country, whether or not it is healthy, that if a person had been told to choose within the tropics a situation appearing favourable for health, very probably he would have named this coast.
The plain round the outskirts of Callao is sparingly covered with a coarse grass, and in some parts there are a few stagnant, though very small, pools of water.
The miasma, in all probability, arises from these: for the town of Arica was similarly circumstanced, and its healthiness was much improved by the drainage of some little pools.
Miasma is not always produced by a luxuriant vegetation with an ardent climate; for many parts of Brazil, even where there are marshes and a rank vegetation, are much more healthy than this sterile coast of Peru.
The densest forests in a temperate climate, as in Chiloe, do not seem in the slightest degree to affect the healthy condition of the atmosphere.
The island of St. Jago, at the Cape de Verds, offers another strongly marked instance of a country, which any one would have expected to find most healthy, being very much the contrary.
I have described the bare and open plains as supporting, during a few weeks after the rainy season, a thin vegetation, which directly withers away and dries up: at this period the air appears to become quite poisonous; both natives and foreigners often
On the other hand, the Galapagos Archipelago, in the Pacific, with a similar soil, and periodically subject to the same process of vegetation, is perfectly healthy.
Humboldt has observed, that, "under the torrid zone, the smallest marshes are the most dangerous, being surrounded, as at Vera Cruz and Carthagena, with an arid and sandy soil, which raises the temperature of the ambient air".
[5] On the coast of Peru, however, the temperature is not hot to any excessive degree; and perhaps in consequence, the intermittent fevers are not of the most malignant order.
In all unhealthy countries the greatest risk is run by sleeping on shore.
Is this owing to the state of the body during sleep, or to a greater abundance of miasma at such times?
It appears certain that those who stay on board a vessel, though anchored at only a short distance from the coast, generally suffer less than those actually on shore.
On the other hand, I have heard of one remarkable case where a fever broke out among the crew of a man-of-war some hundred miles off the coast of Africa, and at the same time one of those fearful periods [6] of death commenced at Sierra Leone.
No state in South America, since the declaration of independence, has suffered more from anarchy than Peru.
At the time of our visit, there were four chiefs in arms contending for supremacy in the government: if one succeeded in becoming for a time very powerful, the others coalesced against him; but no sooner were they victorious, than they were again hostile
The other day, at the Anniversary of the Independence, high mass was performed, the President partaking of the sacrament: during the _Te Deum laudamus_, instead of each regiment displaying the Peruvian flag, a black one with death's head was unfurled.
Imagine a government under which such a scene could be ordered, on such an occasion, to be typical of their determination of fighting to death!
This state of affairs happened at a time very unfortunately for me, as I was precluded from taking any excursions much beyond the limits of the town.
The barren island of St. Lorenzo, which forms the harbour, was nearly the only place where one could walk securely.
The upper part, which is upwards of 1000 feet in height, during this season of the year (winter), comes within the lower limit of the clouds; and in consequence, an abundant cryptogamic vegetation, and a few flowers cover the summit.
On the hills near Lima, at a height but little greater, the ground is carpeted with moss, and beds of beautiful yellow lilies, called Amancaes.
This indicates a very much greater degree of humidity, than at a corresponding height at Iquique.
Proceeding northward of Lima, the climate becomes damper, till on the banks of the Guayaquil, nearly under the equator, we find the most luxuriant forests.
The change, however, from the sterile coast of Peru to that fertile land is described as taking place rather abruptly in the latitude of Cape Blanco, two degrees south of Guayaquil.
Callao is a filthy, ill-built, small seaport.
The inhabitants, both here and at Lima, present every imaginable shade of mixture, between European, Negro, and Indian blood.
They appear a depraved, drunken set of people.
The atmosphere is loaded with foul smells, and that peculiar one, which may be perceived in almost every town within the tropics, was here very strong.
The fortress, which withstood Lord Cochrane's long siege, has an imposing appearance.
But the President, during our stay, sold the brass guns, and proceeded to dismantle parts of it.
The reason assigned was, that he had not an officer to whom he could trust so important a charge.
He himself had good reason for thinking so, as he had obtained the presidentship by rebelling while in charge of this same fortress.
After we left South America, he paid the penalty in the usual manner, by being conquered, taken prisoner, and shot.
Lima stands on a plain in a valley, formed during the gradual retreat of the sea.
It is seven miles from Callao, and is elevated 500 feet above it; but from the slope being very gradual, the road appears absolutely level; so that when at Lima it is difficult to believe one has ascended even one hundred feet: Humboldt has remarked on
Steep barren hills rise like islands from the plain, which is divided, by straight mud-walls, into large green fields.
In these scarcely a tree grows excepting a few willows, and an occasional clump of bananas and of oranges.
The city of Lima is now in a wretched state of decay: the streets are nearly unpaved; and heaps of filth are piled up in all directions, where the black gallinazos, tame as poultry, pick up bits of carrion.
The houses have generally an upper story, built on account of the earthquakes, of plastered woodwork but some of the old ones, which are now used by several families, are immensely large, and would rival in suites of apartments the most magnificent in any
Lima, the City of the Kings, must formerly have been a splendid town.
The extraordinary number of churches gives it, even at the present day, a peculiar and striking character, especially when viewed from a short distance.
One day I went out with some merchants to hunt in the immediate vicinity of the city.
Our sport was very poor; but I had an opportunity of seeing the ruins of one of the ancient Indian villages, with its mound like a natural hill in the centre.
The remains of houses, enclosures, irrigating streams, and burial mounds, scattered over this plain, cannot fail to give one a high idea of the condition and number of the ancient population.
When their earthenware, woollen clothes, utensils of elegant forms cut out of the hardest rocks, tools of copper, ornaments of precious stones, palaces, and hydraulic works, are considered, it is impossible not to respect the considerable advance made by
The burial mounds, called Huacas, are really stupendous; although in some places they appear to be natural hills incased and modelled.
There is also another and very different class of ruins, which possesses some interest, namely, those of old Callao, overwhelmed by the great earthquake of 1746, and its accompanying wave.
The destruction must have been more complete even than at Talcahuano.
Quantities of shingle almost conceal the foundations of the walls, and vast masses of brickwork appear to have been whirled about like pebbles by the retiring waves.
It has been stated that the land subsided during this memorable shock: I could not discover any proof of this; yet it seems far from improbable, for the form of the coast must certainly have undergone some change since the foundation of the old town; as no
Since our voyage, M. Tschudi has come to the conclusion, by the comparison of old and modern maps, that the coast both north and south of Lima has certainly subsided.
On the island of San Lorenzo, there are very satisfactory proofs of elevation within the recent period; this of course is not opposed to the belief, of a small sinking of the ground having subsequently taken place.
The side of this island fronting the Bay of Callao, is worn into three obscure terraces, the lower one of which is covered by a bed a mile in length, almost wholly composed of shells of eighteen species, now living in the adjoining sea.
The height of this bed is eighty-five feet.
Many of the shells are deeply corroded, and have a much older and more decayed appearance than those at the height of 500 or 600 feet on the coast of Chile.
These shells are associated with much common salt, a little sulphate of lime (both probably left by the evaporation of the spray, as the land slowly rose), together with sulphate of soda and muriate of lime.
They rest on fragments of the underlying sandstone, and are covered by a few inches thick of detritus.
The shells, higher up on this terrace could be traced scaling off in flakes, and falling into an impalpable powder; and on an upper terrace, at the height of 170 feet, and likewise at some considerably higher points, I found a layer of saline powder of
I have no doubt that this upper layer originally existed as a bed of shells, like that on the eighty-five-feet ledge; but it does not now contain even a trace of organic structure.
The powder has been analyzed for me by Mr. T. Reeks; it consists of sulphates and muriates both of lime and soda, with very little carbonate of lime.
It is known that common salt and carbonate of lime left in a mass for some time together, partly decompose each other; though this does not happen with small quantities in solution.
As the half-decomposed shells in the lower parts are associated with much common salt, together with some of the saline substances composing the upper saline layer, and as these shells are corroded and decayed in a remarkable manner, I strongly suspect
The resultant salts, however, ought to be carbonate of soda and muriate of lime, the latter is present, but not the carbonate of soda.
Hence I am led to imagine that by some unexplained means, the carbonate of soda becomes changed into the sulphate.
It is obvious that the saline layer could not have been preserved in any country in which abundant rain occasionally fell: on the other hand, this very circumstance, which at first sight appears so highly favourable to the long preservation of exposed
I was much interested by finding on the terrace, at the height of eighty-five feet, _embedded_ amidst the shells and much sea-drifted rubbish, some bits of cotton thread, plaited rush, and the head of a stalk of Indian corn: I compared these relics with
On the mainland in front of San Lorenzo, near Bellavista, there is an extensive and level plain about a hundred feet high, of which the lower part is formed of alternating layers of sand and impure clay, together with some gravel, and the surface, to the
At first I was inclined to believe that this superficial bed, from its wide extent and smoothness, must have been deposited beneath the sea; but I afterwards found in one spot, that it lay on an artificial floor of round stones.
It seems, therefore, most probable that at a period when the land stood at a lower level there was a plain very similar to that now surrounding Callao, which being protected by a shingle beach, is raised but very little above the level of the sea.
On this plain, with its underlying red-clay beds, I imagine that the Indians manufactured their earthen vessels; and that, during some violent earthquake, the sea broke over the beach, and converted the plain into a temporary lake, as happened round Callao
The water would then have deposited mud, containing fragments of pottery from the kilns, more abundant at some spots than at others, and shells from the sea.
This bed, with fossil earthenware, stands at about the same height with the shells on the lower terrace of San Lorenzo, in which the cotton-thread and other relics were embedded.
Hence we may safely conclude, that within the Indo-human period there has been an elevation, as before alluded to, of more than eighty-five feet; for some little elevation must have been lost by the coast having subsided since the old maps were engraved.
At Valparaiso, although in the 220 years before our visit, the elevation cannot have exceeded nineteen feet, yet subsequently to 1817, there has been a rise, partly insensible and partly by a start during the shock of 1822, of ten or eleven feet.
The antiquity of the Indo-human race here, judging by the eighty-five feet rise of the land since the relics were embedded, is the more remarkable, as on the coast of Patagonia, when the land stood about the same number of feet lower, the Macrauchenia was
At Bahia Blanca, the elevation has been only a few feet since the numerous gigantic quadrupeds were there entombed; and, according to the generally received opinion, when these extinct animals were living, man did not exist.
But the rising of that part of the coast of Patagonia, is perhaps no way connected with the Cordillera, but rather with a line of old volcanic rocks in Banda Oriental, so that it may have been infinitely slower than on the shores of Peru.
All these speculations, however, must be vague; for who will pretend to say that there may not have been several periods of subsidence, intercalated between the movements of elevation; for we know that along the whole coast of Patagonia, there have
[1] Vol.
iv.
p.
11, and vol.
ii.
p.
217.
For the remarks on Guayaquil, see Silliman's Journ.
, vol.
xxiv.
p.
384.
For those on Tacna by Mr. Hamilton, see Trans.
of British Association, 1840.
For those on Coseguina see Mr. Caldcleugh in Phil.
Trans.
, 1835.
In the former edition I collected several references on the coincidences between sudden falls in the barometer and earthquakes; and between earthquakes and meteors.
[2] Observa.
sobre el Clima de Lima, p.
67.
--Azara's Travels, vol.
i.
p.
381.
--Ulloa's Voyage, vol.
ii.
p.
28.
--Burchell's Travels, vol.
ii.
p.
524.
--Webster's Description of the Azores, p.
124.
--Voyage a l'Isle de France par un Officer du Roi, tom.
i.
p.
248.
--Description of St. Helena, p.
123.
[3] Temple, in his travels through Upper Peru, or Bolivia, in going from Potosi to Oruro, says, "I saw many Indian villages or dwellings in ruins, up even to the very tops of the mountains, attesting a former population where now all is desolate".
He makes similar remarks in another place; but I cannot tell whether this desolation has been caused by a want of population, or by an altered condition of the land.
[4] Edinburgh, Phil.
Journ.
, Jan.
, 1830, p.
74; and April, 1830, p.
258--also Daubeny on Volcanoes, p.
438; and Bengal Journ.
, vol.
vii.
p.
324.
[5] Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain, vol.
iv.
p.
199.
[6] A similar interesting case is recorded in the Madras Medical Quart.
Journ.
, 1839, p.
340.
Dr. Ferguson, in his admirable Paper (see 9th vol.
of Edinburgh Royal Trans.
), shows clearly that the poison is generated in the drying process; and hence that dry hot countries are often the most unhealthy.
CHAPTER XVII GALAPAGOS ARCHIPELAGO The whole Group Volcanic--Numbers of Craters--Leafless Bushes Colony at Charles Island--James Island--Salt-lake in Crater--Natural History of the Group--Ornithology, curious Finches--Reptiles--Great Tortoises, habits
SEPTEMBER 15th.
--This archipelago consists of ten principal islands, of which five exceed the others in size.
They are situated under the Equator, and between five and six hundred miles westward of the coast of America.
They are all formed of volcanic rocks; a few fragments of granite curiously glazed and altered by the heat, can hardly be considered as an exception.
Some of the craters, surmounting the larger islands, are of immense size, and they rise to a height of between three and four thousand feet.
Their flanks are studded by innumerable smaller orifices.
I scarcely hesitate to affirm, that there must be in the whole archipelago at least two thousand craters.
These consist either of lava or scoriae, or of finely-stratified, sandstone-like tuff.
Most of the latter are beautifully symmetrical; they owe their origin to eruptions of volcanic mud without any lava: it is a remarkable circumstance that every one of the twenty-eight tuff-craters which were examined, had their southern sides either much
As all these craters apparently have been formed when standing in the sea, and as the waves from the trade wind and the swell from the open Pacific here unite their forces on the southern coasts of all the islands, this singular uniformity in the broken
Considering that these islands are placed directly under the equator, the climate is far from being excessively hot; this seems chiefly caused by the singularly low temperature of the surrounding water, brought here by the great southern [map] Polar
Excepting during one short season, very little rain falls, and even then it is irregular; but the clouds generally hang low.
Hence, whilst the lower parts of the islands are very sterile, the upper parts, at a height of a thousand feet and upwards, possess a damp climate and a tolerably luxuriant vegetation.
This is especially the case on the windward sides of the islands, which first receive and condense the moisture from the atmosphere.
In the morning (17th) we landed on Chatham Island, which, like the others, rises with a tame and rounded outline, broken here and there by scattered hillocks, the remains of former craters.
Nothing could be less inviting than the first appearance.
A broken field of black basaltic lava, thrown into the most rugged waves, and crossed by great fissures, is everywhere covered by stunted, sun-burnt brushwood, which shows little signs of life.
The dry and parched surface, being heated by the noon-day sun, gave to the air a close and sultry feeling, like that from a stove: we fancied even that the bushes smelt unpleasantly.
Although I diligently tried to collect as many plants as possible, I succeeded in getting very few; and such wretched-looking little weeds would have better become an arctic than an equatorial Flora.
The brushwood appears, from a short distance, as leafless as our trees during winter; and it was some time before I discovered that not only almost every plant was now in full leaf, but that the greater number were in flower.
The commonest bush is one of the Euphorbiaceae: an acacia and a great odd-looking cactus are the only trees which afford any shade.
After the season of heavy rains, the islands are said to appear for a short time partially green.
The volcanic island of Fernando Noronha, placed in many respects under nearly similar conditions, is the only other country where I have seen a vegetation at all like this of the Galapagos Islands.
The Beagle sailed round Chatham Island, and anchored in several bays.
One night I slept on shore on a part of the island, where black truncated cones were extraordinarily numerous: from one small eminence I counted sixty of them, all surmounted by craters more or less perfect.
The greater number consisted merely of a ring of red scoriae or slags, cemented together: and their height above the plain of lava was not more than from fifty to a hundred feet; none had been very lately active.
The entire surface of this part of the island seems to have been permeated, like a sieve, by the subterranean vapours: here and there the lava, whilst soft, has been blown into great bubbles; and in other parts, the tops of caverns similarly formed have
From the regular form of the many craters, they gave to the country an artificial appearance, which vividly reminded me of those parts of Staffordshire, where the great iron-foundries are most numerous.
The day was glowing hot, and the scrambling over the rough surface and through the intricate thickets, was very fatiguing; but I was well repaid by the strange Cyclopean scene.
As I was walking along I met two large tortoises, each of which must have weighed at least two hundred pounds: one was eating a piece of cactus, and as I approached, it stared at me and slowly walked away; the other gave a deep hiss, and drew in its head.
These huge reptiles, surrounded by the black lava, the leafless shrubs, and large cacti, seemed to my fancy like some antediluvian animals.
The few dull-coloured birds cared no more for me than they did for the great tortoises.
23rd.
--The Beagle proceeded to Charles Island.
This archipelago has long been frequented, first by the bucaniers, and latterly by whalers, but it is only within the last six years, that a small colony has been established here.
The inhabitants are between two and three hundred in number; they are nearly all people of colour, who have been banished for political crimes from the Republic of the Equator, of which Quito is the capital.
The settlement is placed about four and a half miles inland, and at a height probably of a thousand feet.
In the first part of the road we passed through leafless thickets, as in Chatham Island.
Higher up, the woods gradually became greener; and as soon as we crossed the ridge of the island, we were cooled by a fine southerly breeze, and our sight refreshed by a green and thriving vegetation.
In this upper region coarse grasses and ferns abound; but there are no tree-ferns: I saw nowhere any member of the palm family, which is the more singular, as 360 miles northward, Cocos Island takes its name from the number of cocoa-nuts.
The houses are irregularly scattered over a flat space of ground, which is cultivated with sweet potatoes and bananas.
It will not easily be imagined how pleasant the sight of black mud was to us, after having been so long, accustomed to the parched soil of Peru and northern Chile.
The inhabitants, although complaining of poverty, obtain, without much trouble, the means of subsistence.
In the woods there are many wild pigs and goats; but the staple article of animal food is supplied by the tortoises.
Their numbers have of course been greatly reduced in this island, but the people yet count on two days' hunting giving them food for the rest of the week.
It is said that formerly single vessels have taken away as many as seven hundred, and that the ship's company of a frigate some years since brought down in one day two hundred tortoises to the beach.
September 29th.
--We doubled the south-west extremity of Albemarle Island, and the next day were nearly becalmed between it and Narborough Island.
Both are covered with immense deluges of black naked lava, which have flowed either over the rims of the great caldrons, like pitch over the rim of a pot in which it has been boiled, or have burst forth from smaller orifices on the flanks; in their descent
On both of these islands, eruptions are known to have taken place; and in Albemarle, we saw a small jet of smoke curling from the summit of one of the great craters.
In the evening we anchored in Bank's Cove, in Albemarle Island.
The next morning I went out walking.
To the south of the broken tuff-crater, in which the Beagle was anchored, there was another beautifully symmetrical one of an elliptic form; its longer axis was a little less than a mile, and its depth about 500 feet.
At its bottom there was a shallow lake, in the middle of which a tiny crater formed an islet.
The day was overpoweringly hot, and the lake looked clear and blue: I hurried down the cindery slope, and, choked with dust, eagerly tasted the water--but, to my sorrow, I found it salt as brine.
The rocks on the coast abounded with great black lizards, between three and four feet long; and on the hills, an ugly yellowish-brown species was equally common.
We saw many of this latter kind, some clumsily running out of the way, and others shuffling into their burrows.
I shall presently describe in more detail the habits of both these reptiles.
The whole of this northern part of Albemarle Island is miserably sterile.
October 8th.
--We arrived at James Island: this island, as well as Charles Island, were long since thus named after our kings of the Stuart line.
Mr. Bynoe, myself, and our servants were left here for a week, with provisions and a tent, whilst the Beagle went for water.
We found here a party of Spaniards, who had been sent from Charles Island to dry fish, and to salt tortoise-meat.
About six miles inland, and at the height of nearly 2000 feet, a hovel had been built in which two men lived, who were employed in catching tortoises, whilst the others were fishing on the coast.
I paid this party two visits, and slept there one night.
As in the other islands, the lower region was covered by nearly leafless bushes, but the trees were here of a larger growth than elsewhere, several being two feet and some even two feet nine inches in diameter.
The upper region being kept damp by the clouds, supports a green and flourishing vegetation.
So damp was the ground, that there were large beds of a coarse cyperus, in which great numbers of a very small water-rail lived and bred.
While staying in this upper region, we lived entirely upon tortoise-meat: the breast-plate roasted (as the Gauchos do _carne con cuero_), with the flesh on it, is very good; and the young tortoises make excellent soup; but otherwise the meat to my taste is
One day we accompanied a party of the Spaniards in their whale-boat to a salina, or lake from which salt is procured.
After landing, we had a very rough walk over a rugged field of recent lava, which has almost surrounded a tuff-crater, at the bottom of which the salt-lake lies.
The water is only three or four inches deep, and rests on a layer of beautifully crystallized, white salt.
The lake is quite circular, and is fringed with a border of bright green succulent plants; the almost precipitous walls of the crater are clothed with wood, so that the scene was altogether both picturesque and curious.
A few years since, the sailors belonging to a sealing-vessel murdered their captain in this quiet spot; and we saw his skull lying among the bushes.
During the greater part of our stay of a week, the sky was cloudless, and if the trade-wind failed for an hour, the heat became very oppressive.
On two days, the thermometer within the tent stood for some hours at 93 degs.
; but in the open air, in the wind and sun, at only 85 degs.
The sand was extremely hot; the thermometer placed in some of a brown colour immediately rose to 137 degs.
, and how much above that it would have risen, I do not know, for it was not graduated any higher.
The black sand felt much hotter, so that even in thick boots it was quite disagreeable to walk over it.
The natural history of these islands is eminently curious, and well deserves attention.
Most of the organic productions are aboriginal creations, found nowhere else; there is even a difference between the inhabitants of the different islands; yet all show a marked relationship with those of America, though separated from that continent by an
The archipelago is a little world within itself, or rather a satellite attached to America, whence it has derived a few stray colonists, and has received the general character of its indigenous productions.
Considering the small size of the islands, we feel the more astonished at the number of their aboriginal beings, and at their confined range.
Seeing every height crowned with its crater, and the boundaries of most of the lava-streams still distinct, we are led to believe that within a period geologically recent the unbroken ocean was here spread out.
Hence, both in space and time, we seem to be brought somewhat near to that great fact--that mystery of mysteries--the first appearance of new beings on this earth.
Of terrestrial mammals, there is only one which must be considered as indigenous, namely, a mouse (Mus Galapagoensis), and this is confined, as far as I could ascertain, to Chatham Island, the most easterly island of the group.
It belongs, as I am informed by Mr. Waterhouse, to a division of the family of mice characteristic of America.
At James Island, there is a rat sufficiently distinct from the common kind to have been named and described by Mr. Waterhouse; but as it belongs to the old-world division of the family, and as this island has been frequented by ships for the last hundred
Although no one has a right to speculate without distinct facts, yet even with respect to the Chatham Island mouse, it should be borne in mind, that it may possibly be an American species imported here; for I have seen, in a most unfrequented part of the
Of land-birds I obtained twenty-six kinds, all peculiar to the group and found nowhere else, with the exception of one lark-like finch from North America (Dolichonyx oryzivorus), which ranges on that continent as far north as 54 degs.
, and generally frequents marshes.
The other twenty-five birds consist, firstly, of a hawk, curiously intermediate in structure between a buzzard and the American group of carrion-feeding Polybori; and with these latter birds it agrees most closely in every habit and even tone of voice.
Secondly, there are two owls, representing the short-eared and white barn-owls of Europe.
Thirdly, a wren, three tyrant-flycatchers (two of them species of Pyrocephalus, one or both of which would be ranked by some ornithologists as only varieties), and a dove--all analogous to, but distinct from, American species.
Fourthly, a swallow, which though differing from the Progne purpurea of both Americas, only in being rather duller colored, smaller, and slenderer, is considered by Mr. Gould as specifically distinct.
Fifthly, there are three species of mocking thrush--a form highly characteristic of America.
The remaining land-birds form a most singular group of finches, related to each other in the structure of their beaks, short tails, form of body and plumage: there are thirteen species, which Mr. Gould has divided into four sub-groups.
All these species are peculiar to this archipelago; and so is the whole group, with the exception of one species of the sub-group Cactornis, lately brought from Bow Island, in the Low Archipelago.
Of Cactornis, the two species may be often seen climbing about the flowers of the great cactus-trees; but all the other species of this group of finches, mingled together in flocks, feed on the dry and sterile ground of the lower districts.
The males of all, or certainly of the greater number, are jet black; and the females (with perhaps one or two exceptions) are brown.
The most curious fact is the perfect gradation in the size of the beaks in the different species of Geospiza, from one as large as that of a hawfinch to that of a chaffinch, and (if Mr. Gould is right in including his sub-group, Certhidea, in the main
The largest beak in the genus Geospiza is shown in Fig.
1, and the smallest in Fig.
3; but instead of there being only one intermediate species, with a beak of the size shown in Fig.
2, there are no less than six species with insensibly graduated beaks.
The beak of the sub-group Certhidea, is shown in Fig.
4.
The beak of Cactornis is [picture] 1.
Geospiza magnirostris.
2.
Geospiza fortis.
3.
Geospiza parvula.
4.
Certhidea olivasea.
somewhat like that of a starling, and that of the fourth sub-group, Camarhynchus, is slightly parrot-shaped.
Seeing this gradation and diversity of structure in one small, intimately related group of birds, one might really fancy that from an original paucity of birds in this archipelago, one species had been taken and modified for different ends.
In a like manner it might be fancied that a bird originally a buzzard, had been induced here to undertake the office of the carrion-feeding Polybori of the American continent.
Of waders and water-birds I was able to get only eleven kinds, and of these only three (including a rail confined to the damp summits of the islands) are new species.
Considering the wandering habits of the gulls, I was surprised to find that the species inhabiting these islands is peculiar, but allied to one from the southern parts of South America.
The far greater peculiarity of the land-birds, namely, twenty-five out of twenty-six, being new species, or at least new races, compared with the waders and web-footed birds, is in accordance with the greater range which these latter orders have in all
We shall hereafter see this law of aquatic forms, whether marine or fresh-water, being less peculiar at any given point of the earth's surface than the terrestrial forms of the same classes, strikingly illustrated in the shells, and in a lesser degree in
Two of the waders are rather smaller than the same species brought from other places: the swallow is also smaller, though it is doubtful whether or not it is distinct from its analogue.
The two owls, the two tyrant-catchers (Pyrocephalus) and the dove, are also smaller than the analogous but distinct species, to which they are most nearly related; on the other hand, the gull is rather larger.
The two owls, the swallow, all three species of mocking-thrush, the dove in its separate colours though not in its whole plumage, the Totanus, and the gull, are likewise duskier coloured than their analogous species; and in the case of the mocking-thrush
With the exception of a wren with a fine yellow breast, and of a tyrant-flycatcher with a scarlet tuft and breast, none of the birds are brilliantly coloured, as might have been expected in an equatorial district.
Hence it would appear probable, that the same causes which here make the immigrants of some peculiar species smaller, make most of the peculiar Galapageian species also smaller, as well as very generally more dusky coloured.
All the plants have a wretched, weedy appearance, and I did not see one beautiful flower.
The insects, again, are small-sized and dull-coloured, and, as Mr. Waterhouse informs me, there is nothing in their general appearance which would have led him to imagine that they had come from under the equator.
[1] The birds, plants, and insects have a desert character, and are not more brilliantly coloured than those from southern Patagonia; we may, therefore, conclude that the usual gaudy colouring of the intertropical productions, is not related either to the
We will now turn to the order of reptiles, which gives the most striking character to the zoology of these islands.
The species are not numerous, but the numbers of individuals of each species are extraordinarily great.
There is one small lizard belonging to a South American genus, and two species (and probably more) of the Amblyrhynchus--a genus confined to the Galapagos Islands.
There is one snake which is numerous; it is identical, as I am informed by M. Bibron, with the Psammophis Temminckii from Chile.
[2] Of sea-turtle I believe there are more than one species, and of tortoises there are, as we shall presently show, two or three species or races.
Of toads and frogs there are none: I was surprised at this, considering how well suited for them the temperate and damp upper woods appeared to be.
It recalled to my mind the remark made by Bory St. Vincent, [3] namely, that none of this family are found on any of the volcanic islands in the great oceans.
As far as I can ascertain from various works, this seems to hold good throughout the Pacific, and even in the large islands of the Sandwich archipelago.
Mauritius offers an apparent exception, where I saw the Rana Mascariensis in abundance: this frog is said now to inhabit the Seychelles, Madagascar, and Bourbon; but on the other hand, Du Bois, in his voyage in 1669, states that there were no reptiles in
The absence of the frog family in the oceanic islands is the more remarkable, when contrasted with the case of lizards, which swarm on most of the smallest islands.
May this difference not be caused, by the greater facility with which the eggs of lizards, protected by calcareous shells might be transported through salt-water, than could the slimy spawn of frogs?
I will first describe the habits of the tortoise (Testudo nigra, formerly called Indica), which has been so frequently alluded to.
These animals are found, I believe, on all the islands of the archipelago; certainly on the greater number.
They frequent in preference the high damp parts, but they likewise live in the lower and arid districts.
I have already shown, from the numbers which have been caught in a single day, how very numerous they must be.
Some grow to an immense size: Mr. Lawson, an Englishman, and vice-governor of the colony, told us that he had seen several so large, that it required six or eight men to lift them from the ground; and that some had afforded as much as two hundred pounds of
The old males are the largest, the females rarely growing to so great a size: the male can readily be distinguished from the female by the greater length of its tail.
The tortoises which live on those islands where there is no water, or in the lower and arid parts of the others, feed chiefly on the succulent cactus.
Those which frequent the higher and damp regions, eat the leaves of various trees, a kind of berry (called guayavita) which is acid and austere, and likewise a pale green filamentous lichen (Usnera plicata), that hangs from the boughs of the trees.
The tortoise is very fond of water, drinking large quantities, and wallowing in the mud.
The larger islands alone possess springs, and these are always situated towards the central parts, and at a considerable height.
The tortoises, therefore, which frequent the lower districts, when thirsty, are obliged to travel from a long distance.
Hence broad and well-beaten paths branch off in every direction from the wells down to the sea-coast; and the Spaniards by following them up, first discovered the watering-places.
When I landed at Chatham Island, I could not imagine what animal travelled so methodically along well-chosen tracks.
Near the springs it was a curious spectacle to behold many of these huge creatures, one set eagerly travelling onwards with outstretched necks, and another set returning, after having drunk their fill.
When the tortoise arrives at the spring, quite regardless of any spectator, he buries his head in the water above his eyes, and greedily swallows great mouthfuls, at the rate of about ten in a minute.
The inhabitants say each animal stays three or four days in the neighbourhood of the water, and then returns to the lower country; but they differed respecting the frequency of these visits.
The animal probably regulates them according to the nature of the food on which it has lived.
It is, however, certain, that tortoises can subsist even on these islands where there is no other water than what falls during a few rainy days in the year.
I believe it is well ascertained, that the bladder of the frog acts as a reservoir for the moisture necessary to its existence: such seems to be the case with the tortoise.
For some time after a visit to the springs, their urinary bladders are distended with fluid, which is said gradually to decrease in volume, and to become less pure.
The inhabitants, when walking in the lower district, and overcome with thirst, often take advantage of this circumstance, and drink the contents of the bladder if full: in one I saw killed, the fluid was quite limpid, and had only a very slightly bitter
The inhabitants, however, always first drink the water in the pericardium, which is described as being best.
The tortoises, when purposely moving towards any point, travel by night and day, and arrive at their journey's end much sooner than would be expected.
The inhabitants, from observing marked individuals, consider that they travel a distance of about eight miles in two or three days.
One large tortoise, which I watched, walked at the rate of sixty yards in ten minutes, that is 360 yards in the hour, or four miles a day,--allowing a little time for it to eat on the road.
During the breeding season, when the male and female are together, the male utters a hoarse roar or bellowing, which, it is said, can be heard at the distance of more than a hundred yards.
The female never uses her voice, and the male only at these times; so that when the people hear this noise, they know that the two are together.
They were at this time (October) laying their eggs.
The female, where the soil is sandy, deposits them together, and covers them up with sand; but where the ground is rocky she drops them indiscriminately in any hole: Mr. Bynoe found seven placed in a fissure.
The egg is white and spherical; one which I measured was seven inches and three-eighths in circumference, and therefore larger than a hen's egg.
The young tortoises, as soon as they are hatched, fall a prey in great numbers to the carrion-feeding buzzard.
The old ones seem generally to die from accidents, as from falling down precipices: at least, several of the inhabitants told me, that they never found one dead without some evident cause.
The inhabitants believe that these animals are absolutely deaf; certainly they do not overhear a person walking close behind them.
I was always amused when overtaking one of these great monsters, as it was quietly pacing along, to see how suddenly, the instant I passed, it would draw in its head and legs, and uttering a deep hiss fall to the ground with a heavy sound, as if struck
I frequently got on their backs, and then giving a few raps on the hinder part of their shells, they would rise up and walk away;--but I found it very difficult to keep my balance.
The flesh of this animal is largely employed, both fresh and salted; and a beautifully clear oil is prepared from the fat.
When a tortoise is caught, the man makes a slit in the skin near its tail, so as to see inside its body, whether the fat under the dorsal plate is thick.
If it is not, the animal is liberated and it is said to recover soon from this strange operation.
In order to secure the tortoise, it is not sufficient to turn them like turtle, for they are often able to get on their legs again.
There can be little doubt that this tortoise is an aboriginal inhabitant of the Galapagos; for it is found on all, or nearly all, the islands, even on some of the smaller ones where there is no water; had it been an imported species, this would hardly have
Moreover, the old Bucaniers found this tortoise in greater numbers even than at present: Wood and Rogers also, in 1708, say that it is the opinion of the Spaniards, that it is found nowhere else in this quarter of the world.
It is now widely distributed; but it may be questioned whether it is in any other place an aboriginal.
The bones of a tortoise at Mauritius, associated with those of the extinct Dodo, have generally been considered as belonging to this tortoise; if this had been so, undoubtedly it must have been there indigenous; but M. Bibron informs me that he believes
The Amblyrhynchus, a remarkable genus of lizards, is confined to this archipelago; there are two species, resembling [picture] each other in general form, one being terrestrial and the other aquatic.
This latter species (A.
cristatus) was first characterized by Mr. Bell, who well foresaw, from its short, broad head, and strong claws of equal length, that its habits of life would turn out very peculiar, and different from those of its nearest ally, the Iguana.
It is extremely common on all the islands throughout the group, and lives exclusively on the rocky sea-beaches, being never found, at least I never saw one, even ten yards in-shore.
It is a hideous-looking creature, of a dirty black colour, stupid, and sluggish in its movements.
The usual length of a full-grown one is about a yard, but there are some even four feet long; a large one weighed twenty pounds: on the island of Albemarle they seem to grow to a greater size than elsewhere.
Their tails are flattened sideways, and all four feet partially webbed.
They are occasionally seen some hundred yards from the shore, swimming about; and Captain Collnett, in his Voyage says, "They go to sea in herds a-fishing, and sun themselves on the rocks; and may be called alligators in miniature".
It must not, however, be supposed that they live on fish.
When in the water this lizard swims with perfect ease and quickness, by a serpentine movement of its body and flattened tail--the legs being motionless and closely collapsed on its sides.
A seaman on board sank one, with a heavy weight attached to it, thinking thus to kill it directly; but when, an hour afterwards, he drew up the line, it was quite active.
Their limbs and strong claws are admirably adapted for crawling over the rugged and fissured masses of lava, which everywhere form the coast.
In such situations, a group of six or seven of these hideous reptiles may oftentimes be seen on the black rocks, a few feet above the surf, basking in the sun with outstretched legs.
I opened the stomachs of several, and found them largely distended with minced sea-weed (Ulvae), which grows in thin foliaceous expansions of a bright green or a dull red colour.
I do not recollect having observed this sea-weed in any quantity on the tidal rocks; and I have reason to believe it grows at the bottom of the sea, at some little distance from the coast.
If such be the case, the object of these animals occasionally going out to sea is explained.
The stomach contained nothing but the sea-weed.
Mr. Baynoe, however, found a piece of crab in one; but this might have got in accidentally, in the same manner as I have seen a caterpillar, in the midst of some lichen, in the paunch of a tortoise.
The intestines were large, as in other herbivorous animals.
The nature of this lizard's food, as well as the structure of its tail and feet, and the fact of its having been seen voluntarily swimming out at sea, absolutely prove its aquatic habits; yet there is in this respect one strange anomaly, namely, that when
Hence it is easy to drive these lizards down to any little point overhanging the sea, where they will sooner allow a person to catch hold of their tails than jump into the water.
They do not seem to have any notion of biting; but when much frightened they squirt a drop of fluid from each nostril.
I threw one several times as far as I could, into a deep pool left by the retiring tide; but it invariably returned in a direct line to the spot where I stood.
It swam near the bottom, with a very graceful and rapid movement, and occasionally aided itself over the uneven ground with its feet.
As soon as it arrived near the edge, but still being under water, it tried to conceal itself in the tufts of sea-weed, or it entered some crevice.
As soon as it thought the danger was past, it crawled out on the dry rocks, and shuffled away as quickly as it could.
I several times caught this same lizard, by driving it down to a point, and though possessed of such perfect powers of diving and swimming, nothing would induce it to enter the water; and as often as I threw it in, it returned in the manner above
Perhaps this singular piece of apparent stupidity may be accounted for by the circumstance, that this reptile has no enemy whatever on shore, whereas at sea it must often fall a prey to the numerous sharks.
Hence, probably, urged by a fixed and hereditary instinct that the shore is its place of safety, whatever the emergency may be, it there takes refuge.
During our visit (in October), I saw extremely few small individuals of this species, and none I should think under a year old.
From this circumstance it seems probable that the breeding season had not then commenced.
I asked several of the inhabitants if they knew where it laid its eggs: they said that they knew nothing of its propagation, although well acquainted with the eggs of the land kind--a fact, considering how very common this lizard is, not a little
We will now turn to the terrestrial species (A.
Demarlii), with a round tail, and toes without webs.
This lizard, instead of being found like the other on all the islands, is confined to the central part of the archipelago, namely to Albemarle, James, Barrington, and Indefatigable islands.
To the southward, in Charles, Hood, and Chatham islands, and to the northward, in Towers, Bindloes, and Abingdon, I neither saw nor heard of any.
It would appear as if it had been created in the centre of the archipelago, and thence had been dispersed only to a certain distance.
Some of these lizards inhabit the high and damp parts of the islands, but they are much more numerous in the lower and sterile districts near the coast.
I cannot give a more forcible proof of their numbers, than by stating that when we were left at James Island, we could not for some time find a spot free from their burrows on which to pitch our single tent.
Like their brothers the sea-kind, they are ugly animals, of a yellowish orange beneath, and of a brownish red colour above: from their low facial angle they have a singularly stupid appearance.
They are, perhaps, of a rather less size than the marine species; but several of them weighed between ten and fifteen pounds.
In their movements they are lazy and half torpid.
When not frightened, they slowly crawl along with their tails and bellies dragging on the ground.
They often stop, and doze for a minute or two, with closed eyes and hind legs spread out on the parched soil.
They inhabit burrows, which they sometimes make between fragments of lava, but more generally on level patches of the soft sandstone-like tuff.
The holes do not appear to be very deep, and they enter the ground at a small angle; so that when walking over these lizard-warrens, the soil is constantly giving way, much to the annoyance of the tired walker.
This animal, when making its burrow, works alternately the opposite sides of its body.
One front leg for a short time scratches up the soil, and throws it towards the hind foot, which is well placed so as to heave it beyond the mouth of the hole.
That side of the body being tired, the other takes up the task, and so on alternately.
I watched one for a long time, till half its body was buried; I then walked up and pulled it by the tail, at this it was greatly astonished, and soon shuffled up to see what was the matter; and then stared me in the face, as much as to say, "What made you
They feed by day, and do not wander far from their burrows; if frightened, they rush to them with a most awkward gait.
Except when running down hill, they cannot move very fast, apparently from the lateral position of their legs.
They are not at all timorous: when attentively watching any one, they curl their tails, and, raising themselves on their front legs, nod their heads vertically, with a quick movement, and try to look very fierce; but in reality they are not at all so: if
I have frequently observed small fly-eating lizards, when watching anything, nod their heads in precisely the same manner; but I do not at all know for what purpose.
If this Amblyrhynchus is held and plagued with a stick, it will bite it very severely; but I caught many by the tail, and they never tried to bite me.
If two are placed on the ground and held together, they will fight, and bite each other till blood is drawn.
The individuals, and they are the greater number, which inhabit the lower country, can scarcely taste a drop of water throughout the year; but they consume much of the succulent cactus, the branches of which are occasionally broken off by the wind.
I several times threw a piece to two or three of them when together; and it was amusing enough to see them trying to seize and carry it away in their mouths, like so many hungry dogs with a bone.
They eat very deliberately, but do not chew their food.
The little birds are aware how harmless these creatures are: I have seen one of the thick-billed finches picking at one end of a piece of cactus (which is much relished by all the animals of the lower region), whilst a lizard was eating at the other end;
I opened the stomachs of several, and found them full of vegetable fibres and leaves of different trees, especially of an acacia.
In the upper region they live chiefly on the acid and astringent berries of the guayavita, under which trees I have seen these lizards and the huge tortoises feeding together.
To obtain the acacia-leaves they crawl up the low stunted trees; and it is not uncommon to see a pair quietly browsing, whilst seated on a branch several feet above the ground.
These lizards, when cooked, yield a white meat, which is liked by those whose stomachs soar above all prejudices.
Humboldt has remarked that in intertropical South America, all lizards which inhabit dry regions are esteemed delicacies for the table.
The inhabitants state that those which inhabit the upper damp parts drink water, but that the others do not, like the tortoises, travel up for it from the lower sterile country.
At the time of our visit, the females had within their bodies numerous, large, elongated eggs, which they lay in their burrows: the inhabitants seek them for food.
These two species of Amblyrhynchus agree, as I have already stated, in their general structure, and in many of their habits.
Neither have that rapid movement, so characteristic of the genera Lacerta and Iguana.
They are both herbivorous, although the kind of vegetation on which they feed is so very different.
Mr. Bell has given the name to the genus from the shortness of the snout: indeed, the form of the mouth may almost be compared to that of the tortoise: one is led to suppose that this is an adaptation to their herbivorous appetites.
It is very interesting thus to find a well-characterized genus, having its marine and terrestrial species, belonging to so confined a portion of the world.
The aquatic species is by far the most remarkable, because it is the only existing lizard which lives on marine vegetable productions.
As I at first observed, these islands are not so remarkable for the number of the species of reptiles, as for that of the individuals, when we remember the well-beaten paths made by the thousands of huge tortoises--the many turtles--the great warrens of
The geologist on hearing this will probably refer back in his mind to the Secondary epochs, when lizards, some herbivorous, some carnivorous, and of dimensions comparable only with our existing whales, swarmed on the land and in the sea.
It is, therefore, worthy of his observation, that this archipelago, instead of possessing a humid climate and rank vegetation, cannot be considered otherwise than extremely arid, and, for an equatorial region, remarkably temperate.
To finish with the zoology: the fifteen kinds of sea-fish which I procured here are all new species; they belong to twelve genera, all widely distributed, with the exception of Prionotus, of which the four previously known species live on the eastern side
Of land-shells I collected sixteen kinds (and two marked varieties), of which, with the exception of one Helix found at Tahiti, all are peculiar to this archipelago: a single fresh-water shell (Paludina) is common to Tahiti and Van Diemen's Land.
Mr. Cuming, before our voyage procured here ninety species of sea-shells, and this does not include several species not yet specifically examined, of Trochus, Turbo, Monodonta, and Nassa.
He has been kind enough to give me the following interesting results: Of the ninety shells, no less than forty-seven are unknown elsewhere--a wonderful fact, considering how widely distributed sea-shells generally are.
Of the forty-three shells found in other parts of the world, twenty-five inhabit the western coast of America, and of these eight are distinguishable as varieties; the remaining eighteen (including one variety) were found by Mr. Cuming in the Low
This fact of shells from islands in the central parts of the Pacific occurring here, deserves notice, for not one single sea-shell is known to be common to the islands of that ocean and to the west coast of America.
The space of open sea running north and south off the west coast, separates two quite distinct conchological provinces; but at the Galapagos Archipelago we have a halting-place, where many new forms have been created, and whither these two great
The American province has also sent here representative species; for there is a Galapageian species of Monoceros, a genus only found on the west coast of America; and there are Galapageian species of Fissurella and Cancellaria, genera common on the west
On the other hand, there are Galapageian species of Oniscia and Stylifer, genera common to the West Indies and to the Chinese and Indian seas, but not found either on the west coast of America or in the central Pacific.
I may here add, that after the comparison by Messrs.
Cuming and Hinds of about 2000 shells from the eastern and western coasts of America, only one single shell was found in common, namely, the Purpura patula, which inhabits the West Indies, the coast of Panama, and the Galapagos.
We have, therefore, in this quarter of the world, three great conchological sea-provinces, quite distinct, though surprisingly near each other, being separated by long north and south spaces either of land or of open sea.
I took great pains in collecting the insects, but excepting Tierra del Fuego, I never saw in this respect so poor a country.
Even in the upper and damp region I procured very few, excepting some minute Diptera and Hymenoptera, mostly of common mundane forms.
As before remarked, the insects, for a tropical region, are of very small size and dull colours.
Of beetles I collected twenty-five species (excluding a Dermestes and Corynetes imported, wherever a ship touches); of these, two belong to the Harpalidae, two to the Hydrophilidae, nine to three families of the Heteromera, and the remaining twelve to as
This circumstance of insects (and I may add plants), where few in number, belonging to many different families, is, I believe, very general.
Mr. Waterhouse, who has published [4] an account of the insects of this archipelago, and to whom I am indebted for the above details, informs me that there are several new genera: and that of the genera not new, one or two are American, and the rest of
With the exception of a wood-feeding Apate, and of one or probably two water-beetles from the American continent, all the species appear to be new.
The botany of this group is fully as interesting as the zoology.
Dr. J. Hooker will soon publish in the "Linnean Transactions" a full account of the Flora, and I am much indebted to him for the following details.
Of flowering plants there are, as far as at present is known, 185 species, and 40 cryptogamic species, making altogether 225; of this number I was fortunate enough to bring home 193.
Of the flowering plants, 100 are new species, and are probably confined to this archipelago.
Dr. Hooker conceives that, of the plants not so confined, at least 10 species found near the cultivated ground at Charles Island, have been imported.
It is, I think, surprising that more American species have not been introduced naturally, considering that the distance is only between 500 and 600 miles from the continent, and that (according to Collnet, p.
58) drift-wood, bamboos, canes, and the nuts of a palm, are often washed on the south-eastern shores.
The proportion of 100 flowering plants out of 183 (or 175 excluding the imported weeds) being new, is sufficient, I conceive, to make the Galapagos Archipelago a distinct botanical province; but this Flora is not nearly so peculiar as that of St. Helena,
The peculiarity of the Galapageian Flora is best shown in certain families;--thus there are 21 species of Compositae, of which 20 are peculiar to this archipelago; these belong to twelve genera, and of these genera no less than ten are confined to the
Dr. Hooker informs me that the Flora has an undoubtedly Western American character; nor can he detect in it any affinity with that of the Pacific.
If, therefore, we except the eighteen marine, the one fresh-water, and one land-shell, which have apparently come here as colonists from the central islands of the Pacific, and likewise the one distinct Pacific species of the Galapageian group of finches,
If this character were owing merely to immigrants from America, there would be little remarkable in it; but we see that a vast majority of all the land animals, and that more than half of the flowering plants, are aboriginal productions It was most
Why, on these small points of land, which within a late geological period must have been covered by the ocean, which are formed by basaltic lava, and therefore differ in geological character from the American continent, and which are placed under a
It is probable that the islands of the Cape de Verd group resemble, in all their physical conditions, far more closely the Galapagos Islands, than these latter physically resemble the coast of America, yet the aboriginal inhabitants of the two groups are
I have not as yet noticed by far the most remarkable feature in the natural history of this archipelago; it is, that the different islands to a considerable extent are inhabited by a different set of beings.
My attention was first called to this fact by the Vice-Governor, Mr. Lawson, declaring that the tortoises differed from the different islands, and that he could with certainty tell from which island any one was brought.
I did not for some time pay sufficient attention to this statement, and I had already partially mingled together the collections from two of the islands.
I never dreamed that islands, about 50 or 60 miles apart, and most of them in sight of each other, formed of precisely the same rocks, placed under a quite similar climate, rising to a nearly equal height, would have been differently tenanted; but we shall
It is the fate of most voyagers, no sooner to discover what is most interesting in any locality, than they are hurried from it; but I ought, perhaps, to be thankful that I obtained sufficient materials to establish this most remarkable fact in the
The inhabitants, as I have said, state that they can distinguish the tortoises from the different islands; and that they differ not only in size, but in other characters.
Captain Porter has described [5] those from Charles and from the nearest island to it, namely, Hood Island, as having their shells in front thick and turned up like a Spanish saddle, whilst the tortoises from James Island are rounder, blacker, and have a
M. Bibron, moreover, informs me that he has seen what he considers two distinct species of tortoise from the Galapagos, but he does not know from which islands.
The specimens that I brought from three islands were young ones: and probably owing to this cause neither Mr. Gray nor myself could find in them any specific differences.
I have remarked that the marine Amblyrhynchus was larger at Albemarle Island than elsewhere; and M. Bibron informs me that he has seen two distinct aquatic species of this genus; so that the different islands probably have their representative species or
My attention was first thoroughly aroused, by comparing together the numerous specimens, shot by myself and several other parties on board, of the mocking-thrushes, when, to my astonishment, I discovered that all those from Charles Island belonged to one
These two latter species are closely allied, and would by some ornithologists be considered as only well-marked races or varieties; but the Mimus trifasciatus is very distinct.
Unfortunately most of the specimens of the finch tribe were mingled together; but I have strong reasons to suspect that some of the species of the sub-group Geospiza are confined to separate islands.
If the different islands have their representatives of Geospiza, it may help to explain the singularly large number of the species of this sub-group in this one small archipelago, and as a probable consequence of their numbers, the perfectly graduated
Two species of the sub-group Cactornis, and two of the Camarhynchus, were procured in the archipelago; and of the numerous specimens of these two sub-groups shot by four collectors at James Island, all were found to belong to one species of each; whereas
In land-shells this law of distribution does not appear to hold good.
In my very small collection of insects, Mr. Waterhouse remarks, that of those which were ticketed with their locality, not one was common to any two of the islands.
If we now turn to the Flora, we shall find the aboriginal plants of the different islands wonderfully different.
I give all the following results on the high authority of my friend Dr. J. Hooker.
I may premise that I indiscriminately collected everything in flower on the different islands, and fortunately kept my collections separate.
Too much confidence, however, must not be placed in the proportional results, as the small collections brought home by some other naturalists though in some respects confirming the results, plainly show that much remains to be done in the botany of this
) ---------------------------------------------------------------- Hence we have the truly wonderful fact, that in James Island, of the thirty-eight Galapageian plants, or those found in no other part of the world, thirty are exclusively confined to this
This fact will, perhaps, be rendered even more striking, by giving a few illustrations:--thus, Scalesia, a remarkable arborescent genus of the Compositae, is confined to the archipelago: it has six species: one from Chatham, one from Albemarle, one from
Again, Euphorbia, a mundane or widely distributed genus, has here eight species, of which seven are confined to the archipelago, and not one found on any two islands: Acalypha and Borreria, both mundane genera, have respectively six and seven species, none
The species of the Compositae are particularly local; and Dr. Hooker has furnished me with several other most striking illustrations of the difference of the species on the different islands.
He remarks that this law of distribution holds good both with those genera confined to the archipelago, and those distributed in other quarters of the world: in like manner we have seen that the different islands have their proper species of the mundane
The distribution of the tenants of this archipelago would not be nearly so wonderful, if, for instance, one island had a mocking-thrush, and a second island some other quite distinct genus,--if one island had its genus of lizard, and a second island
But it is the circumstance, that several of the islands possess their own species of the tortoise, mocking-thrush, finches, and numerous plants, these species having the same general habits, occupying analogous situations, and obviously filling the same
It may be suspected that some of these representative species, at least in the case of the tortoise and of some of the birds, may hereafter prove to be only well-marked races; but this would be of equally great interest to the philosophical naturalist.
I have said that most of the islands are in sight of each other: I may specify that Charles Island is fifty miles from the nearest part of Chatham Island, and thirty-three miles from the nearest part of Albemarle Island.
Chatham Island is sixty miles from the nearest part of James Island, but there are two intermediate islands between them which were not visited by me.
James Island is only ten miles from the nearest part of Albemarle Island, but the two points where the collections were made are thirty-two miles apart.
I must repeat, that neither the nature of the soil, nor height of the land, nor the climate, nor the general character of the associated beings, and therefore their action one on another, can differ much in the different islands.
If there be any sensible difference in their climates, it must be between the Windward group (namely, Charles and Chatham Islands), and that to leeward; but there seems to be no corresponding difference in the productions of these two halves of the
The only light which I can throw on this remarkable difference in the inhabitants of the different islands, is, that very strong currents of the sea running in a westerly and W.N.W. direction must separate, as far as transportal by the sea is concerned,
As the archipelago is free to a most remarkable degree from gales of wind, neither the birds, insects, nor lighter seeds, would be blown from island to island.
And lastly, the profound depth of the ocean between the islands, and their apparently recent (in a geological sense) volcanic origin, render it highly unlikely that they were ever united; and this, probably, is a far more important consideration than any
Reviewing the facts here given, one is astonished at the amount of creative force, if such an expression may be used, displayed on these small, barren, and rocky islands; and still more so, at its diverse yet analogous action on points so near each other.
I have said that the Galapagos Archipelago might be called a satellite attached to America, but it should rather be called a group of satellites, physically similar, organically distinct, yet intimately related to each other, and all related in a marked,
I will conclude my description of the natural history of these islands, by giving an account of the extreme tameness of the birds.
This disposition is common to all the terrestrial species; namely, to the mocking-thrushes, the finches, wrens, tyrant-flycatchers, the dove, and carrion-buzzard.
All of them are often approached sufficiently near to be killed with a switch, and sometimes, as I myself tried, with a cap or hat.
A gun is here almost superfluous; for with the muzzle I pushed a hawk off the branch of a tree.
One day, whilst lying down, a mocking-thrush alighted on the edge of a pitcher, made of the shell of a tortoise, which I held in my hand, and began very quietly to sip the water; it allowed me to lift it from the ground whilst seated on the vessel: I often
Formerly the birds appear to have been even tamer than at present.
Cowley (in the year 1684) says that the "Turtledoves were so tame, that they would often alight on our hats and arms, so as that we could take them alive, they not fearing man, until such time as some of our company did fire at them, whereby they were
Dampier also, in the same year, says that a man in a morning's walk might kill six or seven dozen of these doves.
At present, although certainly very tame, they do not alight on people's arms, nor do they suffer themselves to be killed in such large numbers.
It is surprising that they have not become wilder; for these islands during the last hundred and fifty years have been frequently visited by bucaniers and whalers; and the sailors, wandering through the wood in search of tortoises, always take cruel
These birds, although now still more persecuted, do not readily become wild.
In Charles Island, which had then been colonized about six years, I saw a boy sitting by a well with a switch in his hand, with which he killed the doves and finches as they came to drink.
He had already procured a little heap of them for his dinner, and he said that he had constantly been in the habit of waiting by this well for the same purpose.
It would appear that the birds of this archipelago, not having as yet learnt that man is a more dangerous animal than the tortoise or the Amblyrhynchus, disregard him, in the same manner as in England shy birds, such as magpies, disregard the cows and
The Falkland Islands offer a second instance of birds with a similar disposition.
The extraordinary tameness of the little Opetiorhynchus has been remarked by Pernety, Lesson, and other voyagers.
It is not, however, peculiar to that bird: the Polyborus, snipe, upland and lowland goose, thrush, bunting, and even some true hawks, are all more or less tame.
As the birds are so tame there, where foxes, hawks, and owls occur, we may infer that the absence of all rapacious animals at the Galapagos, is not the cause of their tameness here.
The upland geese at the Falklands show, by the precaution they take in building on the islets, that they are aware of their danger from the foxes; but they are not by this rendered wild towards man.
This tameness of the birds, especially of the water-fowl, is strongly contrasted with the habits of the same species in Tierra del Fuego, where for ages past they have been persecuted by the wild inhabitants.
In the Falklands, the sportsman may sometimes kill more of the upland geese in one day than he can carry home; whereas in Tierra del Fuego it is nearly as difficult to kill one, as it is in England to shoot the common wild goose.
In the time of Pernety (1763), all the birds there appear to have been much tamer than at present; he states that the Opetiorhynchus would almost perch on his finger; and that with a wand he killed ten in half an hour.
At that period the birds must have been about as tame as they now are at the Galapagos.
They appear to have learnt caution more slowly at these latter islands than at the Falklands, where they have had proportionate means of experience; for besides frequent visits from vessels, those islands have been at intervals colonized during the entire
Even formerly, when all the birds were so tame, it was impossible by Pernety's account to kill the black-necked swan--a bird of passage, which probably brought with it the wisdom learnt in foreign countries.
I may add that, according to Du Bois, all the birds at Bourbon in 1571-72, with the exception of the flamingoes and geese, were so extremely tame, that they could be caught by the hand, or killed in any number with a stick.
Again, at Tristan d'Acunha in the Atlantic, Carmichael [6] states that the only two land-birds, a thrush and a bunting, were "so tame as to suffer themselves to be caught with a hand-net".
From these several facts we may, I think, conclude, first, that the wildness of birds with regard to man, is a particular instinct directed against _him_, and not dependent upon any general degree of caution arising from other sources of danger; secondly,
With domesticated animals we are accustomed to see new mental habits or instincts acquired or rendered hereditary; but with animals in a state of nature, it must always be most difficult to discover instances of acquired hereditary knowledge.
In regard to the wildness of birds towards man, there is no way of accounting for it, except as an inherited habit: comparatively few young birds, in any one year, have been injured by man in England, yet almost all, even nestlings, are afraid of him; many
We may infer from these facts, what havoc the introduction of any new beast of prey must cause in a country, before the instincts of the indigenous inhabitants have become adapted to the stranger's craft or power.
[1] The progress of research has shown that some of these birds, which were then thought to be confined to the islands, occur on the American continent.
The eminent ornithologist, Mr. Sclater, informs me that this is the case with the Strix punctatissima and Pyrocephalus nanus; and probably with the Otus Galapagoensis and Zenaida Galapagoensis: so that the number of endemic birds is reduced to
Mr. Sclater thinks that one or two of these endemic forms should be ranked rather as varieties than species, which always seemed to me probable.
[2] This is stated by Dr. Gunther (Zoolog.
Soc.
Jan 24th, 1859) to be a peculiar species, not known to inhabit any other country.
[3] Voyage aux Quatre Iles d'Afrique.
With respect to the Sandwich Islands, see Tyerman and Bennett's Journal, vol.
i.
p.
434.
For Mauritius, see Voyage par un Officier, etc.
, part i.
p.
170.
There are no frogs in the Canary Islands (Webb et Berthelot, Hist.
Nat.
des Iles Canaries).
I saw none at St. Jago in the Cape de Verds.
There are none at St. Helena.
[4] Ann.
and Mag.
of Nat.
Hist.
, vol.
xvi.
p.
19.
[5] Voyage in the U. S. ship Essex, vol.
i.
p.
215.
[6] Linn.
Trans.
, vol.
xii.
p.
496.
The most anomalous fact on this subject which I have met with is the wildness of the small birds in the Arctic parts of North America (as described by Richardson, Fauna Bor.
, vol.
ii.
p.
332), where they are said never to be persecuted.
This case is the more strange, because it is asserted that some of the same species in their winter-quarters in the United States are tame.
There is much, as Dr. Richardson well remarks, utterly inexplicable connected with the different degrees of shyness and care with which birds conceal their nests.
How strange it is that the English wood-pigeon, generally so wild a bird, should very frequently rear its young in shrubberies close to houses!
CHAPTER XVIII TAHITI AND NEW ZEALAND Pass through the Low Archipelago--Tahiti--Aspect--Vegetation on the Mountains--View of Eimeo--Excursion into the Interior--Profound Ravines--Succession of Waterfalls--Number of wild useful Plants--Temperance of the
OCTOBER 20th.
--The survey of the Galapagos Archipelago being concluded, we steered towards Tahiti and commenced our long passage of 3200 miles.
In the course of a few days we sailed out of the gloomy and clouded ocean-district which extends during the winter far from the coast of South America.
We then enjoyed bright and clear weather, while running pleasantly along at the rate of 150 or 160 miles a day before the steady trade-wind.
The temperature in this more central part of the Pacific is higher than near the American shore.
The thermometer in the poop cabin, by night and day, ranged between 80 and 83 degs.
, which feels very pleasant; but with one degree or two higher, the heat becomes oppressive.
We passed through the Low or Dangerous Archipelago, and saw several of those most curious rings of coral land, just rising above the water's edge, which have been called Lagoon Islands.
A long and brilliantly white beach is capped by a margin of green vegetation; and the strip, looking either way, rapidly narrows away in the distance, and sinks beneath the horizon From the mast-head a wide expanse of smooth water can be seen within the
These low hollow coral islands bear no proportion to the vast ocean out of which they abruptly rise; and it seems wonderful, that such weak invaders are not overwhelmed, by the all-powerful and never-tiring waves of that great sea, miscalled the Pacific.
November 15th.
--At daylight, Tahiti, an island which must for ever remain classical to the voyager in the South Sea, was in view.
At a distance the appearance was not attractive.
The luxuriant vegetation of the lower part could not yet be seen, and as the clouds rolled past, the wildest and most precipitous peaks showed themselves towards the centre of the island.
As soon as we anchored in Matavai Bay, we were surrounded by canoes.
This was our Sunday, but the Monday of Tahiti: if the case had been reversed, we should not have received a single visit; for the injunction not to launch a canoe on the sabbath is rigidly obeyed.
After dinner we landed to enjoy all the delights produced by the first impressions of a new country, and that country the charming Tahiti.
A crowd of men, women, and children, was collected on the memorable Point Venus, ready to receive us with laughing, merry faces.
They marshalled us towards the house of Mr. Wilson, the missionary of the district, who met us on the road, and gave us a very friendly reception.
After sitting a very short time in his house, we separated to walk about, but returned there in the evening.
The land capable of cultivation, is scarcely in any part more than a fringe of low alluvial soil, accumulated round the base of the mountains, and protected from the waves of the sea by a coral reef, which encircles the entire line of coast.
Within the reef there is an expanse of smooth water, like that of a lake, where the canoes of the natives can ply with safety and where ships anchor.
The low land which comes down to the beach of coral-sand, is covered by the most beautiful productions of the intertropical regions.
In the midst of bananas, orange, cocoa-nut, and bread-fruit trees, spots are cleared where yams, sweet potatoes, and sugar-cane, and pine-apples are cultivated.
Even the brushwood is an imported fruit-tree, namely, the guava, which from its abundance has become as noxious as a weed.
In Brazil I have often admired the varied beauty of the bananas, palms, and orange-trees contrasted together; and here we also have the bread-fruit, conspicuous from its large, glossy, and deeply digitated leaf.
It is admirable to behold groves of a tree, sending forth its branches with the vigour of an English oak, loaded with large and most nutritious fruit.
However seldom the usefulness of an object can account for the pleasure of beholding it, in the case of these beautiful woods, the knowledge of their high productiveness no doubt enters largely into the feeling of admiration.
The little winding paths, cool from the surrounding shade, led to the scattered houses; the owners of which everywhere gave us a cheerful and most hospitable reception.
I was pleased with nothing so much as with the inhabitants.
There is a mildness in the expression of their countenances which at once banishes the idea of a savage; and intelligence which shows that they are advancing in civilization.
The common people, when working, keep the upper part of their bodies quite naked; and it is then that the Tahitians are seen to advantage.
They are very tall, broad-shouldered, athletic, and well-proportioned.
It has been remarked, that it requires little habit to make a dark skin more pleasing and natural to the eye of an European than his own colour.
A white man bathing by the side of a Tahitian, was like a plant bleached by the gardener's art compared with a fine dark green one growing vigorously in the open fields.
Most of the men are tattooed, and the ornaments follow the curvature of the body so gracefully, that they have a very elegant effect.
One common pattern, varying in its details, is somewhat like the crown of a palm-tree.
It springs from the central line of the back, and gracefully curls round both sides.
The simile may be a fanciful one, but I thought the body of a man thus ornamented was like the trunk of a noble tree embraced by a delicate creeper.
Many of the elder people had their feet covered with small figures, so placed as to resemble a sock.
This fashion, however, is partly gone by, and has been succeeded by others.
Here, although fashion is far from immutable, every one must abide by that prevailing in his youth.
An old man has thus his age for ever stamped on his body, and he cannot assume the airs of a young dandy.
The women are tattooed in the same manner as the men, and very commonly on their fingers.
One unbecoming fashion is now almost universal: namely, shaving the hair from the upper part of the head, in a circular form, so as to leave only an outer ring.
The missionaries have tried to persuade the people to change this habit; but it is the fashion, and that is a sufficient answer at Tahiti, as well as at Paris.
I was much disappointed in the personal appearance of the women: they are far inferior in every respect to the men.
The custom of wearing a white or scarlet flower in the back of the head, or through a small hole in each ear, is pretty.
A crown of woven cocoa-nut leaves is also worn as a shade for the eyes.
The women appear to be in greater want of some becoming costume even than the men.
Nearly all the natives understand a little English--that is, they know the names of common things; and by the aid of this, together with signs, a lame sort of conversation could be carried on.
In returning in the evening to the boat, we stopped to witness a very pretty scene.
Numbers of children were playing on the beach, and had lighted bonfires which illumined the placid sea and surrounding trees; others, in circles, were singing Tahitian verses.
We seated ourselves on the sand, and joined their party.
The songs were impromptu, and I believe related to our arrival: one little girl sang a line, which the rest took up in parts, forming a very pretty chorus.
The whole scene made us unequivocally aware that we were seated on the shores of an island in the far-famed South Sea.
17th.
--This day is reckoned in the log-book as Tuesday the 17th, instead of Monday the 16th, owing to our, so far, successful chase of the sun.
Before breakfast the ship was hemmed in by a flotilla of canoes; and when the natives were allowed to come on board, I suppose there could not have been less than two hundred.
It was the opinion of every one that it would have been difficult to have picked out an equal number from any other nation, who would have given so little trouble.
Everybody brought something for sale: shells were the main articles of trade.
The Tahitians now fully understand the value of money, and prefer it to old clothes or other articles.
The various coins, however, of English and Spanish denomination puzzle them, and they never seemed to think the small silver quite secure until changed into dollars.
Some of the chiefs have accumulated considerable sums of money.
One chief, not long since, offered 800 dollars (about 160 pounds sterling) for a small vessel; and frequently they purchase whale-boats and horses at the rate of from 50 to 100 dollars.
After breakfast I went on shore, and ascended the nearest slope to a height of between two and three thousand feet.
The outer mountains are smooth and conical, but steep; and the old volcanic rocks, of which they are formed, have been cut through by many profound ravines, diverging from the central broken parts of the island to the coast.
Having crossed the narrow low girt of inhabited and fertile land, I followed a smooth steep ridge between two of the deep ravines.
The vegetation was singular, consisting almost exclusively of small dwarf ferns, mingled higher up, with coarse grass; it was not very dissimilar from that on some of the Welsh hills, and this so close above the orchard of tropical plants on the coast was
At the highest point, which I reached, trees again appeared.
Of the three zones of comparative luxuriance, the lower one owes its moisture, and therefore fertility, to its flatness; for, being scarcely raised above the level of the sea, the water from the higher land drains away slowly.
The intermediate zone does not, like the upper one, reach into a damp and cloudy atmosphere, and therefore remains sterile.
The woods in the upper zone are very pretty, tree-ferns replacing the cocoa-nuts on the coast.
It must not, however, be supposed that these woods at all equal in splendour the forests of Brazil.
The vast numbers of productions, which characterize a continent, cannot be expected to occur in an island.
From the highest point which I attained, there was a good view of the distant island of Eimeo, dependent on the same sovereign with Tahiti.
On the lofty and broken pinnacles, white massive clouds were piled up, which formed an island in the blue sky, as Eimeo itself did in the blue ocean.
The island, with the exception of one small gateway, is completely encircled by a reef.
At this distance, a narrow but well-defined brilliantly white line was alone visible, where the waves first encountered the wall of coral.
The mountains rose abruptly out of the glassy expanse of the lagoon, included within this narrow white line, outside which the heaving waters of the ocean were dark-coloured.
The view was striking: it may aptly be compared to a framed engraving, where the frame represents the breakers, the marginal paper the smooth lagoon, and the drawing the island itself.
When in the evening I descended from the mountain, a man, whom I had pleased with a trifling gift, met me, bringing with him hot roasted bananas, a pine-apple, and cocoa-nuts.
After walking under a burning sun, I do not know anything more delicious than the milk of a young cocoa-nut.
Pine-apples are here so abundant that the people eat them in the same wasteful manner as we might turnips.
They are of an excellent flavor--perhaps even better than those cultivated in England; and this I believe is the highest compliment which can be paid to any fruit.
Before going on board, Mr. Wilson interpreted for me to the Tahitian who had paid me so adroit an attention, that I wanted him and another man to accompany me on a short excursion into the mountains.
18th.
--In the morning I came on shore early, bringing with me some provisions in a bag, and two blankets for myself and servant.
These were lashed to each end of a long pole, which was alternately carried by my Tahitian companions on their shoulders.
These men are accustomed thus to carry, for a whole day, as much as fifty pounds at each end of their poles.
I told my guides to provide themselves with food and clothing; but they said that there was plenty of food in the mountains, and for clothing, that their skins were sufficient.
Our line of march was the valley of Tiaauru, down which a river flows into the sea by Point Venus.
This is one of the principal streams in the island, and its source lies at the base of the loftiest central pinnacles, which rise to a height of about 7000 feet.
The whole island is so mountainous that the only way to penetrate into the interior is to follow up the valleys.
Our road, at first, lay through woods which bordered each side of the river; and the glimpses of the lofty central peaks, seen as through an avenue, with here and there a waving cocoa-nut tree on one side, were extremely picturesque.
The valley soon began to narrow, and the sides to grow lofty and more precipitous.
After having walked between three and four hours, we found the width of the ravine scarcely exceeded that of the bed of the stream.
On each hand the walls were nearly vertical, yet from the soft nature of the volcanic strata, trees and a rank vegetation sprung from every projecting ledge.
These precipices must have been some thousand feet high; and the whole formed a mountain gorge far more magnificent than anything which I had ever before beheld.
Until the midday sun stood vertically over the ravine, the air felt cool and damp, but now it became very sultry.
Shaded by a ledge of rock, beneath a facade of columnar lava, we ate our dinner.
My guides had already procured a dish of small fish and fresh-water prawns.
They carried with them a small net stretched on a hoop; and where the water was deep and in eddies, they dived, and like otters, with their eyes open followed the fish into holes and corners, and thus caught them.
The Tahitians have the dexterity of amphibious animals in the water.
An anecdote mentioned by Ellis shows how much they feel at home in this element.
When a horse was landing for Pomarre in 1817, the slings broke, and it fell into the water; immediately the natives jumped overboard, and by their cries and vain efforts at assistance almost drowned it.
As soon, however, as it reached the shore, the whole population took to flight, and tried to hide themselves from the man-carrying pig, as they christened the horse.
A little higher up, the river divided itself into three little streams.
The two northern ones were impracticable, owing to a succession of waterfalls which descended from the jagged summit of the highest mountain; the other to all appearance was equally inaccessible, but we managed to ascend it by a most extraordinary road.
The sides of the valley were here nearly precipitous, but, as frequently happens with stratified rocks, small ledges projected, which were thickly covered by wild bananas, lilaceous plants, and other luxuriant productions of the tropics.
The Tahitians, by climbing amongst these ledges, searching for fruit, had discovered a track by which the whole precipice could be scaled.
The first ascent from the valley was very dangerous; for it was necessary to pass a steeply inclined face of naked rock, by the aid of ropes which we brought with us.
How any person discovered that this formidable spot was the only point where the side of the mountain was practicable, I cannot imagine.
We then cautiously walked along one of the ledges till we came to one of the three streams.
This ledge formed a flat spot, above which a beautiful cascade, some hundred feet in height, poured down its waters, and beneath, another high cascade fell into the main stream in the valley below.
From this cool and shady recess we made a circuit to avoid the overhanging waterfall.
As before, we followed little projecting ledges, the danger being partly concealed by the thickness of the vegetation.
In passing from one of the ledges to another, there was a vertical wall of rock.
One of the Tahitians, a fine active man, placed the trunk of a tree against this, climbed up it, and then by the aid of crevices reached the summit.
He fixed the ropes to a projecting point, and lowered them for our dog and luggage, and then we clambered up ourselves.
Beneath the ledge on which the dead tree was placed, the precipice must have been five or six hundred feet deep; and if the abyss had not been partly concealed by the overhanging ferns and lilies my head would have turned giddy, and nothing should have
We continued to ascend, sometimes along ledges, and sometimes along knife-edged ridges, having on each hand profound ravines.
In the Cordillera I have seen mountains on a far grander scale, but for abruptness, nothing at all comparable with this.
In the evening we reached a flat little spot on the banks of the same stream, which we had continued to follow, and which descends in a chain of waterfalls: here we bivouacked for the night.
On each side of the ravine there were great beds of the mountain-banana, covered with ripe fruit.
Many of these plants were from twenty to twenty-five feet high, and from three to four in circumference.
By the aid of strips of bark for rope, the stems of bamboos for rafters, and the large leaf of the banana for a thatch, the Tahitians in a few minutes built us an excellent house; and with withered leaves made a soft bed.
They then proceeded to make a fire, and cook our evening meal.
A light was procured, by rubbing a blunt pointed stick in a groove made in another, as if with intention of deepening it, until by the friction the dust became ignited.
A peculiarly white and very light wood (the Hibiscus tiliareus) is alone used for this purpose: it is the same which serves for poles to carry any burden, and for the floating out-riggers to their canoes.
The fire was produced in a few seconds: but to a person who does not understand the art, it requires, as I found, the greatest exertion; but at last, to my great pride, I succeeded in igniting the dust.
The Gaucho in the Pampas uses a different method: taking an elastic stick about eighteen inches long, he presses one end on his breast, and the other pointed end into a hole in a piece of wood, and then rapidly turns the curved part, like a carpenter's
The Tahitians having made a small fire of sticks, placed a score of stones, of about the size of cricket-balls, on the burning wood.
In about ten minutes the sticks were consumed, and the stones hot.
They had previously folded up in small parcels of leaves, pieces of beef, fish, ripe and unripe bananas, and the tops of the wild arum.
These green parcels were laid in a layer between two layers of the hot stones, and the whole then covered up with earth, so that no smoke or steam could escape.
In about a quarter of an hour, the whole was most deliciously cooked.
The choice green parcels were now laid on a cloth of banana leaves, and with a cocoa-nut shell we drank the cool water of the running stream; and thus we enjoyed our rustic meal.
I could not look on the surrounding plants without admiration.
On every side were forests of banana; the fruit of which, though serving for food in various ways, lay in heaps decaying on the ground.
In front of us there was an extensive brake of wild sugar-cane; and the stream was shaded by the dark green knotted stem of the Ava,--so famous in former days for its powerful intoxicating effects.
I chewed a piece, and found that it had an acrid and unpleasant taste, which would have induced any one at once to have pronounced it poisonous.
Thanks to the missionaries, this plant now thrives only in these deep ravines, innocuous to every one.
Close by I saw the wild arum, the roots of which, when well baked, are good to eat, and the young leaves better than spinach.
There was the wild yam, and a liliaceous plant called Ti, which grows in abundance, and has a soft brown root, in shape and size like a huge log of wood: this served us for dessert, for it is as sweet as treacle, and with a pleasant taste.
There were, moreover, several other wild fruits, and useful vegetables.
The little stream, besides its cool water, produced eels, and cray-fish.
I did indeed admire this scene, when I compared it with an uncultivated one in the temperate zones.
I felt the force of the remark, that man, at least savage man, with his reasoning powers only partly developed, is the child of the tropics.
As the evening drew to a close, I strolled beneath the gloomy shade of the bananas up the course of the stream.
My walk was soon brought to a close, by coming to a waterfall between two and three hundred feet high; and again above this there was another.
I mention all these waterfalls in this one brook, to give a general idea of the inclination of the land.
In the little recess where the water fell, it did not appear that a breath of wind had ever blown.
The thin edges of the great leaves of the banana, damp with spray, were unbroken, instead of being, as is so generally the case, split into a thousand shreds.
From our position, almost suspended on the mountain side, there were glimpses into the depths of the neighbouring valleys; and the lofty points of the central mountains, towering up within sixty degrees of the zenith, hid half the evening sky.
Thus seated, it was a sublime spectacle to watch the shades of night gradually obscuring the last and highest pinnacles.
Before we laid ourselves down to sleep, the elder Tahitian fell on his knees, and with closed eyes repeated a long prayer in his native tongue.
He prayed as a Christian should do, with fitting reverence, and without the fear of ridicule or any ostentation of piety.
At our meals neither of the men would taste food, without saying beforehand a short grace.
Those travellers who think that a Tahitian prays only when the eyes of the missionary are fixed on him, should have slept with us that night on the mountain-side.
Before morning it rained very heavily; but the good thatch of banana-leaves kept us dry.
November 19th.
--At daylight my friends, after their morning prayer, prepared an excellent breakfast in the same manner as in the evening.
They themselves certainly partook of it largely; indeed I never saw any men eat near so much.
I suppose such enormously capacious stomachs must be the effect of a large part of their diet consisting of fruit and vegetables, which contain, in a given bulk, a comparatively small portion of nutriment.
Unwittingly, I was the means of my companions breaking, as I afterwards learned, one of their own laws, and resolutions: I took with me a flask of spirits, which they could not refuse to partake of; but as often as they drank a little, they put their
About two years ago, although the use of the ava was prevented, drunkenness from the introduction of spirits became very prevalent.
The missionaries prevailed on a few good men, who saw that their country was rapidly going to ruin, to join with them in a Temperance Society.
From good sense or shame, all the chiefs and the queen were at last persuaded to join.
Immediately a law was passed, that no spirits should be allowed to be introduced into the island, and that he who sold and he who bought the forbidden article should be punished by a fine.
With remarkable justice, a certain period was allowed for stock in hand to be sold, before the law came into effect.
But when it did, a general search was made, in which even the houses of the missionaries were not exempted, and all the ava (as the natives call all ardent spirits) was poured on the ground.
When one reflects on the effect of intemperance on the aborigines of the two Americas, I think it will be acknowledged that every well-wisher of Tahiti owes no common debt of gratitude to the missionaries.
As long as the little island of St. Helena remained under the government of the East India Company, spirits, owing to the great injury they had produced, were not allowed to be imported; but wine was supplied from the Cape of Good Hope.
It is rather a striking and not very gratifying fact, that in the same year that spirits were allowed to be sold in Helena, their use was banished from Tahiti by the free will of the people.
After breakfast we proceeded on our Journey.
As my object was merely to see a little of the interior scenery, we returned by another track, which descended into the main valley lower down.
For some distance we wound, by a most intricate path, along the side of the mountain which formed the valley.
In the less precipitous parts we passed through extensive groves of the wild banana.
The Tahitians, with their naked, tattooed bodies, their heads ornamented with flowers, and seen in the dark shade of these groves, would have formed a fine picture of man inhabiting some primeval land.
In our descent we followed the line of ridges; these were exceedingly narrow, and for considerable lengths steep as a ladder; but all clothed with vegetation.
The extreme care necessary in poising each step rendered the walk fatiguing.
I did not cease to wonder at these ravines and precipices: when viewing the country from one of the knife-edged ridges, the point of support was so small, that the effect was nearly the same as it must be from a balloon.
In this descent we had occasion to use the ropes only once, at the point where we entered the main valley.
We slept under the same ledge of rock where we had dined the day before: the night was fine, but from the depth and narrowness of the gorge, profoundly dark.
Before actually seeing this country, I found it difficult to understand two facts mentioned by Ellis; namely, that after the murderous battles of former times, the survivors on the conquered side retired into the mountains, where a handful of men could
Certainly half a dozen men, at the spot where the Tahitian reared the old tree, could easily have repulsed thousands.
Secondly, that after the introduction of Christianity, there were wild men who lived in the mountains, and whose retreats were unknown to the more civilized inhabitants.
November 20th.
--In the morning we started early, and reached Matavai at noon.
On the road we met a large party of noble athletic men, going for wild bananas.
I found that the ship, on account of the difficulty in watering, had moved to the harbour of Papawa, to which place I immediately walked.
This is a very pretty spot.
The cove is surrounded by reefs, and the water as smooth as in a lake.
The cultivated ground, with its beautiful productions, interspersed with cottages, comes close down to the water's edge.
From the varying accounts which I had read before reaching these islands, I was very anxious to form, from my own observation, a judgment of their moral state,--although such judgment would necessarily be very imperfect.
First impressions at all times very much depend on one's previously acquired ideas.
My notions were drawn from Ellis's "Polynesian Researches"--an admirable and most interesting work, but naturally looking at everything under a favourable point of view, from Beechey's Voyage; and from that of Kotzebue, which is strongly adverse to the
He who compares these three accounts will, I think, form a tolerably accurate conception of the present state of Tahiti.
One of my impressions which I took from the two last authorities, was decidedly incorrect; viz.
, that the Tahitians had become a gloomy race, and lived in fear of the missionaries.
Of the latter feeling I saw no trace, unless, indeed, fear and respect be confounded under one name.
Instead of discontent being a common feeling, it would be difficult in Europe to pick out of a crowd half so many merry and happy faces.
The prohibition of the flute and dancing is inveighed against as wrong and foolish;--the more than presbyterian manner of keeping the sabbath is looked at in a similar light.
On these points I will not pretend to offer any opinion to men who have resided as many years as I was days on the island.
On the whole, it appears to me that the morality and religion of the inhabitants are highly creditable.
There are many who attack, even more acrimoniously than Kotzebue, both the missionaries, their system, and the effects produced by it.
Such reasoners never compare the present state with that of the island only twenty years ago; nor even with that of Europe at this day; but they compare it with the high standard of Gospel perfection.
They expect the missionaries to effect that which the Apostles themselves failed to do.
Inasmuch as the condition of the people falls short of this high standard, blame is attached to the missionary, instead of credit for that which he has effected.
They forget, or will not remember, that human sacrifices, and the power of an idolatrous priesthood--a system of profligacy unparalleled in any other part of the world--infanticide a consequence of that system--bloody wars, where the conquerors spared
In a voyager to forget these things is base ingratitude; for should he chance to be at the point of shipwreck on some unknown coast, he will most devoutly pray that the lesson of the missionary may have extended thus far.
In point of morality, the virtue of the women, it has been often said, is most open to exception.
But before they are blamed too severely, it will be well distinctly to call to mind the scenes described by Captain Cook and Mr. Banks, in which the grandmothers and mothers of the present race played a part.
Those who are most severe, should consider how much of the morality of the women in Europe is owing to the system early impressed by mothers on their daughters, and how much in each individual case to the precepts of religion.
But it is useless to argue against such reasoners;--I believe that, disappointed in not finding the field of licentiousness quite so open as formerly, they will not give credit to a morality which they do not wish to practise, or to a religion which they
Sunday, 22nd.
--The harbour of Papiete, where the queen resides, may be considered as the capital of the island: it is also the seat of government, and the chief resort of shipping.
Captain Fitz Roy took a party there this day to hear divine service, first in the Tahitian language, and afterwards in our own.
Mr. Pritchard, the leading missionary in the island, performed the service.
The chapel consisted of a large airy framework of wood; and it was filled to excess by tidy, clean people, of all ages and both sexes.
I was rather disappointed in the apparent degree of attention; but I believe my expectations were raised too high.
At all events the appearance was quite equal to that in a country church in England.
The singing of the hymns was decidedly very pleasing, but the language from the pulpit, although fluently delivered, did not sound well: a constant repetition of words, like "tata ta, mata mai," rendered it monotonous.
After English service, a party returned on foot to Matavai.
It was a pleasant walk, sometimes along the sea-beach and sometimes under the shade of the many beautiful trees.
About two years ago, a small vessel under English colours was plundered by some of the inhabitants of the Low Islands, which were then under the dominion of the Queen of Tahiti.
It was believed that the perpetrators were instigated to this act by some indiscreet laws issued by her majesty.
The British government demanded compensation; which was acceded to, and the sum of nearly three thousand dollars was agreed to be paid on the first of last September.
The Commodore at Lima ordered Captain Fitz Roy to inquire concerning this debt, and to demand satisfaction if it were not paid.
Captain Fitz Roy accordingly requested an interview with the Queen Pomarre, since famous from the ill-treatment she had received from the French; and a parliament was held to consider the question, at which all the principal chiefs of the island and the
I will not attempt to describe what took place, after the interesting account given by Captain Fitz Roy.
The money, it appeared, had not been paid; perhaps the alleged reasons were rather equivocal; but otherwise I cannot sufficiently express our general surprise at the extreme good sense, the reasoning powers, moderation, candour, and prompt resolution,
I believe we all left the meeting with a very different opinion of the Tahitians, from what we entertained when we entered.
The chiefs and people resolved to subscribe and complete the sum which was wanting; Captain Fitz Roy urged that it was hard that their private property should be sacrificed for the crimes of distant islanders.
They replied, that they were grateful for his consideration, but that Pomarre was their Queen, and that they were determined to help her in this her difficulty.
This resolution and its prompt execution, for a book was opened early the next morning, made a perfect conclusion to this very remarkable scene of loyalty and good feeling.
After the main discussion was ended, several of the chiefs took the opportunity of asking Captain Fitz Roy many intelligent questions on international customs and laws, relating to the treatment of ships and foreigners.
On some points, as soon as the decision was made, the law was issued verbally on the spot.
This Tahitian parliament lasted for several hours; and when it was over Captain Fitz Roy invited Queen Pomarre to pay the Beagle a visit.
November 25th.
--In the evening four boats were sent for her majesty; the ship was dressed with flags, and the yards manned on her coming on board.
She was accompanied by most of the chiefs.
The behaviour of all was very proper: they begged for nothing, and seemed much pleased with Captain Fitz Roy's presents.
The queen is a large awkward woman, without any beauty, grace or dignity.
She has only one royal attribute: a perfect immovability of expression under all circumstances, and that rather a sullen one.
The rockets were most admired, and a deep "Oh"!
could be heard from the shore, all round the dark bay, after each explosion.
The sailors' songs were also much admired; and the queen said she thought that one of the most boisterous ones certainly could not be a hymn!
The royal party did not return on shore till past midnight.
26th.
--In the evening, with a gentle land-breeze, a course was steered for New Zealand; and as the sun set, we had a farewell view of the mountains of Tahiti--the island to which every voyager has offered up his tribute of admiration.
December 19th.
--In the evening we saw in the distance New Zealand.
We may now consider that we have nearly crossed the Pacific.
It is necessary to sail over this great ocean to comprehend its immensity.
Moving quickly onwards for weeks together, we meet with nothing but the same blue, profoundly deep, ocean.
Even within the archipelagoes, the islands are mere specks, and far distant one from the other.
Accustomed to look at maps drawn on a small scale, where dots, shading, and names are crowded together, we do not rightly judge how infinitely small the proportion of dry land is to water of this vast expanse.
The meridian of the Antipodes has likewise been passed; and now every league, it made us happy to think, was one league nearer to England.
These Antipodes call to one's mind old recollections of childish doubt and wonder.
Only the other day I looked forward to this airy barrier as a definite point in our voyage homewards; but now I find it, and all such resting-places for the imagination, are like shadows, which a man moving onwards cannot catch.
A gale of wind lasting for some days, has lately given us full leisure to measure the future stages in our homeward voyage, and to wish most earnestly for its termination.
December 21st.
--Early in the morning we entered the Bay of Islands, and being becalmed for some hours near the mouth, we did not reach the anchorage till the middle of the day.
The country is hilly, with a smooth outline, and is deeply intersected by numerous arms of the sea extending from the bay.
The surface appears from a distance as if clothed with coarse pasture, but this in truth is nothing but fern.
On the more distant hills, as well as in parts of the valleys, there is a good deal of woodland.
The general tint of the landscape is not a bright green; and it resembles the country a short distance to the south of Concepcion in Chile.
In several parts of the bay, little villages of square tidy looking houses are scattered close down to the water's edge.
Three whaling-ships were lying at anchor, and a canoe every now and then crossed from shore to shore; with these exceptions, an air of extreme quietness reigned over the whole district.
Only a single canoe came alongside.
This, and the aspect of the whole scene, afforded a remarkable, and not very pleasing contrast, with our joyful and boisterous welcome at Tahiti.
In the afternoon we went on shore to one of the larger groups of houses, which yet hardly deserves the title of a village.
Its name is Pahia: it is the residence of the missionaries; and there are no native residents except servants and labourers.
In the vicinity of the Bay of Islands, the number of Englishmen, including their families, amounts to between two and three hundred.
All the cottages, many of which are whitewashed and look very neat, are the property of the English.
The hovels of the natives are so diminutive and paltry, that they can scarcely be perceived from a distance.
At Pahia, it was quite pleasing to behold the English flowers in the gardens before the houses; there were roses of several kinds, honeysuckle, jasmine, stocks, and whole hedges of sweetbrier.
December 22nd.
--In the morning I went out walking; but I soon found that the country was very impracticable.
All the hills are thickly covered with tall fern, together with a low bush which grows like a cypress; and very little ground has been cleared or cultivated.
I then tried the sea-beach; but proceeding towards either hand, my walk was soon stopped by salt-water creeks and deep brooks.
The communication between the inhabitants of the different parts of the bay, is (as in Chiloe) almost entirely kept up by boats.
I was surprised to find that almost every hill which I ascended, had been at some former time more or less fortified.
The summits were cut into steps or successive terraces, and frequently they had been protected by deep trenches.
I afterwards observed that the principal hills inland in like manner showed an artificial outline.
These are the Pas, so frequently mentioned by Captain Cook under the name of "hippah;" the difference of sound being owing to the prefixed article.
That the Pas had formerly been much used, was evident from the piles of shells, and the pits in which, as I was informed, sweet potatoes used to be kept as a reserve.
As there was no water on these hills, the defenders could never have anticipated a long siege, but only a hurried attack for plunder, against which the successive terraces would have afforded good protection.
The general introduction of fire-arms has changed the whole system of warfare; and an exposed situation on the top of a hill is now worse than useless.
The Pas in consequence are, at the present day, always built on a level piece of ground.
They consist of a double stockade of thick and tall posts, placed in a zigzag line, so that every part can be flanked.
Within the stockade a mound of earth is thrown up, behind which the defenders can rest in safety, or use their fire-arms over it.
On the level of the ground little archways sometimes pass through this breastwork, by which means the defenders can crawl out to the stockade and reconnoitre their enemies.
The Rev.
W. Williams, who gave me this account, added, that in one Pas he had noticed spurs or buttresses projecting on the inner and protected side of the mound of earth.
On asking the chief the use of them, he replied, that if two or three of his men were shot, their neighbours would not see the bodies, and so be discouraged.
These Pas are considered by the New Zealanders as very perfect means of defence: for the attacking force is never so well disciplined as to rush in a body to the stockade, cut it down, and effect their entry.
When a tribe goes to war, the chief cannot order one party to go here and another there; but every man fights in the manner which best pleases himself; and to each separate individual to approach a stockade defended by fire-arms must appear certain death.
I should think a more warlike race of inhabitants could not be found in any part of the world than the New Zealanders.
Their conduct on first seeing a ship, as described by Captain Cook, strongly illustrates this: the act of throwing volleys of stones at so great and novel an object, and their defiance of "Come on shore and we will kill and eat you all," shows uncommon
This warlike spirit is evident in many of their customs, and even in their smallest actions.
If a New Zealander is struck, although but in joke, the blow must be returned and of this I saw an instance with one of our officers.
At the present day, from the progress of civilization, there is much less warfare, except among some of the southern tribes.
I heard a characteristic anecdote of what took place some time ago in the south.
A missionary found a chief and his tribe in preparation for war;--their muskets clean and bright, and their ammunition ready.
He reasoned long on the inutility of the war, and the little provocation which had been given for it.
The chief was much shaken in his resolution, and seemed in doubt: but at length it occurred to him that a barrel of his gunpowder was in a bad state, and that it would not keep much longer.
This was brought forward as an unanswerable argument for the necessity of immediately declaring war: the idea of allowing so much good gunpowder to spoil was not to be thought of; and this settled the point.
I was told by the missionaries that in the life of Shongi, the chief who visited England, the love of war was the one and lasting spring of every action.
The tribe in which he was a principal chief had at one time been oppressed by another tribe from the Thames River.
A solemn oath was taken by the men that when their boys should grow up, and they should be powerful enough, they would never forget or forgive these injuries.
To fulfil this oath appears to have been Shongi's chief motive for going to England; and when there it was his sole object.
Presents were valued only as they could be converted into arms; of the arts, those alone interested him which were connected with the manufacture of arms.
When at Sydney, Shongi, by a strange coincidence, met the hostile chief of the Thames River at the house of Mr. Marsden: their conduct was civil to each other; but Shongi told him that when again in New Zealand he would never cease to carry war into his
The challenge was accepted; and Shongi on his return fulfilled the threat to the utmost letter.
The tribe on the Thames River was utterly overthrown, and the chief to whom the challenge had been given was himself killed.
Shongi, although harbouring such deep feelings of hatred and revenge, is described as having been a good-natured person.
In the evening I went with Captain Fitz Roy and Mr. Baker, one of the missionaries, to pay a visit to Kororadika: we wandered about the village, and saw and conversed with many of the people, both men, women, and children.
Looking at the New Zealander, one naturally compares him with the Tahitian; both belonging to the same family of mankind.
The comparison, however, tells heavily against the New Zealander.
He may, perhaps be superior in energy, but in every other respect his character is of a much lower order.
One glance at their respective expressions, brings conviction to the mind that one is a savage, the other a civilized man.
It would be vain to seek in the whole of New Zealand a person with the face and mien of the old Tahitian chief Utamme.
No doubt the extraordinary manner in which tattooing is here practised, gives a disagreeable expression to their countenances.
The complicated but symmetrical figures covering the whole face, puzzle and mislead an unaccustomed eye: it is moreover probable, that the deep incisions, by destroying the play of the superficial muscles, give an air of rigid inflexibility.
But, besides this, there is a twinkling in the eye, which cannot indicate anything but cunning and ferocity.
Their figures are tall and bulky; but not comparable in elegance with those of the working-classes in Tahiti.
But their persons and houses are filthily dirty and offensive: the idea of washing either their bodies or their clothes never seems to enter their heads.
I saw a chief, who was wearing a shirt black and matted with filth, and when asked how it came to be so dirty, he replied, with surprise, "Do not you see it is an old one"?
Some of the men have shirts; but the common dress is one or two large blankets, generally black with dirt, which are thrown over their shoulders in a very inconvenient and awkward fashion.
A few of the principal chiefs have decent suits of English clothes; but these are only worn on great occasions.
December 23rd.
--At a place called Waimate, about fifteen miles from the Bay of Islands, and midway between the eastern and western coasts, the missionaries have purchased some land for agricultural purposes.
I had been introduced to the Rev.
W. Williams, who, upon my expressing a wish, invited me to pay him a visit there.
Mr. Bushby, the British resident, offered to take me in his boat by a creek, where I should see a pretty waterfall, and by which means my walk would be shortened.
He likewise procured for me a guide.
Upon asking a neighbouring chief to recommend a man, the chief himself offered to go; but his ignorance of the value of money was so complete, that at first he asked how many pounds I would give him, but afterwards was well contented with two dollars.
When I showed the chief a very small bundle, which I wanted carried, it became absolutely necessary for him to take a slave.
These feelings of pride are beginning to wear away; but formerly a leading man would sooner have died, than undergone the indignity of carrying the smallest burden.
My companion was a light active man, dressed in a dirty blanket, and with his face completely tattooed.
He had formerly been a great warrior.
He appeared to be on very cordial terms with Mr. Bushby; but at various times they had quarrelled violently.
Mr. Bushby remarked that a little quiet irony would frequently silence any one of these natives in their most blustering moments.
This chief has come and harangued Mr. Bushby in a hectoring manner, saying, "great chief, a great man, a friend of mine, has come to pay me a visit--you must give him something good to eat, some fine presents, etc".
Mr. Bushby has allowed him to finish his discourse, and then has quietly replied by some answer such as, "What else shall your slave do for you"?
The man would then instantly, with a very comical expression, cease his braggadocio.
Some time ago, Mr. Bushby suffered a far more serious attack.
A chief and a party of men tried to break into his house in the middle of the night, and not finding this so easy, commenced a brisk firing with their muskets.
Mr. Bushby was slightly wounded, but the party was at length driven away.
Shortly afterwards it was discovered who was the aggressor; and a general meeting of the chiefs was convened to consider the case.
It was considered by the New Zealanders as very atrocious, inasmuch as it was a night attack, and that Mrs. Bushby was lying ill in the house: this latter circumstance, much to their honour, being considered in all cases as a protection.
The chiefs agreed to confiscate the land of the aggressor to the King of England.
The whole proceeding, however, in thus trying and punishing a chief was entirely without precedent.
The aggressor, moreover, lost caste in the estimation of his equals and this was considered by the British as of more consequence than the confiscation of his land.
As the boat was shoving off, a second chief stepped into her, who only wanted the amusement of the passage up and down the creek.
I never saw a more horrid and ferocious expression than this man had.
It immediately struck me I had somewhere seen his likeness: it will be found in Retzch's outlines to Schiller's ballad of Fridolin, where two men are pushing Robert into the burning iron furnace.
It is the man who has his arm on Robert's breast.
Physiognomy here spoke the truth; this chief had been a notorious murderer, and was an arrant coward to boot.
At the point where the boat landed, Mr. Bushby accompanied me a few hundred yards on the road: I could not help admiring the cool impudence of the hoary old villain, whom we left lying in the boat, when he shouted to Mr. Bushby, "Do not you stay long, I
We now commenced our walk.
The road lay along a well beaten path, bordered on each side by the tall fern, which covers the whole country.
After travelling some miles, we came to a little country village, where a few hovels were collected together, and some patches of ground cultivated with potatoes.
The introduction of the potato has been the most essential benefit to the island; it is now much more used than any native vegetable.
New Zealand is favoured by one great natural advantage; namely, that the inhabitants can never perish from famine.
The whole country abounds with fern: and the roots of this plant, if not very palatable, yet contain much nutriment.
A native can always subsist on these, and on the shell-fish, which are abundant on all parts of the sea-coast.
The villages are chiefly conspicuous by the platforms which are raised on four posts ten or twelve feet above the ground, and on which the produce of the fields is kept secure from all accidents.
On coming near one of the huts I was much amused by seeing in due form the ceremony of rubbing, or, as it ought to be called, pressing noses.
The women, on our first approach, began uttering something in a most dolorous voice; they then squatted themselves down and held up their faces; my companion standing over them, one after another, placed the bridge of his nose at right angles to theirs,
This lasted rather longer than a cordial shake of the hand with us, and as we vary the force of the grasp of the hand in shaking, so do they in pressing.
During the process they uttered comfortable little grunts, very much in the same manner as two pigs do, when rubbing against each other.
I noticed that the slave would press noses with any one he met, indifferently either before or after his master the chief.
Although among the savages, the chief has absolute power of life and death over his slave, yet there is an entire absence of ceremony between them.
Mr. Burchell has remarked the same thing in Southern Africa, with the rude Bachapins.
Where civilization has arrived at a certain point, complex formalities soon arise between the different grades of society: thus at Tahiti all were formerly obliged to uncover themselves as low as the waist in presence of the king.
The ceremony of pressing noses having been duly completed with all present, we seated ourselves in a circle in the front of one of the hovels, and rested there half-an-hour.
All the hovels have nearly the same form and dimensions, and all agree in being filthily dirty.
They resemble a cow-shed with one end open, but having a partition a little way within, with a square hole in it, making a small gloomy chamber.
In this the inhabitants keep all their property, and when the weather is cold they sleep there.
They eat, however, and pass their time in the open part in front.
My guides having finished their pipes, we continued our walk.
The path led through the same undulating country, the whole uniformly clothed as before with fern.
On our right hand we had a serpentine river, the banks of which were fringed with trees, and here and there on the hill sides there was a clump of wood.
The whole scene, in spite of its green colour, had rather a desolate aspect.
The sight of so much fern impresses the mind with an idea of sterility: this, however, is not correct; for wherever the fern grows thick and breast-high, the land by tillage becomes productive.
Some of the residents think that all this extensive open country originally was covered with forests, and that it has been cleared by fire.
It is said, that by digging in the barest spots, lumps of the kind of resin which flows from the kauri pine are frequently found.
The natives had an evident motive in clearing the country; for the fern, formerly a staple article of food, flourishes only in the open cleared tracks.
The almost entire absence of associated grasses, which forms so remarkable a feature in the vegetation of this island, may perhaps be accounted for by the land having been aboriginally covered with forest-trees.
The soil is volcanic; in several parts we passed over shaggy lavas, and craters could clearly be distinguished on several of the neighbouring hills.
Although the scenery is nowhere beautiful, and only occasionally pretty, I enjoyed my walk.
I should have enjoyed it more, if my companion, the chief, had not possessed extraordinary conversational powers.
I knew only three words: "good," "bad," and "yes:" and with these I answered all his remarks, without of course having understood one word he said.
This, however, was quite sufficient: I was a good listener, an agreeable person, and he never ceased talking to me.
At length we reached Waimate.
After having passed over so many miles of an uninhabited useless country, the sudden appearance of an English farm-house, and its well-dressed fields, placed there as if by an enchanter's wand, was exceedingly pleasant.
Mr. Williams not being at home, I received in Mr. Davies's house a cordial welcome.
After drinking tea with his family party, we took a stroll about the farm.
At Waimate there are three large houses, where the missionary gentlemen, Messrs.
Williams, Davies, and Clarke, reside; and near them are the huts of the native labourers.
On an adjoining slope, fine crops of barley and wheat were standing in full ear; and in another part, fields of potatoes and clover.
But I cannot attempt to describe all I saw; there were large gardens, with every fruit and vegetable which England produces; and many belonging to a warmer clime.
I may instance asparagus, kidney beans, cucumbers, rhubarb, apples, pears, figs, peaches, apricots, grapes, olives, gooseberries, currants, hops, gorse for fences, and English oaks; also many kinds of flowers.
Around the farm-yard there were stables, a thrashing-barn with its winnowing machine, a blacksmith's forge, and on the ground ploughshares and other tools: in the middle was that happy mixture of pigs and poultry, lying comfortably together, as in every
At the distance of a few hundred yards, where the water of a little rill had been dammed up into a pool, there was a large and substantial water-mill.
All this is very surprising, when it is considered that five years ago nothing but the fern flourished here.
Moreover, native workmanship, taught by the missionaries, has effected this change;--the lesson of the missionary is the enchanter's wand.
The house had been built, the windows framed, the fields ploughed, and even the trees grafted, by a New Zealander.
At the mill, a New Zealander was seen powdered white with flower, like his brother miller in England.
When I looked at this whole scene, I thought it admirable.
It was not merely that England was brought vividly before my mind; yet, as the evening drew to a close, the domestic sounds, the fields of corn, the distant undulating country with its trees might well have been mistaken for our fatherland: nor was it the
Several young men, redeemed by the missionaries from slavery, were employed on the farm.
They were dressed in a shirt, jacket, and trousers, and had a respectable appearance.
Judging from one trifling anecdote, I should think they must be honest.
When walking in the fields, a young labourer came up to Mr. Davies, and gave him a knife and gimlet, saying that he had found them on the road, and did not know to whom they belonged!
These young men and boys appeared very merry and good-humoured.
In the evening I saw a party of them at cricket: when I thought of the austerity of which the missionaries have been accused, I was amused by observing one of their own sons taking an active part in the game.
A more decided and pleasing change was manifested in the young women, who acted as servants within the houses.
Their clean, tidy, and healthy appearance, like that of the dairy-maids in England, formed a wonderful contrast with the women of the filthy hovels in Kororadika.
The wives of the missionaries tried to persuade them not to be tattooed; but a famous operator having arrived from the south, they said, "We really must just have a few lines on our lips; else when we grow old, our lips will shrivel, and we shall be so
There is not nearly so much tattooing as formerly; but as it is a badge of distinction between the chief and the slave, it will probably long be practised.
So soon does any train of ideas become habitual, that the missionaries told me that even in their eyes a plain face looked mean, and not like that of a New Zealand gentleman.
Late in the evening I went to Mr. Williams's house, where I passed the night.
I found there a large party of children, collected together for Christmas Day, and all sitting round a table at tea.
I never saw a nicer or more merry group; and to think that this was in the centre of the land of cannibalism, murder, and all atrocious crimes!
The cordiality and happiness so plainly pictured in the faces of the little circle, appeared equally felt by the older persons of the mission.
December 24th.
--In the morning, prayers were read in the native tongue to the whole family.
After breakfast I rambled about the gardens and farm.
This was a market-day, when the natives of the surrounding hamlets bring their potatoes, Indian corn, or pigs, to exchange for blankets, tobacco, and sometimes, through the persuasions of the missionaries, for soap.
Mr. Davies's eldest son, who manages a farm of his own, is the man of business in the market.
The children of the missionaries, who came while young to the island, understand the language better than their parents, and can get anything more readily done by the natives.
A little before noon Messrs.
Williams and Davies walked with me to a part of a neighbouring forest, to show me the famous kauri pine.
I measured one of the noble trees, and found it thirty-one feet in circumference above the roots.
There was another close by, which I did not see, thirty-three feet; and I heard of one no less than forty feet.
These trees are remarkable for their smooth cylindrical boles, which run up to a height of sixty, and even ninety feet, with a nearly equal diameter, and without a single branch.
The crown of branches at the summit is out of all proportion small to the trunk; and the leaves are likewise small compared with the branches.
The forest was here almost composed of the kauri; and the largest trees, from the parallelism of their sides, stood up like gigantic columns of wood.
The timber of the kauri is the most valuable production of the island; moreover, a quantity of resin oozes from the bark, which is sold at a penny a pound to the Americans, but its use was then unknown.
Some of the New Zealand forest must be impenetrable to an extraordinary degree.
Mr. Matthews informed me that one forest only thirty-four miles in width, and separating two inhabited districts, had only lately, for the first time, been crossed.
He and another missionary, each with a party of about fifty men, undertook to open a road, but it cost more than a fortnight's labour!
In the woods I saw very few birds.
With regard to animals, it is a most remarkable fact, that so large an island, extending over more than 700 miles in latitude, and in many parts ninety broad, with varied stations, a fine climate, and land of all heights, from 14,000 feet downwards, with
The several species of that gigantic genus of birds, the Deinornis seem here to have replaced mammiferous quadrupeds, in the same manner as the reptiles still do at the Galapagos archipelago.
It is said that the common Norway rat, in the short space of two years, annihilated in this northern end of the island, the New Zealand species.
In many places I noticed several sorts of weeds, which, like the rats, I was forced to own as countrymen.
A leek has overrun whole districts, and will prove very troublesome, but it was imported as a favour by a French vessel.
The common dock is also widely disseminated, and will, I fear, for ever remain a proof of the rascality of an Englishman, who sold the seeds for those of the tobacco plant.
On returning from our pleasant walk to the house, I dined with Mr. Williams; and then, a horse being lent me, I returned to the Bay of Islands.
I took leave of the missionaries with thankfulness for their kind welcome, and with feelings of high respect for their gentlemanlike, useful, and upright characters.
I think it would be difficult to find a body of men better adapted for the high office which they fulfil.
Christmas Day.
--In a few more days the fourth year of our absence from England will be completed.
Our first Christmas Day was spent at Plymouth, the second at St. Martin's Cove, near Cape Horn; the third at Port Desire, in Patagonia; the fourth at anchor in a wild harbour in the peninsula of Tres Montes, this fifth here, and the next, I trust in
We attended divine service in the chapel of Pahia; part of the service being read in English, and part in the native language.
Whilst at New Zealand we did not hear of any recent acts of cannibalism; but Mr. Stokes found burnt human bones strewed round a fire-place on a small island near the anchorage; but these remains of a comfortable banquet might have been lying there for
It is probable that the moral state of the people will rapidly improve.
Mr. Bushby mentioned one pleasing anecdote as a proof of the sincerity of some, at least, of those who profess Christianity.
One of his young men left him, who had been accustomed to read prayers to the rest of the servants.
Some weeks afterwards, happening to pass late in the evening by an outhouse, he saw and heard one of his men reading the Bible with difficulty by the light of the fire, to the others.
After this the party knelt and prayed: in their prayers they mentioned Mr. Bushby and his family, and the missionaries, each separately in his respective district.
December 26th.
--Mr. Bushby offered to take Mr. Sulivan and myself in his boat some miles up the river to Cawa-Cawa, and proposed afterwards to walk on to the village of Waiomio, where there are some curious rocks.
Following one of the arms of the bay, we enjoyed a pleasant row, and passed through pretty scenery, until we came to a village, beyond which the boat could not pass.
From this place a chief and a party of men volunteered to walk with us to Waiomio, a distance of four miles.
The chief was at this time rather notorious from having lately hung one of his wives and a slave for adultery.
When one of the missionaries remonstrated with him he seemed surprised, and said he thought he was exactly following the English method.
Old Shongi, who happened to be in England during the Queen's trial, expressed great disapprobation at the whole proceeding: he said he had five wives, and he would rather cut off all their heads than be so much troubled about one.
Leaving this village, we crossed over to another, seated on a hill-side at a little distance.
The daughter of a chief, who was still a heathen, had died there five days before.
The hovel in which she had expired had been burnt to the ground: her body being enclosed between two small canoes, was placed upright on the ground, and protected by an enclosure bearing wooden images of their gods, and the whole was painted bright red, so
Her gown was fastened to the coffin, and her hair being cut off was cast at its foot.
The relatives of the family had torn the flesh of their arms, bodies, and faces, so that they were covered with clotted blood; and the old women looked most filthy, disgusting objects.
On the following day some of the officers visited this place, and found the women still howling and cutting themselves.
We continued our walk, and soon reached Waiomio.
Here there are some singular masses of limestone, resembling ruined castles.
These rocks have long served for burial places, and in consequence are held too sacred to be approached.
One of the young men, however, cried out, "Let us all be brave," and ran on ahead; but when within a hundred yards, the whole party thought better of it, and stopped short.
With perfect indifference, however, they allowed us to examine the whole place.
At this village we rested some hours, during which time there was a long discussion with Mr. Bushby, concerning the right of sale of certain lands.
One old man, who appeared a perfect genealogist, illustrated the successive possessors by bits of stick driven into the ground.
Before leaving the houses a little basketful of roasted sweet potatoes was given to each of our party; and we all, according to the custom, carried them away to eat on the road.
I noticed that among the women employed in cooking, there was a man-slave: it must be a humiliating thing for a man in this warlike country to be employed in doing that which is considered as the lowest woman's work.
Slaves are not allowed to go to war; but this perhaps can hardly be considered as a hardship.
I heard of one poor wretch who, during hostilities, ran away to the opposite party; being met by two men, he was immediately seized; but as they could not agree to whom he should belong, each stood over him with a stone hatchet, and seemed determined that
The poor man, almost dead with fright, was only saved by the address of a chief's wife.
We afterwards enjoyed a pleasant walk back to the boat, but did not reach the ship till late in the evening.
December 30th.
--In the afternoon we stood out of the Bay of Islands, on our course to Sydney.
I believe we were all glad to leave New Zealand.
It is not a pleasant place.
Amongst the natives there is absent that charming simplicity which is found in Tahiti; and the greater part of the English are the very refuse of society.
Neither is the country itself attractive.
I look back but to one bright spot, and that is Waimate, with its Christian inhabitants.
CHAPTER XIX AUSTRALIA Sydney--Excursion to Bathurst--Aspect of the Woods--Party of Natives--Gradual Extinction of the Aborigines--Infection generated by associated Men in health--Blue Mountains--View of the grand gulf-like Valleys--Their origin and
JANUARY 12th, 1836.
--Early in the morning a light air carried us towards the entrance of Port Jackson.
Instead of beholding a verdant country, interspersed with fine houses, a straight line of yellowish cliff brought to our minds the coast of Patagonia.
A solitary lighthouse, built of white stone, alone told us that we were near a great and populous city.
Having entered the harbour, it appears fine and spacious, with cliff-formed shores of horizontally stratified sandstone.
The nearly level country is covered with thin scrubby trees, bespeaking the curse of sterility.
Proceeding further inland, the country improves: beautiful villas and nice cottages are here and there scattered along the beach.
In the distance stone houses, two and three stories high, and windmills standing on the edge of a bank, pointed out to us the neighbourhood of the capital of Australia.
At last we anchored within Sydney Cove.
We found the little basin occupied by many large ships, and surrounded by warehouses.
In the evening I walked through the town, and returned full of admiration at the whole scene.
It is a most magnificent testimony to the power of the British nation.
Here, in a less promising country, scores of years have done many more times more than an equal number of centuries have effected in South America.
My first feeling was to congratulate myself that I was born an Englishman.
Upon seeing more of the town afterwards, perhaps my admiration fell a little; but yet it is a fine town.
The streets are regular, broad, clean, and kept in excellent order; the houses are of a good size, and the shops well furnished.
It may be faithfully compared to the large suburbs which stretch out from London and a few other great towns in England; but not even near London or Birmingham is there an appearance of such rapid growth.
The number of large houses and other buildings just finished was truly surprising; nevertheless, every one complained of the high rents and difficulty in procuring a house.
Coming from South America, where in the towns every man of property is known, no one thing surprised me more than not being able to ascertain at once to whom this or that carriage belonged.
I hired a man and two horses to take me to Bathurst, a village about one hundred and twenty miles in the interior, and the centre of a great pastoral district.
By this means I hoped to gain a general idea of the appearance of the country.
On the morning of the 16th (January) I set out on my excursion.
The first stage took us to Paramatta, a small country town, next to Sydney in importance.
The roads were excellent, and made upon the MacAdam principle, whinstone having been brought for the purpose from the distance of several miles.
In all respects there was a close resemblance to England: perhaps the alehouses here were more numerous.
The iron gangs, or parties of convicts who have committed here some offense, appeared the least like England: they were working in chains, under the charge of sentries with loaded arms.
The power which the government possesses, by means of forced labour, of at once opening good roads throughout the country, has been, I believe, one main cause of the early prosperity of this colony.
I slept at night at a very comfortable inn at Emu ferry, thirty-five miles from Sydney, and near the ascent of the Blue Mountains.
This line of road is the most frequented, and has been the longest inhabited of any in the colony.
The whole land is enclosed with high railings, for the farmers have not succeeded in rearing hedges.
There are many substantial houses and good cottages scattered about; but although considerable pieces of land are under cultivation, the greater part yet remains as when first discovered.
The extreme uniformity of the vegetation is the most remarkable feature in the landscape of the greater part of New South Wales.
Everywhere we have an open woodland, the ground being partially covered with a very thin pasture, with little appearance of verdure.
The trees nearly all belong to one family, and mostly have their leaves placed in a vertical, instead of as in Europe, in a nearly horizontal position: the foliage is scanty, and of a peculiar pale green tint, without any gloss.
Hence the woods appear light and shadowless: this, although a loss of comfort to the traveller under the scorching rays of summer, is of importance to the farmer, as it allows grass to grow where it otherwise would not.
The leaves are not shed periodically: this character appears common to the entire southern hemisphere, namely, South America, Australia, and the Cape of Good Hope.
The inhabitants of this hemisphere, and of the intertropical regions, thus lose perhaps one of the most glorious, though to our eyes common, spectacles in the world--the first bursting into full foliage of the leafless tree.
They may, however, say that we pay dearly for this by having the land covered with mere naked skeletons for so many months.
This is too true but our senses thus acquire a keen relish for the exquisite green of the spring, which the eyes of those living within the tropics, sated during the long year with the gorgeous productions of those glowing climates, can never experience.
The greater number of the trees, with the exception of some of the Blue-gums, do not attain a large size; but they grow tall and tolerably straight, and stand well apart.
The bark of some of the Eucalypti falls annually, or hangs dead in long shreds which swing about with the wind, and give to the woods a desolate and untidy appearance.
I cannot imagine a more complete contrast, in every respect, than between the forests of Valdivia or Chiloe, and the woods of Australia.
At sunset, a party of a score of the black aborigines passed by, each carrying, in their accustomed manner, a bundle of spears and other weapons.
By giving a leading young man a shilling, they were easily detained, and threw their spears for my amusement.
They were all partly clothed, and several could speak a little English: their countenances were good-humoured and pleasant, and they appeared far from being such utterly degraded beings as they have usually been represented.
In their own arts they are admirable.
A cap being fixed at thirty yards distance, they transfixed it with a spear, delivered by the throwing-stick with the rapidity of an arrow from the bow of a practised archer.
In tracking animals or men they show most wonderful sagacity; and I heard of several of their remarks which manifested considerable acuteness.
They will not, however, cultivate the ground, or build houses and remain stationary, or even take the trouble of tending a flock of sheep when given to them.
On the whole they appear to me to stand some few degrees higher in the scale of civilization than the Fuegians.
It is very curious thus to see in the midst of a civilized people, a set of harmless savages wandering about without knowing where they shall sleep at night, and gaining their livelihood by hunting in the woods.
As the white man has travelled onwards, he has spread over the country belonging to several tribes.
These, although thus enclosed by one common people, keep up their ancient distinctions, and sometimes go to war with each other.
In an engagement which took place lately, the two parties most singularly chose the centre of the village of Bathurst for the field of battle.
This was of service to the defeated side, for the runaway warriors took refuge in the barracks.
The number of aborigines is rapidly decreasing.
In my whole ride, with the exception of some boys brought up by Englishmen, I saw only one other party.
This decrease, no doubt, must be partly owing to the introduction of spirits, to European diseases (even the milder ones of which, such as the measles, [1] prove very destructive), and to the gradual extinction of the wild animals.
It is said that numbers of their children invariably perish in very early infancy from the effects of their wandering life; and as the difficulty of procuring food increases, so must their wandering habits increase; and hence the population, without any
Besides the several evident causes of destruction, there appears to be some more mysterious agency generally at work.
Wherever the European has trod, death seems to pursue the aboriginal.
We may look to the wide extent of the Americas, Polynesia, the Cape of Good Hope, and Australia, and we find the same result.
Nor is it the white man alone that thus acts the destroyer; the Polynesian of Malay extraction has in parts of the East Indian archipelago, thus driven before him the dark-coloured native.
The varieties of man seem to act on each other in the same way as different species of animals--the stronger always extirpating the weaker.
It was melancholy at New Zealand to hear the fine energetic natives saying that they knew the land was doomed to pass from their children.
Every one has heard of the inexplicable reduction of the population in the beautiful and healthy island of Tahiti since the date of Captain Cook's voyages: although in that case we might have expected that it would have been increased; for infanticide,
The Rev.
J. Williams, in his interesting work, [2] says, that the first intercourse between natives and Europeans, "is invariably attended with the introduction of fever, dysentery, or some other disease, which carries off numbers of the people".
Again he affirms, "It is certainly a fact, which cannot be controverted, that most of the diseases which have raged in the islands during my residence there, have been introduced by ships; [3] and what renders this fact remarkable is, that there might be
This statement is not quite so extraordinary as it at first appears; for several cases are on record of the most malignant fevers having broken out, although the parties themselves, who were the cause, were not affected.
In the early part of the reign of George III.
, a prisoner who had been confined in a dungeon, was taken in a coach with four constables before a magistrate; and although the man himself was not ill, the four constables died from a short putrid fever; but the contagion extended to no others.
From these facts it would almost appear as if the effluvium of one set of men shut up for some time together was poisonous when inhaled by others; and possibly more so, if the men be of different races.
Mysterious as this circumstance appears to be, it is not more surprising than that the body of one's fellow-creature, directly after death, and before putrefaction has commenced, should often be of so deleterious a quality, that the mere puncture from an
17th.
--Early in the morning we passed the Nepean in a ferry-boat.
The river, although at this spot both broad and deep, had a very small body of running water.
Having crossed a low piece of land on the opposite side, we reached the slope of the Blue Mountains.
The ascent is not steep, the road having been cut with much care on the side of a sandstone cliff.
On the summit an almost level plain extends, which, rising imperceptibly to the westward, at last attains a height of more than 3000 feet.
From so grand a title as Blue Mountains, and from their absolute altitude, I expected to have seen a bold chain of mountains crossing the country; but instead of this, a sloping plain presents merely an inconsiderable front to the low land near the coast.
From this first slope, the view of the extensive woodland to the east was striking, and the surrounding trees grew bold and lofty.
But when once on the sandstone platform, the scenery becomes exceedingly monotonous; each side of the road is bordered by scrubby trees of the never-failing Eucalyptus family; and with the exception of two or three small inns, there are no houses or
In the middle of the day we baited our horses at a little inn, called the Weatherboard.
The country here is elevated 2800 feet above the sea.
About a mile and a half from this place there is a view exceedingly well worth visiting.
Following down a little valley and its tiny rill of water, an immense gulf unexpectedly opens through the trees which border the pathway, at the depth of perhaps 1500 feet.
Walking on a few yards, one stands on the brink of a vast precipice, and below one sees a grand bay or gulf, for I know not what other name to give it, thickly covered with forest.
The point of view is situated as if at the head of a bay, the line of cliff diverging on each side, and showing headland behind headland, as on a bold sea-coast.
These cliffs are composed of horizontal strata of whitish sandstone; and are so absolutely vertical, that in many places a person standing on the edge and throwing down a stone, can see it strike the trees in the abyss below.
So unbroken is the line of cliff, that in order to reach the foot of the waterfall, formed by this little stream, it is said to be necessary to go sixteen miles round.
About five miles distant in front, another line of cliff extends, which thus appears completely to encircle the valley; and hence the name of bay is justified, as applied to this grand amphitheatrical depression.
If we imagine a winding harbour, with its deep water surrounded by bold cliff-like shores, to be laid dry, and a forest to spring up on its sandy bottom, we should then have the appearance and structure here exhibited.
This kind of view was to me quite novel, and extremely magnificent.
In the evening we reached the Blackheath.
The sandstone plateau has here attained the height of 3400 feet; and is covered, as before, with the same scrubby woods.
From the road, there were occasional glimpses into a profound valley, of the same character as the one described; but from the steepness and depth of its sides, the bottom was scarcely ever to be seen.
The Blackheath is a very comfortable inn, kept by an old soldier; and it reminded me of the small inns in North Wales.
18th.
--Very early in the morning, I walked about three miles to see Govett's Leap; a view of a similar character with that near the Weatherboard, but perhaps even more stupendous.
So early in the day the gulf was filled with a thin blue haze, which, although destroying the general effect of the view added to the apparent depth at which the forest was stretched out beneath our feet.
These valleys, which so long presented an insuperable barrier to the attempts of the most enterprising of the colonists to reach the interior, are most remarkable.
Great arm-like bays, expanding at their upper ends, often branch from the main valleys and penetrate the sandstone platform; on the other hand, the platform often sends promontories into the valleys, and even leaves in them great, almost insulated, masses.
To descend into some of these valleys, it is necessary to go round twenty miles; and into others, the surveyors have only lately penetrated, and the colonists have not yet been able to drive in their cattle.
But the most remarkable feature in their structure is, that although several miles wide at their heads, they generally contract towards their mouths to such a degree as to become impassable.
The Surveyor-General, Sir T. Mitchell, [4] endeavoured in vain, first walking and then by crawling between the great fallen fragments of sandstone, to ascend through the gorge by which the river Grose joins the Nepean, yet the valley of the Grose in its
When cattle are driven into the valley of the Wolgan by a path (which I descended), partly natural and partly made by the owner of the land, they cannot escape; for this valley is in every other part surrounded by perpendicular cliffs, and eight miles
Sir T. Mitchell states that the great valley of the Cox river with all its branches, contracts, where it unites with the Nepean, into a gorge 2200 yards in width, and about 1000 feet in depth.
Other similar cases might have been added.
The first impression, on seeing the correspondence of the horizontal strata on each side of these valleys and great amphitheatrical depressions, is that they have been hollowed out, like other valleys, by the action of water; but when one reflects on the
But considering the form of the irregularly branching valleys, and of the narrow promontories projecting into them from the platforms, we are compelled to abandon this notion.
To attribute these hollows to the present alluvial action would be preposterous; nor does the drainage from the summit-level always fall, as I remarked near the Weatherboard, into the head of these valleys, but into one side of their bay-like recesses.
Some of the inhabitants remarked to me that they never viewed one of those bay-like recesses, with the headlands receding on both hands, without being struck with their resemblance to a bold sea-coast.
This is certainly the case; moreover, on the present coast of New South Wales, the numerous, fine, widely-branching harbours, which are generally connected with the sea by a narrow mouth worn through the sandstone coast-cliffs, varying from one mile in
But then immediately occurs the startling difficulty, why has the sea worn out these great, though circumscribed depressions on a wide platform, and left mere gorges at the openings, through which the whole vast amount of triturated matter must have been
The only light I can throw upon this enigma, is by remarking that banks of the most irregular forms appear to be now forming in some seas, as in parts of the West Indies and in the Red Sea, and that their sides are exceedingly steep.
Such banks, I have been led to suppose, have been formed by sediment heaped by strong currents on an irregular bottom.
That in some cases the sea, instead of spreading out sediment in a uniform sheet, heaps it round submarine rocks and islands, it is hardly possible to doubt, after examining the charts of the West Indies; and that the waves have power to form high and
To apply these ideas to the sandstone platforms of New South Wales, I imagine that the strata were heaped by the action of strong currents, and of the undulations of an open sea, on an irregular bottom; and that the valley-like spaces thus left unfilled
Soon after leaving the Blackheath, we descended from the sandstone platform by the pass of Mount Victoria.
To effect this pass, an enormous quantity of stone has been cut through; the design, and its manner of execution, being worthy of any line of road in England.
We now entered upon a country less elevated by nearly a thousand feet, and consisting of granite.
With the change of rock, the vegetation improved, the trees were both finer and stood farther apart; and the pasture between them was a little greener and more plentiful.
At Hassan's Walls, I left the high road, and made a short detour to a farm called Walerawang; to the superintendent of which I had a letter of introduction from the owner in Sydney.
Mr. Browne had the kindness to ask me to stay the ensuing day, which I had much pleasure in doing.
This place offers an example of one of the large farming, or rather sheep-grazing establishments of the colony.
Cattle and horses are, however, in this case rather more numerous than usual, owing to some of the valleys being swampy and producing a coarser pasture.
Two or three flat pieces of ground near the house were cleared and cultivated with corn, which the harvest-men were now reaping: but no more wheat is sown than sufficient for the annual support of the labourers employed on the establishment.
The usual number of assigned convict-servants here is about forty, but at the present time there were rather more.
Although the farm was well stocked with every necessary, there was an apparent absence of comfort; and not one single woman resided here.
The sunset of a fine day will generally cast an air of happy contentment on any scene; but here, at this retired farm-house, the brightest tints on the surrounding woods could not make me forget that forty hardened, profligate men were ceasing from their
Early on the next morning, Mr. Archer, the joint superintendent, had the kindness to take me out kangaroo-hunting.
We continued riding the greater part of the day, but had very bad sport, not seeing a kangaroo, or even a wild dog.
The greyhounds pursued a kangaroo rat into a hollow tree, out of which we dragged it: it is an animal as large as a rabbit, but with the figure of a kangaroo.
A few years since this country abounded with wild animals; but now the emu is banished to a long distance, and the kangaroo is become scarce; to both the English greyhound has been highly destructive.
It may be long before these animals are altogether exterminated, but their doom is fixed.
The aborigines are always anxious to borrow the dogs from the farm-houses: the use of them, the offal when an animal is killed, and some milk from the cows, are the peace-offerings of the settlers, who push farther and farther towards the interior.
The thoughtless aboriginal, blinded by these trifling advantages, is delighted at the approach of the white man, who seems predestined to inherit the country of his children.
Although having poor sport, we enjoyed a pleasant ride.
The woodland is generally so open that a person on horseback can gallop through it.
It is traversed by a few flat-bottomed valleys, which are green and free from trees: in such spots the scenery was pretty like that of a park.
In the whole country I scarcely saw a place without the marks of a fire; whether these had been more or less recent--whether the stumps were more or less black, was the greatest change which varied the uniformity, so wearisome to the traveller's eye.
In these woods there are not many birds; I saw, however, some large flocks of the white cockatoo feeding in a corn-field, and a few most beautiful parrots; crows, like our jackdaws were not uncommon, and another bird something like the magpie.
In the dusk of the evening I took a stroll along a chain of ponds, which in this dry country represented the course of a river, and had the good fortune to see several of the famous Ornithorhynchus paradoxus.
They were diving and playing about the surface of the water, but showed so little of their bodies, that they might easily have been mistaken for water-rats.
Mr. Browne shot one: certainly it is a most extraordinary animal; a stuffed specimen does not at all give a good idea of the appearance of the head and beak when fresh; the latter becoming hard and contracted.
[5] 20th.
--A long day's ride to Bathurst.
Before joining the highroad we followed a mere path through the forest; and the country, with the exception of a few squatters' huts, was very solitary.
We experienced this day the sirocco-like wind of Australia, which comes from the parched deserts of the interior.
Clouds of dust were travelling in every direction; and the wind felt as if it had passed over a fire.
I afterwards heard that the thermometer out of doors had stood at 119 degs.
, and in a closed room at 96 degs.
In the afternoon we came in view of the downs of Bathurst.
These undulating but nearly smooth plains are very remarkable in this country, from being absolutely destitute of trees.
They support only a thin brown pasture.
We rode some miles over this country, and then reached the township of Bathurst, seated in the middle of what may be called either a very broad valley, or narrow plain.
I was told at Sydney not to form too bad an opinion of Australia by judging of the country from the roadside, nor too good a one from Bathurst; in this latter respect, I did not feel myself in the least danger of being prejudiced.
The season, it must be owned, had been one of great drought, and the country did not wear a favourable aspect; although I understand it was incomparably worse two or three months before.
The secret of the rapidly growing prosperity of Bathurst is, that the brown pasture which appears to the stranger's eye so wretched, is excellent for sheep-grazing.
The town stands, at the height of 2200 feet above the sea, on the banks of the Macquarie.
This is one of the rivers flowing into the vast and scarcely known interior.
The line of water-shed, which divides the inland streams from those on the coast, has a height of about 3000 feet, and runs in a north and south direction at the distance of from eighty to a hundred miles from the sea-side.
The Macquarie figures in the map as a respectable river, and it is the largest of those draining this part of the water-shed; yet to my surprise I found it a mere chain of ponds, separated from each other by spaces almost dry.
Generally a small stream is running; and sometimes there are high and impetuous floods.
Scanty as the supply of the water is throughout this district, it becomes still scantier further inland.
22nd.
--I commenced my return, and followed a new road called Lockyer's Line, along which the country is rather more hilly and picturesque.
This was a long day's ride; and the house where I wished to sleep was some way off the road, and not easily found.
I met on this occasion, and indeed on all others, a very general and ready civility among the lower orders, which, when one considers what they are, and what they have been, would scarcely have been expected.
The farm where I passed the night, was owned by two young men who had only lately come out, and were beginning a settler's life.
The total want of almost every comfort was not attractive; but future and certain prosperity was before their eyes, and that not far distant.
The next day we passed through large tracts of country in flames, volumes of smoke sweeping across the road.
Before noon we joined our former road, and ascended Mount Victoria.
I slept at the Weatherboard, and before dark took another walk to the amphitheatre.
On the road to Sydney I spent a very pleasant evening with Captain King at Dunheved; and thus ended my little excursion in the colony of New South Wales.
Before arriving here the three things which interested me most were--the state of society amongst the higher classes, the condition of the convicts, and the degree of attraction sufficient to induce persons to emigrate.
Of course, after so very short a visit, one's opinion is worth scarcely anything; but it is as difficult not to form some opinion, as it is to form a correct judgment.
On the whole, from what I heard, more than from what I saw, I was disappointed in the state of society.
The whole community is rancorously divided into parties on almost every subject.
Among those who, from their station in life, ought to be the best, many live in such open profligacy that respectable people cannot associate with them.
There is much jealousy between the children of the rich emancipist and the free settlers, the former being pleased to consider honest men as interlopers.
The whole population, poor and rich, are bent on acquiring wealth: amongst the higher orders, wool and sheep-grazing form the constant subject of conversation.
There are many serious drawbacks to the comforts of a family, the chief of which, perhaps, is being surrounded by convict servants.
How thoroughly odious to every feeling, to be waited on by a man who the day before, perhaps, was flogged, from your representation, for some trifling misdemeanor.
The female servants are of course, much worse: hence children learn the vilest expressions, and it is fortunate, if not equally vile ideas.
On the other hand, the capital of a person, without any trouble on his part, produces him treble interest to what it will in England; and with care he is sure to grow rich.
The luxuries of life are in abundance, and very little dearer than in England, and most articles of food are cheaper.
The climate is splendid, and perfectly healthy; but to my mind its charms are lost by the uninviting aspect of the country.
Settlers possess a great advantage in finding their sons of service when very young.
At the age of from sixteen to twenty, they frequently take charge of distant farming stations.
This, however, must happen at the expense of their boys associating entirely with convict servants.
I am not aware that the tone of society has assumed any peculiar character; but with such habits, and without intellectual pursuits, it can hardly fail to deteriorate.
My opinion is such, that nothing but rather sharp necessity should compel me to emigrate.
The rapid prosperity and future prospects of this colony are to me, not understanding these subjects, very puzzling.
The two main exports are wool and whale-oil, and to both of these productions there is a limit.
The country is totally unfit for canals, therefore there is a not very distant point, beyond which the land-carriage of wool will not repay the expense of shearing and tending sheep.
Pasture everywhere is so thin that settlers have already pushed far into the interior: moreover, the country further inland becomes extremely poor.
Agriculture, on account of the droughts, can never succeed on an extended scale: therefore, so far as I can see, Australia must ultimately depend upon being the centre of commerce for the southern hemisphere, and perhaps on her future manufactories.
Possessing coal, she always has the moving power at hand.
From the habitable country extending along the coast, and from her English extraction, she is sure to be a maritime nation.
I formerly imagined that Australia would rise to be as grand and powerful a country as North America, but now it appears to me that such future grandeur is rather problematical.
With respect to the state of the convicts, I had still fewer opportunities of judging than on other points.
The first question is, whether their condition is at all one of punishment: no one will maintain that it is a very severe one.
This, however, I suppose, is of little consequence as long as it continues to be an object of dread to criminals at home.
The corporeal wants of the convicts are tolerably well supplied: their prospect of future liberty and comfort is not distant, and, after good conduct, certain.
A "ticket of leave," which, as long as a man keeps clear of suspicion as well as of crime, makes him free within a certain district, is given upon good conduct, after years proportional to the length of the sentence; yet with all this, and overlooking the
As an intelligent man remarked to me, the convicts know no pleasure beyond sensuality, and in this they are not gratified.
The enormous bribe which Government possesses in offering free pardons, together with the deep horror of the secluded penal settlements, destroys confidence between the convicts, and so prevents crime.
As to a sense of shame, such a feeling does not appear to be known, and of this I witnessed some very singular proofs.
Though it is a curious fact, I was universally told that the character of the convict population is one of arrant cowardice: not unfrequently some become desperate, and quite indifferent as to life, yet a plan requiring cool or continued courage is seldom
The worst feature in the whole case is, that although there exists what may be called a legal reform, and comparatively little is committed which the law can touch, yet that any moral reform should take place appears to be quite out of the question.
I was assured by well-informed people, that a man who should try to improve, could not while living with other assigned servants;--his life would be one of intolerable misery and persecution.
Nor must the contamination of the convict-ships and prisons, both here and in England, be forgotten.
On the whole, as a place of punishment, the object is scarcely gained; as a real system of reform it has failed, as perhaps would every other plan; but as a means of making men outwardly honest,--of converting vagabonds, most useless in one hemisphere,
30th.
--The Beagle sailed for Hobart Town in Van Diemen's Land.
On the 5th of February, after a six days' passage, of which the first part was fine, and the latter very cold and squally, we entered the mouth of Storm Bay: the weather justified this awful name.
The bay should rather be called an estuary, for it receives at its head the waters of the Derwent.
Near the mouth, there are some extensive basaltic platforms; but higher up the land becomes mountainous, and is covered by a light wood.
The lower parts of the hills which skirt the bay are cleared; and the bright yellow fields of corn, and dark green ones of potatoes, appear very luxuriant.
Late in the evening we anchored in the snug cove, on the shores of which stands the capital of Tasmania.
The first aspect of the place was very inferior to that of Sydney; the latter might be called a city, this is only a town.
It stands at the base of Mount Wellington, a mountain 3100 feet high, but of little picturesque beauty; from this source, however, it receives a good supply of water.
Round the cove there are some fine warehouses and on one side a small fort.
Coming from the Spanish settlements, where such magnificent care has generally been paid to the fortifications, the means of defence in these colonies appeared very contemptible.
Comparing the town with Sydney, I was chiefly struck with the comparative fewness of the large houses, either built or building.
Hobart Town, from the census of 1835, contained 13,826 inhabitants, and the whole of Tasmania 36,505.
All the aborigines have been removed to an island in Bass's Straits, so that Van Diemen's Land enjoys the great advantage of being free from a native population.
This most cruel step seems to have been quite unavoidable, as the only means of stopping a fearful succession of robberies, burnings, and murders, committed by the blacks; and which sooner or later would have ended in their utter destruction.
I fear there is no doubt, that this train of evil and its consequences, originated in the infamous conduct of some of our countrymen.
Thirty years is a short period, in which to have banished the last aboriginal from his native island,--and that island nearly as large as Ireland.
The correspondence on this subject, which took place between the government at home and that of Van Diemen's Land, is very interesting.
Although numbers of natives were shot and taken prisoners in the skirmishing, which was going on at intervals for several years; nothing seems fully to have impressed them with the idea of our overwhelming power, until the whole island, in 1830, was put
The plan adopted was nearly similar to that of the great hunting-matches in India: a line was formed reaching across the island, with the intention of driving the natives into a _cul-de-sac_ on Tasman's peninsula.
The attempt failed; the natives, having tied up their dogs, stole during one night through the lines.
This is far from surprising, when their practised senses, and usual manner of crawling after wild animals is considered.
I have been assured that they can conceal themselves on almost bare ground, in a manner which until witnessed is scarcely credible; their dusky bodies being easily mistaken for the blackened stumps which are scattered all over the country.
I was told of a trial between a party of Englishmen and a native, who was to stand in full view on the side of a bare hill; if the Englishmen closed their eyes for less than a minute, he would squat down, and then they were never able to distinguish him
But to return to the hunting-match; the natives understanding this kind of warfare, were terribly alarmed, for they at once perceived the power and numbers of the whites.
Shortly afterwards a party of thirteen belonging to two tribes came in; and, conscious of their unprotected condition, delivered themselves up in despair.
Subsequently by the intrepid exertions of Mr. Robinson, an active and benevolent man, who fearlessly visited by himself the most hostile of the natives, the whole were induced to act in a similar manner.
They were then removed to an island, where food and clothes were provided them.
Count Strzelecki states, [6] that "at the epoch of their deportation in 1835, the number of natives amounted to 210.
In 1842, that is, after the interval of seven years, they mustered only fifty-four individuals; and, while each family of the interior of New South Wales, uncontaminated by contact with the whites, swarms with children, those of Flinders' Island had during
The Beagle stayed here ten days, and in this time I made several pleasant little excursions, chiefly with the object of examining the geological structure of the immediate neighbourhood.
The main points of interest consist, first in some highly fossiliferous strata, belonging to the Devonian or Carboniferous period; secondly, in proofs of a late small rise of the land; and lastly, in a solitary and superficial patch of yellowish limestone
It is not improbable that this one small quarry includes the only remaining record of the vegetation of Van Diemen's Land during one former epoch.
The climate here is damper than in New South Wales, and hence the land is more fertile.
Agriculture flourishes; the cultivated fields look well, and the gardens abound with thriving vegetables and fruit-trees.
Some of the farm-houses, situated in retired spots, had a very attractive appearance.
The general aspect of the vegetation is similar to that of Australia; perhaps it is a little more green and cheerful; and the pasture between the trees rather more abundant.
One day I took a long walk on the side of the bay opposite to the town: I crossed in a steam-boat, two of which are constantly plying backwards and forwards.
The machinery of one of these vessels was entirely manufactured in this colony, which, from its very foundation, then numbered only three and thirty years!
Another day I ascended Mount Wellington; I took with me a guide, for I failed in a first attempt, from the thickness of the wood.
Our guide, however, was a stupid fellow, and conducted us to the southern and damp side of the mountain, where the vegetation was very luxuriant; and where the labour of the ascent, from the number of rotten trunks, was almost as great as on a mountain in
It cost us five and a half hours of hard climbing before we reached the summit.
In many parts the Eucalypti grew to a great size, and composed a noble forest.
In some of the dampest ravines, tree-ferns flourished in an extraordinary manner; I saw one which must have been at least twenty feet high to the base of the fronds, and was in girth exactly six feet.
The fronds forming the most elegant parasols, produced a gloomy shade, like that of the first hour of the night.
The summit of the mountain is broad and flat, and is composed of huge angular masses of naked greenstone.
Its elevation is 3100 feet above the level of the sea.
The day was splendidly clear, and we enjoyed a most extensive view; to the north, the country appeared a mass of wooded mountains, of about the same height with that on which we were standing, and with an equally tame outline: to the south the broken land
After staying some hours on the summit, we found a better way to descend, but did not reach the Beagle till eight o'clock, after a severe day's work.
February 7th.
--The Beagle sailed from Tasmania, and, on the 6th of the ensuing month, reached King George's Sound, situated close to the S. W. corner of Australia.
We stayed there eight days; and we did not during our voyage pass a more dull and uninteresting time.
The country, viewed from an eminence, appears a woody plain, with here and there rounded and partly bare hills of granite protruding.
One day I went out with a party, in hopes of seeing a kangaroo hunt, and walked over a good many miles of country.
Everywhere we found the soil sandy, and very poor; it supported either a coarse vegetation of thin, low brushwood and wiry grass, or a forest of stunted trees.
The scenery resembled that of the high sandstone platform of the Blue Mountains; the Casuarina (a tree somewhat resembling a Scotch fir) is, however, here in greater number, and the Eucalyptus in rather less.
In the open parts there were many grass-trees,--a plant which, in appearance, has some affinity with the palm; but, instead of being surmounted by a crown of noble fronds, it can boast merely of a tuft of very coarse grass-like leaves.
The general bright green colour of the brushwood and other plants, viewed from a distance, seemed to promise fertility.
A single walk, however, was enough to dispel such an illusion; and he who thinks with me will never wish to walk again in so uninviting a country.
One day I accompanied Captain Fitz Roy to Bald Head; the place mentioned by so many navigators, where some imagined that they saw corals, and others that they saw petrified trees, standing in the position in which they had grown.
According to our view, the beds have been formed by the wind having heaped up fine sand, composed of minute rounded particles of shells and corals, during which process branches and roots of trees, together with many land-shells, became enclosed.
The whole then became consolidated by the percolation of calcareous matter; and the cylindrical cavities left by the decaying of the wood, were thus also filled up with a hard pseudo-stalactical stone.
The weather is now wearing away the softer parts, and in consequence the hard casts of the roots and branches of the trees project above the surface, and, in a singularly deceptive manner, resemble the stumps of a dead thicket.
A large tribe of natives, called the White Cockatoo men happened to pay the settlement a visit while we were there.
These men, as well as those of the tribe belonging to King George's Sound, being tempted by the offer of some tubs of rice and sugar, were persuaded to hold a "corrobery," or great dancing-party.
As soon as it grew dark, small fires were lighted, and the men commenced their toilet, which consisted in painting themselves white in spots and lines.
As soon as all was ready, large fires were kept blazing, round which the women and children were collected as spectators; the Cockatoo and King George's men formed two distinct parties, and generally danced in answer to each other.
The dancing consisted in their running either sideways or in Indian file into an open space, and stamping the ground with great force as they marched together.
Their heavy footsteps were accompanied by a kind of grunt, by beating their clubs and spears together, and by various other gesticulations, such as extending their arms and wriggling their bodies.
It was a most rude, barbarous scene, and, to our ideas, without any sort of meaning; but we observed that the black women and children watched it with the greatest pleasure.
Perhaps these dances originally represented actions, such as wars and victories; there was one called the Emu dance, in which each man extended his arm in a bent manner, like the neck of that bird.
In another dance, one man imitated the movements of a kangaroo grazing in the woods, whilst a second crawled up, and pretended to spear him.
When both tribes mingled in the dance, the ground trembled with the heaviness of their steps, and the air resounded with their wild cries.
Every one appeared in high spirits, and the group of nearly naked figures, viewed by the light of the blazing fires, all moving in hideous harmony, formed a perfect display of a festival amongst the lowest barbarians.
In Tierra del Fuego, we have beheld many curious scenes in savage life, but never, I think, one where the natives were in such high spirits, and so perfectly at their ease.
After the dancing was over, the whole party formed a great circle on the ground, and the boiled rice and sugar was distributed, to the delight of all.
After several tedious delays from clouded weather, on the 14th of March, we gladly stood out of King George's Sound on our course to Keeling Island.
Farewell, Australia!
you are a rising child, and doubtless some day will reign a great princess in the South: but you are too great and ambitious for affection, yet not great enough for respect.
I leave your shores without sorrow or regret.
[1] It is remarkable how the same disease is modified in different climates.
At the little island of St. Helena the introduction of scarlet fever is dreaded as a plague.
In some countries, foreigners and natives are as differently affected by certain contagious disorders as if they had been different animals; of which fact some instances have occurred in Chile; and, according to Humboldt, in Mexico (Polit.
Essay, New Spain, vol.
iv.
).
[2] Narrative of Missionary Enterprise, p.
282.
[3] Captain Beechey (chap.
iv.
, vol.
i.
) states that the inhabitants of Pitcairn Island are firmly convinced that after the arrival of every ship they suffer cutaneous and other disorders.
Captain Beechey attributes this to the change of diet during the time of the visit.
Dr. Macculloch (Western Isles, vol.
ii.
p.
32) says: "It is asserted, that on the arrival of a stranger (at St. Kilda) all the inhabitants, in the common phraseology, catch a cold".
Dr. Macculloch considers the whole case, although often previously affirmed, as ludicrous.
He adds, however, that "the question was put by us to the inhabitants who unanimously agreed in the story".
In Vancouver's Voyage, there is a somewhat similar statement with respect to Otaheite.
Dr. Dieffenbach, in a note to his translation of the Journal, states that the same fact is universally believed by the inhabitants of the Chatham Islands, and in parts of New Zealand.
It is impossible that such a belief should have become universal in the northern hemisphere, at the Antipodes, and in the Pacific, without some good foundation.
Humboldt (Polit.
Essay on King of New Spain, vol.
iv.
) says, that the great epidemics of Panama and Callao are "marked" by the arrival of ships from Chile, because the people from that temperate region, first experience the fatal effects of the torrid zones.
I may add, that I have heard it stated in Shropshire, that sheep, which have been imported from vessels, although themselves in a healthy condition, if placed in the same fold with others, frequently produce sickness in the flock.
[4] Travels in Australia, vol.
i.
p.
154.
I must express my obligation to Sir T. Mitchell, for several interesting personal communications on the subject of these great valleys of New South Wales.
[5] I was interested by finding here the hollow conical pitfall of the lion-ant, or some other insect; first a fly fell down the treacherous slope and immediately disappeared; then came a large but unwary ant; its struggles to escape being very violent,
, vol.
i.
p.
425) as being flirted by the insect's tail, were promptly directed against the expected victim.
But the ant enjoyed a better fate than the fly, and escaped the fatal jaws which lay concealed at the base of the conical hollow.
This Australian pitfall was only about half the size of that made by the European lion-ant.
[6] Physical Description of New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land, p.
354.
CHAPTER XX KEELING ISLAND:--CORAL FORMATIONS Keeling Island--Singular appearance--Scanty Flora--Transport of Seeds--Birds and Insects--Ebbing and flowing Springs--Fields of dead Coral--Stones transported in the roots of Trees--Great Crab--Stinging
APRIL 1st.
--We arrived in view of the Keeling or Cocos Islands, situated in the Indian Ocean, and about six hundred miles distant from the coast of Sumatra.
This is one of the lagoon-islands (or atolls) of coral formation, similar to those in the Low Archipelago which we passed near.
When the ship was in the channel at the entrance, Mr. Liesk, an English resident, came off in his boat.
The history of the inhabitants of this place, in as few words as possible, is as follows.
About nine years ago, Mr. Hare, a worthless character, brought from the East Indian archipelago a number of Malay slaves, which now including children, amount to more than a hundred.
Shortly afterwards, Captain Ross, who had before visited these islands in his merchant-ship, arrived from England, bringing with him his family and goods for settlement: along with him came Mr. Liesk, who had been a mate in his vessel.
The Malay slaves soon ran away from the islet on which Mr. Hare was settled, and joined Captain Ross's party.
Mr. Hare upon this was ultimately obliged to leave the place.
The Malays are now nominally in a state of freedom, and certainly are so, as far as regards their personal treatment; but in most other points they are considered as slaves.
From their discontented state, from the repeated removals from islet to islet, and perhaps also from a little mismanagement, things are not very prosperous.
The island has no domestic quadruped, excepting the pig, and the main vegetable production is the cocoa-nut.
The whole prosperity of the place depends on this tree: the only exports being oil from the nut, and the nuts themselves, which are taken to Singapore and Mauritius, where they are chiefly used, when grated, in making curries.
On the cocoa-nut, also, the pigs, which are loaded with fat, almost entirely subsist, as do the ducks and poultry.
Even a huge land-crab is furnished by nature with the means to open and feed on this most useful production.
The ring-formed reef of the lagoon-island is surmounted in the greater part of its length by linear islets.
On the northern or leeward side, there is an opening through which vessels can pass to the anchorage within.
On entering, the scene was very curious and rather pretty; its beauty, however, entirely depended on the brilliancy of the surrounding colours.
The shallow, clear, and still water of the lagoon, resting in its greater part on white sand, is, when illumined by a vertical sun, of the most vivid green.
This brilliant expanse, several miles in width, is on all sides divided, either by a line of snow-white breakers from the dark heaving waters of the ocean, or from the blue vault of heaven by the strips of land, crowned by the level tops of the cocoa-nut
As a white cloud here and there affords a pleasing contrast with the azure sky, so in the lagoon, bands of living coral darken the emerald green water.
The next morning after anchoring, I went on shore on Direction Island.
The strip of dry land is only a few hundred yards in width; on the lagoon side there is a white calcareous beach, the radiation from which under this sultry climate was very oppressive; and on the outer coast, a solid broad flat of coral-rock served to
Excepting near the lagoon, where there is some sand, the land is entirely composed of rounded fragments of coral.
In such a loose, dry, stony soil, the climate of the intertropical regions alone could produce a vigorous vegetation.
On some of the smaller islets, nothing could be more elegant than the manner in which the young and full-grown cocoa-nut trees, without destroying each other's symmetry, were mingled into one wood.
A beach of glittering white sand formed a border to these fairy spots.
I will now give a sketch of the natural history of these islands, which, from its very paucity, possesses a peculiar interest.
The cocoa-nut tree, at first glance, seems to compose the whole wood; there are however, five or six other trees.
One of these grows to a very large size, but from the extremes of softness of its wood, is useless; another sort affords excellent timber for ship-building.
Besides the trees, the number of plants is exceedingly limited, and consists of insignificant weeds.
In my collection, which includes, I believe, nearly the perfect Flora, there are twenty species, without reckoning a moss, lichen, and fungus.
To this number two trees must be added; one of which was not in flower, and the other I only heard of.
The latter is a solitary tree of its kind, and grows near the beach, where, without doubt, the one seed was thrown up by the waves.
A Guilandina also grows on only one of the islets.
I do not include in the above list the sugar-cane, banana, some other vegetables, fruit-trees, and imported grasses.
As the islands consist entirely of coral, and at one time must have existed as mere water-washed reefs, all their terrestrial productions must have been transported here by the waves of the sea.
In accordance with this, the Florula has quite the character of a refuge for the destitute: Professor Henslow informs me that of the twenty species nineteen belong to different genera, and these again to no less than sixteen families!
[1] In Holman's [2] Travels an account is given, on the authority of Mr. A. S. Keating, who resided twelve months on these islands, of the various seeds and other bodies which have been known to have been washed on shore.
"Seeds and plants from Sumatra and Java have been driven up by the surf on the windward side of the islands.
Among them have been found the Kimiri, native of Sumatra and the peninsula of Malacca; the cocoa-nut of Balci, known by its shape and size; the Dadass, which is planted by the Malays with the pepper-vine, the latter intwining round its trunk, and
These are all supposed to have been driven by the N. W. monsoon to the coast of New Holland, and thence to these islands by the S. E. trade-wind.
Large masses of Java teak and Yellow wood have also been found, besides immense trees of red and white cedar, and the blue gumwood of New Holland, in a perfectly sound condition.
All the hardy seeds, such as creepers, retain their germinating power, but the softer kinds, among which is the mangostin, are destroyed in the passage.
Fishing-canoes, apparently from Java, have at times been washed on shore".
It is interesting thus to discover how numerous the seeds are, which, coming from several countries, are drifted over the wide ocean.
Professor Henslow tells me, he believes that nearly all the plants which I brought from these islands, are common littoral species in the East Indian archipelago.
From the direction, however, of the winds and currents, it seems scarcely possible that they could have come here in a direct line.
If, as suggested with much probability by Mr. Keating, they were first carried towards the coast of New Holland, and thence drifted back together with the productions of that country, the seeds, before germinating, must have travelled between 1800 and 2400
Chamisso, [3] when describing the Radack Archipelago, situated in the western part of the Pacific, states that "the sea brings to these islands the seeds and fruits of many trees, most of which have yet not grown here.
The greater part of these seeds appear to have not yet lost the capability of growing".
It is also said that palms and bamboos from somewhere in the torrid zone, and trunks of northern firs, are washed on shore: these firs must have come from an immense distance.
These facts are highly interesting.
It cannot be doubted that if there were land-birds to pick up the seeds when first cast on shore, and a soil better adapted for their growth than the loose blocks of coral, that the most isolated of the lagoon-islands would in time possess a far more
The list of land animals is even poorer than that of the plants.
Some of the islets are inhabited by rats, which were brought in a ship from the Mauritius, wrecked here.
These rats are considered by Mr. Waterhouse as identical with the English kind, but they are smaller, and more brightly coloured.
There are no true land-birds, for a snipe and a rail (Rallus Phillippensis), though living entirely in the dry herbage, belong to the order of Waders.
Birds of this order are said to occur on several of the small low islands in the Pacific.
At Ascension, where there is no land-bird, a rail (Porphyrio simplex) was shot near the summit of the mountain, and it was evidently a solitary straggler.
At Tristan d'Acunha, where, according to Carmichael, there are only two land-birds, there is a coot.
From these facts I believe that the waders, after the innumerable web-footed species, are generally the first colonists of small isolated islands.
I may add, that whenever I noticed birds, not of oceanic species, very far out at sea, they always belonged to this order; and hence they would naturally become the earliest colonists of any remote point of land.
Of reptiles I saw only one small lizard.
Of insects I took pains to collect every kind.
Exclusive of spiders, which were numerous, there were thirteen species.
[4] Of these, one only was a beetle.
A small ant swarmed by thousands under the loose dry blocks of coral, and was the only true insect which was abundant.
Although the productions of the land are thus scanty, if we look to the waters of the surrounding sea, the number of organic beings is indeed infinite.
Chamisso has described [5] the natural history of a lagoon-island in the Radack Archipelago; and it is remarkable how closely its inhabitants, in number and kind, resemble those of Keeling Island.
There is one lizard and two waders, namely, a snipe and curlew.
Of plants there are nineteen species, including a fern; and some of these are the same with those growing here, though on a spot so immensely remote, and in a different ocean.
The long strips of land, forming the linear islets, have been raised only to that height to which the surf can throw fragments of coral, and the wind heap up calcareous sand.
The solid flat of coral rock on the outside, by its breadth, breaks the first violence of the waves, which otherwise, in a day, would sweep away these islets and all their productions.
The ocean and the land seem here struggling for mastery: although terra firma has obtained a footing, the denizens of the water think their claim at least equally good.
In every part one meets hermit crabs of more than one species, [6] carrying on their backs the shells which they have stolen from the neighbouring beach.
Overhead, numerous gannets, frigate-birds, and terns, rest on the trees; and the wood, from the many nests and from the smell of the atmosphere, might be called a sea-rookery.
The gannets, sitting on their rude nests, gaze at one with a stupid yet angry air.
The noddies, as their name expresses, are silly little creatures.
But there is one charming bird: it is a small, snow-white tern, which smoothly hovers at the distance of a few feet above one's head, its large black eye scanning, with quiet curiosity, your expression.
Little imagination is required to fancy that so light and delicate a body must be tenanted by some wandering fairy spirit.
Sunday, April 3rd.
--After service I accompanied Captain Fitz Roy to the settlement, situated at the distance of some miles, on the point of an islet thickly covered with tall cocoa-nut trees.
Captain Ross and Mr. Liesk live in a large barn-like house open at both ends, and lined with mats made of woven bark.
The houses of the Malays are arranged along the shore of the lagoon.
The whole place had rather a desolate aspect, for there were no gardens to show the signs of care and cultivation.
The natives belong to different islands in the East Indian archipelago, but all speak the same language: we saw the inhabitants of Borneo, Celebes, Java, and Sumatra.
In colour they resemble the Tahitians, from whom they do not widely differ in features.
Some of the women, however, show a good deal of the Chinese character.
I liked both their general expressions and the sound of their voices.
They appeared poor, and their houses were destitute of furniture; but it was evident, from the plumpness of the little children, that cocoa-nuts and turtle afford no bad sustenance.
On this island the wells are situated, from which ships obtain water.
At first sight it appears not a little remarkable that the fresh water should regularly ebb and flow with the tides; and it has even been imagined, that sand has the power of filtering the salt from the sea-water.
These ebbing wells are common on some of the low islands in the West Indies.
The compressed sand, or porous coral rock, is permeated like a sponge with the salt water, but the rain which falls on the surface must sink to the level of the surrounding sea, and must accumulate there, displacing an equal bulk of the salt water.
As the water in the lower part of the great sponge-like coral mass rises and falls with the tides, so will the water near the surface; and this will keep fresh, if the mass be sufficiently compact to prevent much mechanical admixture; but where the land
After dinner we stayed to see a curious half superstitious scene acted by the Malay women.
A large wooden spoon dressed in garments, and which had been carried to the grave of a dead man, they pretend becomes inspired at the full of the moon, and will dance and jump about.
After the proper preparations, the spoon, held by two women, became convulsed, and danced in good time to the song of the surrounding children and women.
It was a most foolish spectacle; but Mr. Liesk maintained that many of the Malays believed in its spiritual movements.
The dance did not commence till the moon had risen, and it was well worth remaining to behold her bright orb so quietly shining through the long arms of the cocoa-nut trees as they waved in the evening breeze.
These scenes of the tropics are in themselves so delicious, that they almost equal those dearer ones at home, to which we are bound by each best feeling of the mind.
The next day I employed myself in examining the very interesting, yet simple structure and origin of these islands.
The water being unusually smooth, I waded over the outer flat of dead rock as far as the living mounds of coral, on which the swell of the open sea breaks.
In some of the gullies and hollows there were beautiful green and other coloured fishes, and the form and tints of many of the zoophytes were admirable.
It is excusable to grow enthusiastic over the infinite numbers of organic beings with which the sea of the tropics, so prodigal of life, teems; yet I must confess I think those naturalists who have described, in well-known words, the submarine grottoes
April 6th.
--I accompanied Captain Fitz Roy to an island at the head of the lagoon: the channel was exceedingly intricate, winding through fields of delicately branched corals.
We saw several turtle and two boats were then employed in catching them.
The water was so clear and shallow, that although at first a turtle quickly dives out of sight, yet in a canoe or boat under sail, the pursuers after no very long chase come up to it.
A man standing ready in the bow, at this moment dashes through the water upon the turtle's back; then clinging with both hands by the shell of its neck, he is carried away till the animal becomes exhausted and is secured.
It was quite an interesting chase to see the two boats thus doubling about, and the men dashing head foremost into the water trying to seize their prey.
Captain Moresby informs me that in the Chagos archipelago in this same ocean, the natives, by a horrible process, take the shell from the back of the living turtle.
"It is covered with burning charcoal, which causes the outer shell to curl upwards, it is then forced off with a knife, and before it becomes cold flattened between boards.
After this barbarous process the animal is suffered to regain its native element, where, after a certain time, a new shell is formed; it is, however, too thin to be of any service, and the animal always appears languishing and sickly".
When we arrived at the head of the lagoon, we crossed a narrow islet, and found a great surf breaking on the windward coast.
I can hardly explain the reason, but there is to my mind much grandeur in the view of the outer shores of these lagoon-islands.
There is a simplicity in the barrier-like beach, the margin of green bushes and tall cocoa-nuts, the solid flat of dead coral-rock, strewed here and there with great loose fragments, and the line of furious breakers, all rounding away towards either hand.
The ocean throwing its waters over the broad reef appears an invincible, all-powerful enemy; yet we see it resisted, and even conquered, by means which at first seem most weak and inefficient.
It is not that the ocean spares the rock of coral; the great fragments scattered over the reef, and heaped on the beach, whence the tall cocoa-nut springs, plainly bespeak the unrelenting power of the waves.
Nor are any periods of repose granted.
The long swell caused by the gentle but steady action of the trade-wind, always blowing in one direction over a wide area, causes breakers, almost equalling in force those during a gale of wind in the temperate regions, and which never cease to rage.
It is impossible to behold these waves without feeling a conviction that an island, though built of the hardest rock, let it be porphyry, granite, or quartz, would ultimately yield and be demolished by such an irresistible power.
Yet these low, insignificant coral-islets stand and are victorious: for here another power, as an antagonist, takes part in the contest.
The organic forces separate the atoms of carbonate of lime, one by one, from the foaming breakers, and unite them into a symmetrical structure.
Let the hurricane tear up its thousand huge fragments; yet what will that tell against the accumulated labour of myriads of architects at work night and day, month after month?
Thus do we see the soft and gelatinous body of a polypus, through the agency of the vital laws, conquering the great mechanical power of the waves of an ocean which neither the art of man nor the inanimate works of nature could successfully resist.
We did not return on board till late in the evening, for we stayed a long time in the lagoon, examining the fields of coral and the gigantic shells of the chama, into which, if a man were to put his hand, he would not, as long as the animal lived, be able
Near the head of the lagoon I was much surprised to find a wide area, considerably more than a mile square, covered with a forest of delicately branching corals, which, though standing upright, were all dead and rotten.
At first I was quite at a loss to understand the cause afterwards it occurred to me that it was owing to the following rather curious combination of circumstances.
It should, however, first be stated, that corals are not able to survive even a short exposure in the air to the sun's rays, so that their upward limit of growth is determined by that of lowest water at spring tides.
It appears, from some old charts, that the long island to windward was formerly separated by wide channels into several islets; this fact is likewise indicated by the trees being younger on these portions.
Under the former condition of the reef, a strong breeze, by throwing more water over the barrier, would tend to raise the level of the lagoon.
Now it acts in a directly contrary manner; for the water within the lagoon not only is not increased by currents from the outside, but is itself blown outwards by the force of the wind.
Hence it is observed, that the tide near the head of the lagoon does not rise so high during a strong breeze as it does when it is calm.
This difference of level, although no doubt very small, has, I believe, caused the death of those coral-groves, which under the former and more open condition of the outer reef has attained the utmost possible limit of upward growth.
A few miles north of Keeling there is another small atoll, the lagoon of which is nearly filled up with coral-mud.
Captain Ross found embedded in the conglomerate on the outer coast, a well-rounded fragment of greenstone, rather larger than a man's head: he and the men with him were so much surprised at this, that they brought it away and preserved it as a curiosity.
The occurrence of this one stone, where every other particle of matter is calcareous, certainly is very puzzling.
The island has scarcely ever been visited, nor is it probable that a ship had been wrecked there.
From the absence of any better explanation, I came to the conclusion that it must have come entangled in the roots of some large tree: when, however, I considered the great distance from the nearest land, the combination of chances against a stone thus
It was therefore with great interest that I found Chamisso, the justly distinguished naturalist who accompanied Kotzebue, stating that the inhabitants of the Radack archipelago, a group of lagoon-islands in the midst of the Pacific, obtained stones for
It will be evident that this must have happened several times, since laws have been established that such stones belong to the chief, and a punishment is inflicted on any one who attempts to steal them.
When the isolated position of these small islands in the midst of a vast ocean--their great distance from any land excepting that of coral formation, attested by the value which the inhabitants, who are such bold navigators, attach to a stone of any kind,
Stones may often be thus carried; and if the island on which they are stranded is constructed of any other substance besides coral, they would scarcely attract attention, and their origin at least would never be guessed.
Moreover, this agency may long escape discovery from the probability of trees, especially those loaded with stones, floating beneath the surface.
In the channels of Tierra del Fuego large quantities of drift timber are cast upon the beach, yet it is extremely rare to meet a tree swimming on the water.
These facts may possibly throw light on single stones, whether angular or rounded, occasionally found embedded in fine sedimentary masses.
During another day I visited West Islet, on which the vegetation was perhaps more luxuriant than on any other.
The cocoa-nut trees generally grow separate, but here the young ones flourished beneath their tall parents, and formed with their long and curved fronds the most shady arbours.
Those alone who have tried it, know how delicious it is to be seated in such shade, and drink the cool pleasant fluid of the cocoa-nut.
In this island there is a large bay-like space, composed of the finest white sand: it is quite level and is only covered by the tide at high water; from this large bay smaller creeks penetrate the surrounding woods.
To see a field of glittering white sand, representing water, with the cocoa-nut trees extending their tall and waving trunks around the margin, formed a singular and very pretty view.
I have before alluded to a crab which lives on the cocoa-nuts; it is very common on all parts of the dry land, and grows to a monstrous size: it is closely allied or identical with the Birgos latro.
The front pair of legs terminate in very strong and heavy pincers, and the last pair are fitted with others weaker and much narrower.
It would at first be thought quite impossible for a crab to open a strong cocoa-nut covered with the husk; but Mr. Liesk assures me that he has repeatedly seen this effected.
The crab begins by tearing the husk, fibre by fibre, and always from that end under which the three eye-holes are situated; when this is completed, the crab commences hammering with its heavy claws on one of the eye-holes till an opening is made.
Then turning round its body, by the aid of its posterior and narrow pair of pincers, it extracts the white albuminous substance.
I think this is as curious a case of instinct as ever I heard of, and likewise of adaptation in structure between two objects apparently so remote from each other in the scheme of nature, as a crab and a cocoa-nut tree.
The Birgos is diurnal in its habits; but every night it is said to pay a visit to the sea, no doubt for the purpose of moistening its branchiae.
The young are likewise hatched, and live for some time, on the coast.
These crabs inhabit deep burrows, which they hollow out beneath the roots of trees; and where they accumulate surprising quantities of the picked fibres of the cocoa-nut husk, on which they rest as on a bed.
The Malays sometimes take advantage of this, and collect the fibrous mass to use as junk.
These crabs are very good to eat; moreover, under the tail of the larger ones there is a mass of fat, which, when melted, sometimes yields as much as a quart bottle full of limpid oil.
It has been stated by some authors that the Birgos crawls up the cocoa-nut trees for the purpose of stealing the nuts: I very much doubt the possibility of this; but with the Pandanus [8] the task would be very much easier.
I was told by Mr. Liesk that on these islands the Birgos lives only on the nuts which have fallen to the ground.
Captain Moresby informs me that this crab inhabits the Chagos and Seychelle groups, but not the neighbouring Maldiva archipelago.
It formerly abounded at Mauritius, but only a few small ones are now found there.
In the Pacific, this species, or one with closely allied habits, is said [9] to inhabit a single coral island, north of the Society group.
To show the wonderful strength of the front pair of pincers, I may mention, that Captain Moresby confined one in a strong tin-box, which had held biscuits, the lid being secured with wire; but the crab turned down the edges and escaped.
In turning down the edges, it actually punched many small holes quite through the tin!
I was a good deal surprised by finding two species of coral of the genus Millepora (M.
complanata and alcicornis), possessed of the power of stinging.
The stony branches or plates, when taken fresh from the water, have a harsh feel and are not slimy, although possessing a strong and disagreeable smell.
The stinging property seems to vary in different specimens: when a piece was pressed or rubbed on the tender skin of the face or arm, a pricking sensation was usually caused, which came on after the interval of a second, and lasted only for a few minutes.
One day, however, by merely touching my face with one of the branches, pain was instantaneously caused; it increased as usual after a few seconds, and remaining sharp for some minutes, was perceptible for half an hour afterwards.
The sensation was as bad as that from a nettle, but more like that caused by the Physalia or Portuguese man-of-war.
Little red spots were produced on the tender skin of the arm, which appeared as if they would have formed watery pustules, but did not.
M. Quoy mentions this case of the Millepora; and I have heard of stinging corals in the West Indies.
Many marine animals seem to have this power of stinging: besides the Portuguese man-of-war, many jelly-fish, and the Aplysia or sea-slug of the Cape de Verd Islands, it is stated in the voyage of the Astrolabe, that an Actinia or sea-anemone, as well as a
In the East Indian sea, a stinging sea-weed is said to be found.
Two species of fish, of the genus Scarus, which are common here, exclusively feed on coral: both are coloured of a splendid bluish-green, one living invariably in the lagoon, and the other amongst the outer breakers.
Mr. Liesk assured us, that he had repeatedly seen whole shoals grazing with their strong bony jaws on the tops of the coral branches: I opened the intestines of several, and found them distended with yellowish calcareous sandy mud.
The slimy disgusting Holuthuriae (allied to our star-fish), which the Chinese gourmands are so fond of, also feed largely, as I am informed by Dr. Allan, on corals; and the bony apparatus within their bodies seems well adapted for this end.
These Holuthuriae, the fish, the numerous burrowing shells, and nereidous worms, which perforate every block of dead coral, must be very efficient agents in producing the fine white mud which lies at the bottom and on the shores of the lagoon.
A portion, however, of this mud, which when wet resembled pounded chalk, was found by Professor Ehrenberg to be partly composed of siliceous-shielded infusoria.
April 12th.
--In the morning we stood out of the lagoon on our passage to the Isle of France.
I am glad we have visited these islands: such formations surely rank high amongst the wonderful objects of this world.
Captain Fitz Roy found no bottom with a line 7200 feet in length, at the distance of only 2200 yards from the shore; hence this island forms a lofty submarine mountain, with sides steeper even than those of the most abrupt volcanic cone.
The saucer-shaped summit is nearly ten miles across; and every single atom, [10] from the least particle to the largest fragment of rock, in this great pile, which however is small compared with very many other lagoon-islands, bears the stamp of having
We feel surprise when travellers tell us of the vast dimensions of the Pyramids and other great ruins, but how utterly insignificant are the greatest of these, when compared to these mountains of stone accumulated by the agency of various minute and tender
This is a wonder which does not at first strike the eye of the body, but, after reflection, the eye of reason.
I will now give a very brief account of the three great classes of coral-reefs; namely, Atolls, Barrier, and Fringing-reefs, and will explain my views [11] on their formation.
Almost every voyager who has crossed the Pacific has expressed his unbounded astonishment at the lagoon-islands, or as I shall for the future call them by their Indian name of atolls, and has attempted some explanation.
Even as long ago as the year 1605, Pyrard de Laval well exclaimed, "C'est [picture] une merveille de voir chacun de ces atollons, environne d'un grand banc de pierre tout autour, n'y ayant point d'artifice humain".
The accompanying sketch of Whitsunday Island in the Pacific, copied from, Capt.
Beechey's admirable Voyage, gives but a faint idea of the singular aspect of an atoll: it is one of the smallest size, and has its narrow islets united together in a ring.
The immensity of the ocean, the fury of the breakers, contrasted with the lowness of the land and the smoothness of the bright green water within the lagoon, can hardly be imagined without having been seen.
The earlier voyagers fancied that the coral-building animals instinctively built up their great circles to afford themselves protection in the inner parts; but so far is this from the truth, that those massive kinds, to whose growth on the exposed outer
Moreover, on this view, many species of distinct genera and families are supposed to combine for one end; and of such a combination, not a single instance can be found in the whole of nature.
The theory that has been most generally received is, that atolls are based on submarine craters; but when we consider the form and size of some, the number, proximity, and relative positions of others, this idea loses its plausible character: thus Suadiva
This theory, moreover, is totally inapplicable to the northern Maldiva atolls in the Indian Ocean (one of which is 88 miles in length, and between 10 and 20 in breadth), for they are not bounded like ordinary atolls by narrow reefs, but by a vast number of
A third and better theory was advanced by Chamisso, who thought that from the corals growing more vigorously where exposed to the open sea, as undoubtedly is the case, the outer edges would grow up from the general foundation before any other part, and
But we shall immediately see, that in this, as well as in the crater-theory, a most important consideration has been overlooked, namely, on what have the reef-building corals, which cannot live at a great depth, based their massive structures?
Numerous soundings were carefully taken by Captain Fitz Roy on the steep outside of Keeling atoll, and it was found that within ten fathoms, the prepared tallow at the bottom of the lead, invariably came up marked with the impression of living corals, but
From these observations, confirmed by many others, it may be safely inferred that the utmost depth at which corals can construct reefs is between 20 and 30 fathoms.
Now there are enormous areas in the Pacific and Indian Ocean, in which every single island is of coral formation, and is raised only to that height to which the waves can throw up fragments, and the winds pile up sand.
Thus Radack group of atolls is an irregular square, 520 miles long and 240 broad; the Low Archipelago is elliptic-formed, 840 miles in its longer, and 420 in its shorter axis: there are other small groups and single low islands between these two
Again, in the Indian Ocean there is a space of ocean 1500 miles in length, including three archipelagoes, in which every island is low and of coral formation.
From the fact of the reef-building corals not living at great depths, it is absolutely certain that throughout these vast areas, wherever there is now an atoll, a foundation must have originally existed within a depth of from 20 to 30 fathoms from the
It is improbable in the highest degree that broad, lofty, isolated, steep-sided banks of sediment, arranged in groups and lines hundreds of leagues in length, could have been deposited in the central and profoundest parts of the Pacific and Indian Oceans,
It is equally improbable that the elevatory forces should have uplifted throughout the above vast areas, innumerable great rocky banks within 20 to 30 fathoms, or 120 to 180 feet, of the surface of the sea, and not one single point above that level; for
If then the foundations, whence the atoll-building corals sprang, were not formed of sediment, and if they were not lifted up to the required level, they must of necessity have subsided into it; and this at once solves the difficulty.
For as mountain after mountain, and island after island, slowly sank beneath the water, fresh bases would be successively afforded for the growth of the corals.
It is impossible here to enter into all the necessary details, but I venture to defy [12] any one to explain in any other manner how it is possible that numerous islands should be distributed throughout vast areas--all the islands being low--all being
Before explaining how atoll-formed reefs acquire their peculiar structure, we must turn to the second great class, namely, Barrier-reefs.
These either extend in straight lines in front of the shores of a continent or of a large island, or they encircle smaller islands; in both cases, being separated from the land by a broad and rather deep channel of water, analogous to the lagoon within an
It is remarkable how little attention has been paid to encircling barrier-reefs; yet they are truly wonderful structures.
The following sketch represents part of the barrier encircling the island of Bolabola in the Pacific, as seen from one of the central peaks.
In this instance the whole line of reef has been converted into land; but usually a snow-white line of great breakers, with only here and there a single low islet crowned with cocoa-nut trees, divides the dark heaving waters of the ocean from the
And the quiet waters of this channel generally bathe a fringe of low alluvial soil, loaded with the most beautiful productions of the tropics, and lying at the foot of the wild, abrupt, central mountains.
Encircling barrier-reefs are of all sizes, from three miles to no less than forty-four miles in diameter; and that which fronts one side, and encircles both ends, of New Caledonia, is 400 miles long.
Each reef includes one, two, or several rocky islands of various heights; and in one instance, even as many as twelve separate islands.
The reef runs at a greater or less distance from the included land; in the Society archipelago generally from one to three or four miles; but at Hogoleu the reef is 20 miles on the southern side, and 14 miles on the opposite or northern side, from the
The depth within the lagoon-channel also varies much; from 10 to 30 fathoms may be taken as an average; but at Vanikoro there are spaces no less than 56 fathoms or 363 feet deep.
Internally the reef either slopes gently into the lagoon-channel, or ends in a perpendicular wall sometimes between two and three hundred feet under water in height: externally the reef rises, like an atoll, with extreme abruptness out of the profound
What can be more singular than these structures?
We see [picture] an island, which may be compared to a castle situated on the summit of a lofty submarine mountain, protected by a great wall of coral-rock, always steep externally and sometimes internally, with a broad level summit, here and there
As far as the actual reef of coral is concerned, there is not the smallest difference, in general size, outline, grouping, and even in quite trifling details of structure, between a barrier and an atoll.
The geographer Balbi has well remarked, that an encircled island is an atoll with high land rising out of its lagoon; remove the land from within, and a perfect atoll is left.
But what has caused these reefs to spring up at such great distances from the shores of the included islands?
It cannot be that the corals will not grow close to the land; for the shores within the lagoon-channel, when not surrounded by alluvial soil, are often fringed by living reefs; and we shall presently see that there is a whole class, which I have called
Again, on what have the reef-building corals, which cannot live at great depths, based their encircling structures?
This is a great apparent difficulty, analogous to that in the case of atolls, which has generally been overlooked.
It will be perceived more clearly by inspecting the following sections which are real ones, taken in north and south lines, through the islands with their barrier-reefs, of Vanikoro, Gambier, and Maurua; and they are laid down, both vertically and
It should be observed that the sections might have been taken in any direction through these islands, or through [picture] many other encircled islands, and the general features would have been the same.
Now, bearing in mind that reef-building coral cannot live at a greater depth than from 20 to 30 fathoms, and that the scale is so small that the plummets on the right hand show a depth of 200 fathoms, on what are these barrier-reefs based?
Are we to suppose that each island is surrounded by a collar-like submarine ledge of rock, or by a great bank of sediment, ending abruptly where the reef ends?
If the sea had formerly eaten deeply into the islands, before they were protected by the reefs, thus having left a shallow ledge round them under water, the present shores would have been invariably bounded by great precipices, but this is most rarely the
Moreover, on this notion, it is not possible to explain why the corals should have sprung up, like a wall, from the extreme outer margin of the ledge, often leaving a broad space of water within, too deep for the growth of corals.
The accumulation of a wide bank of sediment all round these islands, and generally widest where the included islands are smallest, is highly improbable, considering their exposed positions in the central and deepest parts of the ocean.
In the case of the barrier-reef of New Caledonia, which extends for 150 miles beyond the northern point of the islands, in the same straight line with which it fronts the west coast, it is hardly possible to believe that a bank of sediment could thus have
Finally, if we look to other oceanic islands of about the same height and of similar geological constitution, but not encircled by coral-reefs, we may in vain search for so trifling a circumambient depth as 30 fathoms, except quite near to their shores;
On what then, I repeat, are these barrier reefs based?
Why, with their wide and deep moat-like channels, do they stand so far from the included land?
We shall soon see how easily these difficulties disappear.
We come now to our third class of Fringing-reefs, which will require a very short notice.
Where the land slopes abruptly under water, these reefs are only a few yards in width, forming a mere ribbon or fringe round the shores: where the land slopes gently under the water the reef extends further, sometimes even as much as a mile from the land;
In fact, the reefs extend only to that distance from the shore, at which a foundation within the requisite depth from 20 to 30 fathoms is found.
As far as the actual reef is concerned, there is no essential difference between it and that forming a barrier or an atoll: it is, however, generally of less width, and consequently few islets have been formed on it.
From the corals growing more vigorously on the outside, and from the noxious effect of the sediment washed inwards, the outer edge of the reef is the highest part, and between it and the land there is generally a shallow sandy channel a few feet in depth.
Where banks or sediments have accumulated near to the surface, as in parts of the West Indies, they sometimes become fringed with corals, and hence in some degree resemble lagoon-islands or atolls, in the same manner as fringing-reefs, surrounding gently
No theory on the formation of coral-reefs can be considered satisfactory which does not include the three great [picture] classes.
We have seen that we are driven to believe in the subsidence of those vast areas, interspersed with low islands, of which not one rises above the height to which the wind and waves can throw up matter, and yet are constructed by animals requiring a
Let us then take an island surrounded by fringing-reefs, which offer no difficulty in their structure; and let this island with its reefs, represented by the unbroken lines in the woodcut, slowly subside.
Now, as the island sinks down, either a few feet at a time or quite insensibly, we may safely infer, from what is known of the conditions favourable to the growth of coral, that the living masses, bathed by the surf on the margin of the reef, will soon
The water, however, will encroach little by little on the shore, the island becoming lower and smaller, and the space between the inner edge of the reef and the beach proportionately broader.
A section of the reef and island in this state, after a subsidence of several hundred feet, is given by the dotted lines.
Coral islets are supposed to have been formed on the reef; and a ship is anchored in the lagoon-channel.
This channel will be more or less deep, according to the rate of subsidence, to the amount of sediment accumulated in it, and to the growth of the delicately branched corals which can live there.
The section in this state resembles in every respect one drawn through an encircled island: in fact, it is a real section (on the scale of .
517 of an inch to a mile) through Bolabola in the Pacific.
We can now at once see why encircling barrier-reefs stand so far from the shores which they front.
We can also perceive, that a line drawn perpendicularly down from the outer edge of the new reef, to the foundation of solid rock beneath the old fringing-reef, will exceed by as many feet as there have been feet of subsidence, that small limit of depth at
Thus the difficulty on this head, which appeared so great, disappears.
If, instead of an island, we had taken the shore of a continent fringed with reefs, and had imagined it to have subsided, a great straight barrier, like that of Australia or New Caledonia, separated from the land by a wide and deep channel, would evidently
Let us take our new encircling barrier-reef, of which the section is now represented by unbroken lines, and which, as I have said, is a real section through Bolabola, and let it go on subsiding.
As the barrier-reef slowly sinks down, the corals will go on vigorously growing upwards; but as the island sinks, the water will gain inch by inch on the shore--the separate mountains first forming separate islands within [picture] one great reef--and
The instant this takes place, a perfect atoll is formed: I have said, remove the high land from within an encircling barrier-reef, and an atoll is left, and the land has been removed.
We can now perceive how it comes that atolls, having sprung from encircling barrier-reefs, resemble them in general size, form, in the manner in which they are grouped together, and in their arrangement in single or double lines; for they may be called
We can further see how it arises that the atolls in the Pacific and Indian Oceans extend in lines parallel to the generally prevailing strike of the high islands and great coast-lines of those oceans.
I venture, therefore, to affirm, that on the theory of the upward growth of the corals during the sinking of the land, [13] all the leading features in those wonderful structures, the lagoon-islands or atolls, which have so long excited the attention of
It may be asked, whether I can offer any direct evidence of the subsidence of barrier-reefs or atolls; but it must be borne in mind how difficult it must ever be to detect a movement, the tendency of which is to hide under water the part affected.
Nevertheless, at Keeling atoll I observed on all sides of the lagoon old cocoa-nut trees undermined and falling; and in one place the foundation-posts of a shed, which the inhabitants asserted had stood seven years before just above high-water mark, but
At Vanikoro, the lagoon-channel is remarkably deep, scarcely any alluvial soil has accumulated at the foot of the lofty included mountains, and remarkably few islets have been formed by the heaping of fragments and sand on the wall-like barrier reef; these
In the Society archipelago, on the other hand, where the lagoon-channels are almost choked up, where much low alluvial land has accumulated, and where in some cases long islets have been formed on the barrier-reefs--facts all showing that the islands have
In these coral formations, where the land and water seem struggling for mastery, it must be ever difficult to decide between the effects of a change in the set of the tides and of a slight subsidence: that many of these reefs and atolls are subject to
The inhabitants of parts of the Maldiva archipelago know the date of the first formation of some islets; in other parts, the corals are now flourishing on water-washed reefs, where holes made for graves attest the former existence of inhabited land.
It is difficult to believe in frequent changes in the tidal currents of an open ocean; whereas, we have in the earthquakes recorded by the natives on some atolls, and in the great fissures observed on other atolls, plain evidence of changes and
It is evident, on our theory, that coasts merely fringed by reefs cannot have subsided to any perceptible amount; and therefore they must, since the growth of their corals, either have remained stationary or have been upheaved.
Now, it is remarkable how generally it can be shown, by the presence of upraised organic remains, that the fringed islands have been elevated: and so far, this is indirect evidence in favour of our theory.
I was particularly struck with this fact, when I found, to my surprise, that the descriptions given by MM.
Quoy and Gaimard were applicable, not to reefs in general as implied by them, but only to those of the fringing class; my surprise, however, ceased when I afterwards found that, by a strange chance, all the several islands visited by these eminent
Not only the grand features in the structure of barrier-reefs and of atolls, and to their likeness to each other in form, size, and other characters, are explained on the theory of subsidence--which theory we are independently forced to admit in the very
I will give only a few instances.
In barrier-reefs it has long been remarked with surprise, that the passages through the reef exactly face valleys in the included land, even in cases where the reef is separated from the land by a lagoon-channel so wide and so much deeper than the actual
Now, every reef of the fringing class is breached by a narrow gateway in front of the smallest rivulet, even if dry during the greater part of the year, for the mud, sand, or gravel, occasionally washed down kills the corals on which it is deposited.
Consequently, when an island thus fringed subsides, though most of the narrow gateways will probably become closed by the outward and upward growth of the corals, yet any that are not closed (and some must always be kept open by the sediment and impure
We can easily see how an island fronted only on one side, or on one side with one end or both ends encircled by barrier-reefs, might after long-continued subsidence be converted either into a single wall-like reef, or into an atoll with a great straight
As the reef-building corals require food, are preyed upon by other animals, are killed by sediment, cannot adhere to a loose bottom, and may be easily carried down to a depth whence they cannot spring up again, we need feel no surprise at the reefs both of
The great barrier of New Caledonia is thus imperfect and broken in many parts; hence, after long subsidence, this great reef would not produce one great atoll 400 miles in length, but a chain or archipelago of atolls, of very nearly the same dimension with
Moreover, in an atoll once breached on opposite sides, from the likelihood of the oceanic and tidal currents passing straight through the breaches, it is extremely improbable that the corals, especially during continued subsidence, would ever be able again
In the Maldiva archipelago there are distinct atolls so related to each other in position, and separated by channels either unfathomable or very deep (the channel between Ross and Ari atolls is 150 fathoms, and that between the north and south Nillandoo
And in this same archipelago, Mahlos-Mahdoo atoll is divided by a bifurcating channel from 100 to 132 fathoms in depth, in such a manner, that it is scarcely possible to say whether it ought strictly to be called three separate atolls, or one great atoll
I will not enter on many more details; but I must remark that the curious structure of the northern Maldiva atolls receives (taking into consideration the free entrance of the sea through their broken margins) a simple explanation in the upward and outward
I cannot refrain from once again remarking on the singularity of these complex structures--a great sandy and generally concave disk rises abruptly from the unfathomable ocean, with its central expanse studded, and its edge symmetrically bordered with oval
One more point in detail: as in the two neighbouring archipelagoes corals flourish in one and not in the other, and as so many conditions before enumerated must affect their existence, it would be an inexplicable fact if, during the changes to which earth,
And as by our theory the areas including atolls and barrier-reefs are subsiding, we ought occasionally to find reefs both dead and submerged.
In all reefs, owing to the sediment being washed out of the lagoon-channel to leeward, that side is least favourable to the long-continued vigorous growth of the corals; hence dead portions of reef not unfrequently occur on the leeward side; and these,
The Chagos group appears from some cause, possibly from the subsidence having been too rapid, at present to be much less favourably circumstanced for the growth of reefs than formerly: one atoll has a portion of its marginal reef, nine miles in length,
It is remarkable that in all these cases, the dead reefs and portions of reef lie at nearly the same depth, namely, from six to eight fathoms beneath the surface, as if they had been carried down by one uniform movement.
One of these "half-drowned atolls," so called by Capt.
Moresby (to whom I am indebted for much invaluable information), is of vast size, namely, ninety nautical miles across in one direction, and seventy miles in another line; and is in many respects eminently curious.
As by our theory it follows that new atolls will generally be formed in each new area of subsidence, two weighty objections might have been raised, namely, that atolls must be increasing indefinitely in number; and secondly, that in old areas of subsidence
Thus have we traced the history of these great rings of coral-rock, from their first origin through their normal changes, and through the occasional accidents of their existence, to their death and final obliteration.
In my volume on "Coral Formations" I have published a map, in which I have coloured all the atolls dark-blue, the barrier-reefs pale-blue, and the fringing reefs red.
These latter reefs have been formed whilst the land has been stationary, or, as appears from the frequent presence of upraised organic remains, whilst it has been slowly rising: atolls and barrier-reefs, on the other hand, have grown up during the directly
Now in this map we see that the reefs tinted pale and dark-blue, which have been produced by the same order of movement, as a general rule manifestly stand near each other.
Again we see, that the areas with the two blue tints are of wide extent; and that they lie separate from extensive lines of coast coloured red, both of which circumstances might naturally have been inferred, on the theory of the nature of the reefs having
It deserves notice that in more than one instance where single red and blue circles approach near each other, I can show that there have been oscillations of level; for in such cases the red or fringed circles consist of atolls, originally by our theory
Authors have noticed with surprise, that although atolls are the commonest coral-structures throughout some enormous oceanic tracts, they are entirely absent in other seas, as in the West Indies: we can now at once perceive the cause, for where there has
The larger areas, coloured red and blue, are all elongated; and between the two colours there is a degree of rude alternation, as if the rising of one had balanced the sinking of the other.
Taking into consideration the proofs of recent elevation both on the fringed coasts and on some others (for instance, in South America) where there are no reefs, we are led to conclude that the great continents are for the most part rising areas: and from
The East Indian archipelago, the most broken land in the world, is in most parts an area of elevation, but surrounded and penetrated, probably in more lines than one, by narrow areas of subsidence.
I have marked with vermilion spots all the many known active volcanos within the limits of this same map.
Their entire absence from every one of the great subsiding areas, coloured either pale or dark blue, is most striking and not less so is the coincidence of the chief volcanic chains with the parts coloured red, which we are led to conclude have either long
Although a few of the vermilion spots occur within no great distance of single circles tinted blue, yet not one single active volcano is situated within several hundred miles of an archipelago, or even small group of atolls.
It is, therefore, a striking fact that in the Friendly archipelago, which consists of a group of atolls upheaved and since partially worn down, two volcanos, and perhaps more, are historically known to have been in action.
On the other hand, although most of the islands in the Pacific which are encircled by barrier-reefs, are of volcanic origin, often with the remnants of craters still distinguishable, not one of them is known to have ever been in eruption.
Hence in these cases it would appear, that volcanos burst forth into action and become extinguished on the same spots, accordingly as elevatory or subsiding movements prevail there.
Numberless facts could be adduced to prove that upraised organic remains are common wherever there are active volcanos; but until it could be shown that in areas of subsidence, volcanos were either absent or inactive, the inference, however probable in
But now, I think, we may freely admit this important deduction.
Taking a final view of the map, and bearing in mind the statements made with respect to the upraised organic remains, we must feel astonished at the vastness of the areas, which have suffered changes in level either downwards or upwards, within a period
It would appear also, that the elevatory and subsiding movements follow nearly the same laws.
Throughout the spaces interspersed with atolls, where not a single peak of high land has been left above the level of the sea, the sinking must have been immense in amount.
The sinking, moreover, whether continuous, or recurrent with intervals sufficiently long for the corals again to bring up their living edifices to the surface, must necessarily have been extremely slow.
This conclusion is probably the most important one which can be deduced from the study of coral formations;--and it is one which it is difficult to imagine how otherwise could ever have been arrived at.
Nor can I quite pass over the probability of the former existence of large archipelagoes of lofty islands, where now only rings of coral-rock scarcely break the open expanse of the sea, throwing some light on the distribution of the inhabitants of the
The reef-constructing corals have indeed reared and preserved wonderful memorials of the subterranean oscillations of level; we see in each barrier-reef a proof that the land has there subsided, and in each atoll a monument over an island now lost.
We may thus, like unto a geologist who had lived his ten thousand years and kept a record of the passing changes, gain some insight into the great system by which the surface of this globe has been broken up, and land and water interchanged.
[1] These Plants are described in the Annals of Nat.
Hist.
, vol.
i.
, 1838, p.
337.
[2] Holman's Travels, vol.
iv.
p.
378.
[3] Kotzebue's First Voyage, vol.
iii.
p.
155.
[4] The thirteen species belong to the following orders:--In the Coleoptera, a minute Elater; Orthoptera, a Gryllus and a Blatta; Hemiptera, one species; Homoptera, two; Neuroptera a Chrysopa; Hymenoptera, two ants; Lepidoptera nocturna, a Diopaea, and a
); Diptera, two species.
[5] Kotzebue's First Voyage, vol.
iii.
p.
222.
[6] The large claws or pincers of some of these crabs are most beautifully adapted, when drawn back, to form an operculum to the shell, nearly as perfect as the proper one originally belonging to the molluscous animal.
I was assured, and as far as my observations went I found it so, that certain species of the hermit-crab always use certain species of shells.
[7] Some natives carried by Kotzebue to Kamtschatka collected stones to take back to their country.
[8] See Proceedings of Zoological Society, 1832, p.
17.
[9] Tyerman and Bennett.
Voyage, etc.
vol.
ii.
p.
33.
[10] I exclude, of course, some soil which has been imported here in vessels from Malacca and Java, and likewise, some small fragments of pumice, drifted here by the waves.
The one block of greenstone, moreover, on the northern island must be excepted.
[11] These were first read before the Geological Society in May, 1837, and have since been developed in a separate volume on the "Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs".
[12] It is remarkable that Mr. Lyell, even in the first edition of his "Principles of Geology," inferred that the amount of subsidence in the Pacific must have exceeded that of elevation, from the area of land being very small relatively to the agents
[13] It has been highly satisfactory to me to find the following passage in a pamphlet by Mr. Couthouy, one of the naturalists in the great Antarctic Expedition of the United States:--"Having personally examined a large number of coral-islands and resided
I may be permitted to state that my own observations have impressed a conviction of the correctness of the theory of Mr. Darwin".
--The naturalists, however, of this expedition differ with me on some points respecting coral formations.
CHAPTER XXI MAURITIUS TO ENGLAND Mauritius, beautiful appearance of--Great crateriform ring of Mountains--Hindoos--St. Helena--History of the changes in the Vegetation--Cause of the extinction of Land-shells--Ascension--Variation in the imported
APRIL 29th.
--In the morning we passed round the northern end of Mauritius, or the Isle of France.
From this point of view the aspect of the island equalled the expectations raised by the many well-known descriptions of its beautiful scenery.
The sloping plain of the Pamplemousses, interspersed with houses, and coloured by the large fields of sugar-cane of a bright green, composed the foreground.
The brilliancy of the green was the more remarkable because it is a colour which generally is conspicuous only from a very short distance.
Towards the centre of the island groups of wooded mountains rose out of this highly cultivated plain; their summits, as so commonly happens with ancient volcanic rocks, being jagged into the sharpest points.
Masses of white clouds were collected around these pinnacles, as if for the sake of pleasing the stranger's eye.
The whole island, with its sloping border and central mountains, was adorned with an air of perfect elegance: the scenery, if I may use such an expression, appeared to the sight harmonious.
I spent the greater part of the next day in walking about the town and visiting different people.
The town is of considerable size, and is said to contain 20,000 inhabitants; the streets are very clean and regular.
Although the island has been so many years under the English Government, the general character of the place is quite French: Englishmen speak to their servants in French, and the shops are all French; indeed, I should think that Calais or Boulogne was much
There is a very pretty little theatre, in which operas are excellently performed.
We were also surprised at seeing large booksellers' shops, with well-stored shelves;--music and reading bespeak our approach to the old world of civilization; for in truth both Australia and America are new worlds.
The various races of men walking in the streets afford the most interesting spectacle in Port Louis.
Convicts from India are banished here for life; at present there are about 800, and they are employed in various public works.
Before seeing these people, I had no idea that the inhabitants of India were such noble-looking figures.
Their skin is extremely dark, and many of the older men had large mustaches and beards of a snow-white colour; this, together with the fire of their expression, gave them quite an imposing aspect.
The greater number had been banished for murder and the worst crimes; others for causes which can scarcely be considered as moral faults, such as for not obeying, from superstitious motives, the English laws.
These men are generally quiet and well-conducted; from their outward conduct, their cleanliness, and faithful observance of their strange religious rites, it was impossible to look at them with the same eyes as on our wretched convicts in New South Wales.
May 1st.
--Sunday.
I took a quiet walk along the sea-coast to the north of the town.
The plain in this part is quite uncultivated; it consists of a field of black lava, smoothed over with coarse grass and bushes, the latter being chiefly Mimosas.
The scenery may be described as intermediate in character between that of the Galapagos and of Tahiti; but this will convey a definite idea to very few persons.
It is a very pleasant country, but it has not the charms of Tahiti, or the grandeur of Brazil.
The next day I ascended La Pouce, a mountain so called from a thumb-like projection, which rises close behind the town to a height of 2,600 feet.
The centre of the island consists of a great platform, surrounded by old broken basaltic mountains, with their strata dipping seawards.
The central platform, formed of comparatively recent streams of lava, is of an oval shape, thirteen geographical miles across, in the line of its shorter axis.
The exterior bounding mountains come into that class of structures called Craters of Elevation, which are supposed to have been formed not like ordinary craters, but by a great and sudden upheaval.
There appears to me to be insuperable objections to this view: on the other hand, I can hardly believe, in this and in some other cases, that these marginal crateriform mountains are merely the basal remnants of immense volcanos, of which the summits
From our elevated position we enjoyed an excellent view over the island.
The country on this side appears pretty well cultivated, being divided into fields and studded with farm-houses.
I was, however, assured that of the whole land, not more than half is yet in a productive state; if such be the case, considering the present large export of sugar, this island, at some future period when thickly peopled, will be of great value.
Since England has taken possession of it, a period of only twenty-five years, the export of sugar is said to have increased seventy-five fold.
One great cause of its prosperity is the excellent state of the roads.
In the neighbouring Isle of Bourbon, which remains under the French government, the roads are still in the same miserable state as they were here only a few years ago.
Although the French residents must have largely profited by the increased prosperity of their island, yet the English government is far from popular.
3rd.
--In the evening Captain Lloyd, the Surveyor-general, so well known from his examination of the Isthmus of Panama, invited Mr. Stokes and myself to his country-house, which is situated on the edge of Wilheim Plains, and about six miles from the Port.
We stayed at this delightful place two days; standing nearly 800 feet above the sea, the air was cool and fresh, and on every side there were delightful walks.
Close by, a grand ravine has been worn to a depth of about 500 feet through the slightly inclined streams of lava, which have flowed from the central platform.
5th.
--Captain Lloyd took us to the Riviere Noire, which is several miles to the southward, that I might examine some rocks of elevated coral.
We passed through pleasant gardens, and fine fields of sugar-cane growing amidst huge blocks of lava.
The roads were bordered by hedges of Mimosa, and near many of the houses there were avenues of the mango.
Some of the views, where the peaked hills and the cultivated farms were seen together, were exceedingly picturesque; and we were constantly tempted to exclaim, "How pleasant it would be to pass one's life in such quiet abodes"!
Captain Lloyd possessed an elephant, and he sent it half way with us, that we might enjoy a ride in true Indian fashion.
The circumstance which surprised me most was its quite noiseless step.
This elephant is the only one at present on the island; but it is said others will be sent for.
May 9th.
--We sailed from Port Louis, and, calling at the Cape of Good Hope, on the 8th of July, we arrived off St. Helena.
This island, the forbidding aspect of which has been so often described, rises abruptly like a huge black castle from the ocean.
Near the town, as if to complete nature's defence, small forts and guns fill up every gap in the rugged rocks.
The town runs up a flat and narrow valley; the houses look respectable, and are interspersed with a very few green trees.
When approaching the anchorage there was one striking view: an irregular castle perched on the summit of a lofty hill, and surrounded by a few scattered fir-trees, boldly projected against the sky.
The next day I obtained lodgings within a stone's throw of Napoleon's tomb; [1] it was a capital central situation, whence I could make excursions in every direction.
During the four days I stayed here, I wandered over the island from morning to night, and examined its geological history.
My lodgings were situated at a height of about 2000 feet; here the weather was cold and boisterous, with constant showers of rain; and every now and then the whole scene was veiled in thick clouds.
Near the coast the rough lava is quite bare: in the central and higher parts, feldspathic rocks by their decomposition have produced a clayey soil, which, where not covered by vegetation, is stained in broad bands of many bright colours.
At this season, the land moistened by constant showers, produces a singularly bright green pasture, which lower and lower down, gradually fades away and at last disappears.
In latitude 16 degs.
, and at the trifling elevation of 1500 feet, it is surprising to behold a vegetation possessing a character decidedly British.
The hills are crowned with irregular plantations of Scotch firs; and the sloping banks are thickly scattered over with thickets of gorse, covered with its bright yellow flowers.
Weeping-willows are common on the banks of the rivulets, and the hedges are made of the blackberry, producing its well-known fruit.
When we consider that the number of plants now found on the island is 746, and that out of these fifty-two alone are indigenous species, the rest having been imported, and most of them from England, we see the reason of the British character of the
Many of these English plants appear to flourish better than in their native country; some also from the opposite quarter of Australia succeed remarkably well.
The many imported species must have destroyed some of the native kinds; and it is only on the highest and steepest ridges that the indigenous Flora is now predominant.
The English, or rather Welsh character of the scenery, is kept up by the numerous cottages and small white houses; some buried at the bottom of the deepest valleys, and others mounted on the crests of the lofty hills.
Some of the views are striking, for instance that from near Sir W. Doveton's house, where the bold peak called Lot is seen over a dark wood of firs, the whole being backed by the red water-worn mountains of the southern coast.
On viewing the island from an eminence, the first circumstance which strikes one, is the number of the roads and forts: the labour bestowed on the public works, if one forgets its character as a prison, seems out of all proportion to its extent or value.
There is so little level or useful land, that it seems surprising how so many people, about 5000, can subsist here.
The lower orders, or the emancipated slaves, are I believe extremely poor: they complain of the want of work.
From the reduction in the number of public servants owing to the island having been given up by the East Indian Company, and the consequent emigration of many of the richer people, the poverty probably will increase.
The chief food of the working class is rice with a little salt meat; as neither of these articles are the products of the island, but must be purchased with money, the low wages tell heavily on the poor people.
Now that the people are blessed with freedom, a right which I believe they value fully, it seems probable that their numbers will quickly increase: if so, what is to become of the little state of St. Helena?
My guide was an elderly man, who had been a goatherd when a boy, and knew every step amongst the rocks.
He was of a race many times crossed, and although with a dusky skin, he had not the disagreeable expression of a mulatto.
He was a very civil, quiet old man, and such appears the character of the greater number of the lower classes.
It was strange to my ears to hear a man, nearly white and respectably dressed, talking with indifference of the times when he was a slave.
With my companion, who carried our dinners and a horn of water, which is quite necessary, as all the water in the lower valleys is saline, I every day took long walks.
Beneath the upper and central green circle, the wild valleys are quite desolate and untenanted.
Here, to the geologist, there were scenes of high interest, showing successive changes and complicated disturbances.
According to my views, St. Helena has existed as an island from a very remote epoch: some obscure proofs, however, of the elevation of the land are still extant.
I believe that the central and highest peaks form parts of the rim of a great crater, the southern half of which has been entirely removed by the waves of the sea: there is, moreover, an external wall of black basaltic rocks, like the coast-mountains of
On the higher parts of the island, considerable numbers of a shell, long thought to be a marine species occur imbedded in the soil.
It proved to be a Cochlogena, or land-shell of a very peculiar form; [2] with it I found six other kinds; and in another spot an eighth species.
It is remarkable that none of them are now found living.
Their extinction has probably been caused by the entire destruction of the woods, and the consequent loss of food and shelter, which occurred during the early part of the last century.
The history of the changes, which the elevated plains of Longwood and Deadwood have undergone, as given in General Beatson's account of the island, is extremely curious.
Both plains, it is said in former times were covered with wood, and were therefore called the Great Wood.
So late as the year 1716 there were many trees, but in 1724 the old trees had mostly fallen; and as goats and hogs had been suffered to range about, all the young trees had been killed.
It appears also from the official records, that the trees were unexpectedly, some years afterwards, succeeded by a wire grass which spread over the whole surface.
[3] General Beatson adds that now this plain "is covered with fine sward, and is become the finest piece of pasture on the island".
The extent of surface, probably covered by wood at a former period, is estimated at no less than two thousand acres; at the present day scarcely a single tree can be found there.
It is also said that in 1709 there were quantities of dead trees in Sandy Bay; this place is now so utterly desert, that nothing but so well attested an account could have made me believe that they could ever have grown there.
The fact, that the goats and hogs destroyed all the young trees as they sprang up, and that in the course of time the old ones, which were safe from their attacks, perished from age, seems clearly made out.
Goats were introduced in the year 1502; eighty-six years afterwards, in the time of Cavendish, it is known that they were exceedingly numerous.
More than a century afterwards, in 1731, when the evil was complete and irretrievable, an order was issued that all stray animals should be destroyed.
It is very interesting thus to find, that the arrival of animals at St. Helena in 1501, did not change the whole aspect of the island, until a period of two hundred and twenty years had elapsed: for the goats were introduced in 1502, and in 1724 it is said
There can be little doubt that this great change in the vegetation affected not only the land-shells, causing eight species to become extinct, but likewise a multitude of insects.
St. Helena, situated so remote from any continent, in the midst of a great ocean, and possessing a unique Flora, excites our curiosity.
The eight land-shells, though now extinct, and one living Succinea, are peculiar species found nowhere else.
Mr. Cuming, however, informs me that an English Helix is common here, its eggs no doubt having been imported in some of the many introduced plants.
Mr. Cuming collected on the coast sixteen species of sea-shells, of which seven, as far as he knows, are confined to this island.
Birds and insects, [4] as might have been expected, are very few in number; indeed I believe all the birds have been introduced within late years.
Partridges and pheasants are tolerably abundant; the island is much too English not to be subject to strict game-laws.
I was told of a more unjust sacrifice to such ordinances than I ever heard of even in England.
The poor people formerly used to burn a plant, which grows on the coast-rocks, and export the soda from its ashes; but a peremptory order came out prohibiting this practice, and giving as a reason that the partridges would have nowhere to build.
In my walks I passed more than once over the grassy plain bounded by deep valleys, on which Longwood stands.
Viewed from a short distance, it appears like a respectable gentleman's country-seat.
In front there are a few cultivated fields, and beyond them the smooth hill of coloured rocks called the Flagstaff, and the rugged square black mass of the Barn.
On the whole the view was rather bleak and uninteresting.
The only inconvenience I suffered during my walks was from the impetuous winds.
One day I noticed a curious circumstance; standing on the edge of a plain, terminated by a great cliff of about a thousand feet in depth, I saw at the distance of a few yards right to windward, some tern, struggling against a very strong breeze, whilst,
Approaching close to the brink, where the current seemed to be deflected upwards from the face of the cliff, I stretched out my arm, and immediately felt the full force of the wind: an invisible barrier, two yards in width, separated perfectly calm air
I so much enjoyed my rambles among the rocks and mountains of St. Helena, that I felt almost sorry on the morning of the 14th to descend to the town.
Before noon I was on board, and the Beagle made sail.
On the 19th of July we reached Ascension.
Those who have beheld a volcanic island, situated under an arid climate, will at once be able to picture to themselves the appearance of Ascension.
They will imagine smooth conical hills of a bright red colour, with their summits generally truncated, rising separately out of a level surface of black rugged lava.
A principal mound in the centre of the island, seems the father of the lesser cones.
It is called Green Hill: its name being taken from the faintest tinge of that colour, which at this time of the year is barely perceptible from the anchorage.
To complete the desolate scene, the black rocks on the coast are lashed by a wild and turbulent sea.
The settlement is near the beach; it consists of several houses and barracks placed irregularly, but well built of white freestone.
The only inhabitants are marines, and some negroes liberated from slave-ships, who are paid and victualled by government.
There is not a private person on the island.
Many of the marines appeared well contented with their situation; they think it better to serve their one-and-twenty years on shore, let it be what it may, than in a ship; in this choice, if I were a marine, I should most heartily agree.
The next morning I ascended Green Hill, 2840 feet high, and thence walked across the island to the windward point.
A good cart-road leads from the coast-settlement to the houses, gardens, and fields, placed near the summit of the central mountain.
On the roadside there are milestones, and likewise cisterns, where each thirsty passer-by can drink some good water.
Similar care is displayed in each part of the establishment, and especially in the management of the springs, so that a single drop of water may not be lost: indeed the whole island may be compared to a huge ship kept in first-rate order.
I could not help, when admiring the active industry, which had created such effects out of such means, at the same time regretting that it had been wasted on so poor and trifling an end.
M. Lesson has remarked with justice, that the English nation would have thought of making the island of Ascension a productive spot, any other people would have held it as a mere fortress in the ocean.
Near this coast nothing grows; further inland, an occasional green castor-oil plant, and a few grasshoppers, true friends of the desert, may be met with.
Some grass is scattered over the surface of the central elevated region, and the whole much resembles the worse parts of the Welsh mountains.
But scanty as the pasture appears, about six hundred sheep, many goats, a few cows and horses, all thrive well on it.
Of native animals, land-crabs and rats swarm in numbers.
Whether the rat is really indigenous, may well be doubted; there are two varieties as described by Mr. Waterhouse; one is of a black colour, with fine glossy fur, and lives on the grassy summit, the other is brown-coloured and less glossy, with longer
Both these varieties are one-third smaller than the common black rat (M.
rattus); and they differ from it both in the colour and character of their fur, but in no other essential respect.
I can hardly doubt that these rats (like the common mouse, which has also run wild) have been imported, and, as at the Galapagos, have varied from the effect of the new conditions to which they have been exposed: hence the variety on the summit of the
Of native birds there are none; but the guinea-fowl, imported from the Cape de Verd Islands, is abundant, and the common fowl has likewise run wild.
Some cats, which were originally turned out to destroy the rats and mice, have increased, so as to become a great plague.
The island is entirely without trees, in which, and in every other respect, it is very far inferior to St. Helena.
One of my excursions took me towards the S. W. extremity of the island.
The day was clear and hot, and I saw the island, not smiling with beauty, but staring with naked hideousness.
The lava streams are covered with hummocks, and are rugged to a degree which, geologically speaking, is not of easy explanation.
The intervening spaces are concealed with layers of pumice, ashes and volcanic tuff.
Whilst passing this end of the island at sea, I could not imagine what the white patches were with which the whole plain was mottled; I now found that they were seafowl, sleeping in such full confidence, that even in midday a man could walk up and seize
These birds were the only living creatures I saw during the whole day.
On the beach a great surf, although the breeze was light, came tumbling over the broken lava rocks.
The geology of this island is in many respects interesting.
In several places I noticed volcanic bombs, that is, masses of lava which have been shot through the air whilst fluid, and have consequently assumed a spherical or pear-shape.
Not only their external form, but, in several cases, their internal structure shows in a very curious manner that they have revolved in their aerial course.
The internal structure of one of these bombs, when broken, is represented very accurately in the woodcut.
The central part is coarsely cellular, the cells decreasing in size towards the exterior; where there is a shell-like case about the third of an inch in thickness, of compact stone, which again is overlaid by the outside crust of finely cellular lava.
I think there can be little doubt, first that the external crust cooled rapidly in the state in which we now see it; secondly, that the still fluid lava within, was packed by the centrifugal force, generated by [picture] the revolving of the bomb, against
A hill, formed of the older series of volcanic rocks, and which has been incorrectly considered as the crater of a volcano, is remarkable from its broad, slightly hollowed, and circular summit having been filled up with many successive layers of ashes and
These saucer-shaped layers crop out on the margin, forming perfect rings of many different colours, giving to the summit a most fantastic appearance; one of these rings is white and broad, and resembles a course round which horses have been exercised;
I brought away specimens of one of the tufaceous layers of a pinkish colour and it is a most extraordinary fact, that Professor Ehrenberg [5] finds it almost wholly composed of matter which has been organized: he detects in it some siliceous-shielded
From the absence of all carbonaceous matter, Professor Ehrenberg believes that these organic bodies have passed through the volcanic fire, and have been erupted in the state in which we now see them.
The appearance of the layers induced me to believe that they had been deposited under water, though from the extreme dryness of the climate I was forced to imagine, that torrents of rain had probably fallen during some great eruption, and that thus a
But it may now be suspected that the lake was not a temporary one.
Anyhow, we may feel sure, that at some former epoch the climate and productions of Ascension were very different from what they now are.
Where on the face of the earth can we find a spot, on which close investigation will not discover signs of that endless cycle of change, to which this earth has been, is, and will be subjected?
On leaving Ascension, we sailed for Bahia, on the coast of Brazil, in order to complete the chronometrical measurement of the world.
We arrived there on August 1st, and stayed four days, during which I took several long walks.
I was glad to find my enjoyment in tropical scenery had not decreased from the want of novelty, even in the slightest degree.
The elements of the scenery are so simple, that they are worth mentioning, as a proof on what trifling circumstances exquisite natural beauty depends.
The country may be described as a level plain of about three hundred feet in elevation, which in all parts has been worn into flat-bottomed valleys.
This structure is remarkable in a granitic land, but is nearly universal in all those softer formations of which plains are usually composed.
The whole surface is covered by various kinds of stately trees, interspersed with patches of cultivated ground, out of which houses, convents, and chapels arise.
It must be remembered that within the tropics, the wild luxuriance of nature is not lost even in the vicinity of large cities: for the natural vegetation of the hedges and hill-sides overpowers in picturesque effect the artificial labour of man.
Hence, there are only a few spots where the bright red soil affords a strong contrast with the universal clothing of green.
From the edges of the plain there are distant views either of the ocean, or of the great Bay with its low-wooded shores, and on which numerous boats and canoes show their white sails.
Excepting from these points, the scene is extremely limited; following the level pathways, on each hand, only glimpses into the wooded valleys below can be obtained.
The houses I may add, and especially the sacred edifices, are built in a peculiar and rather fantastic style of architecture.
They are all whitewashed; so that when illumined by the brilliant sun of midday, and as seen against the pale blue sky of the horizon, they stand out more like shadows than real buildings.
Such are the elements of the scenery, but it is a hopeless attempt to paint the general effect.
Learned naturalists describe these scenes of the tropics by naming a multitude of objects, and mentioning some characteristic feature of each.
To a learned traveller this possibly may communicate some definite ideas: but who else from seeing a plant in an herbarium can imagine its appearance when growing in its native soil?
Who from seeing choice plants in a hothouse, can magnify some into the dimensions of forest trees, and crowd others into an entangled jungle?
Who when examining in the cabinet of the entomologist the gay exotic butterflies, and singular cicadas, will associate with these lifeless objects, the ceaseless harsh music of the latter, and the lazy flight of the former,--the sure accompaniments of the
It is when the sun has attained its greatest height, that such scenes should be viewed: then the dense splendid foliage of the mango hides the ground with its darkest shade, whilst the upper branches are rendered from the profusion of light of the most
In the temperate zones the case is different--the vegetation there is not so dark or so rich, and hence the rays of the declining sun, tinged of a red, purple, or bright yellow color, add most to the beauties of those climes.
When quietly walking along the shady pathways, and admiring each successive view, I wished to find language to express my ideas.
Epithet after epithet was found too weak to convey to those who have not visited the intertropical regions, the sensation of delight which the mind experiences.
I have said that the plants in a hothouse fail to communicate a just idea of the vegetation, yet I must recur to it.
The land is one great wild, untidy, luxuriant hothouse, made by Nature for herself, but taken possession of by man, who has studded it with gay houses and formal gardens.
How great would be the desire in every admirer of nature to behold, if such were possible, the scenery of another planet!
yet to every person in Europe, it may be truly said, that at the distance of only a few degrees from his native soil, the glories of another world are opened to him.
In my last walk I stopped again and again to gaze on these beauties, and endeavoured to fix in my mind for ever, an impression which at the time I knew sooner or later must fail.
The form of the orange-tree, the cocoa-nut, the palm, the mango, the tree-fern, the banana, will remain clear and separate; but the thousand beauties which unite these into one perfect scene must fade away: yet they will leave, like a tale heard in
August 6th.
--In the afternoon we stood out to sea, with the intention of making a direct course to the Cape de Verd Islands.
Unfavourable winds, however, delayed us, and on the 12th we ran into Pernambuco,--a large city on the coast of Brazil, in latitude 8 degs.
south.
We anchored outside the reef; but in a short time a pilot came on board and took us into the inner harbour, where we lay close to the town.
Pernambuco is built on some narrow and low sand-banks, which are separated from each other by shoal channels of salt water.
The three parts of the town are connected together by two long bridges built on wooden piles.
The town is in all parts disgusting, the streets being narrow, ill-paved, and filthy; the houses, tall and gloomy.
The season of heavy rains had hardly come to an end, and hence the surrounding country, which is scarcely raised above the level of the sea, was flooded with water; and I failed in all my attempts to take walks.
The flat swampy land on which Pernambuco stands is surrounded, at the distance of a few miles, by a semicircle of low hills, or rather by the edge of a country elevated perhaps two hundred feet above the sea.
The old city of Olinda stands on one extremity of this range.
One day I took a canoe, and proceeded up one of the channels to visit it; I found the old town from its situation both sweeter and cleaner than that of Pernambuco.
I must here commemorate what happened for the first time during our nearly five years' wandering, namely, having met with a want of politeness.
I was refused in a sullen manner at two different houses, and obtained with difficulty from a third, permission to pass through their gardens to an uncultivated hill, for the purpose of viewing the country.
I feel glad that this happened in the land of the Brazilians, for I bear them no good will--a land also of slavery, and therefore of moral debasement.
A Spaniard would have felt ashamed at the very thought of refusing such a request, or of behaving to a stranger with rudeness.
The channel by which we went to and returned from Olinda, was bordered on each side by mangroves, which sprang like a miniature forest out of the greasy mud-banks.
The bright green colour of these bushes always reminded me of the rank grass in a church-yard: both are nourished by putrid exhalations; the one speaks of death past, and the other too often of death to come.
The most curious object which I saw in this neighbourhood, was the reef that forms the harbour.
I doubt whether in the whole world any other natural structure has so artificial an appearance.
[6] It runs for a length of several miles in an absolutely straight line, parallel to, and not far distant from, the shore.
It varies in width from thirty to sixty yards, and its surface is level and smooth; it is composed of obscurely stratified hard sandstone.
At high water the waves break over it; at low water its summit is left dry, and it might then be mistaken for a breakwater erected by Cyclopean workmen.
On this coast the currents of the sea tend to throw up in front of the land, long spits and bars of loose sand, and on one of these, part of the town of Pernambuco stands.
In former times a long spit of this nature seems to have become consolidated by the percolation of calcareous matter, and afterwards to have been gradually upheaved; the outer and loose parts during this process having been worn away by the action of the
Although night and day the waves of the open Atlantic, turbid with sediment, are driven against the steep outside edges of this wall of stone, yet the oldest pilots know of no tradition of any change in its appearance.
This durability is much the most curious fact in its history: it is due to a tough layer, a few inches thick, of calcareous matter, wholly formed by the successive growth and death of the small shells of Serpulae, together with some few barnacles and
These nulliporae, which are hard, very simply-organized sea-plants, play an analogous and important part in protecting the upper surfaces of coral-reefs, behind and within the breakers, where the true corals, during the outward growth of the mass, become
These insignificant organic beings, especially the Serpulae, have done good service to the people of Pernambuco; for without their protective aid the bar of sandstone would inevitably have been long ago worn away and without the bar, there would have been
On the 19th of August we finally left the shores of Brazil.
I thank God, I shall never again visit a slave-country.
To this day, if I hear a distant scream, it recalls with painful vividness my feelings, when passing a house near Pernambuco, I heard the most pitiable moans, and could not but suspect that some poor slave was being tortured, yet knew that I was as
I suspected that these moans were from a tortured slave, for I was told that this was the case in another instance.
Near Rio de Janeiro I lived opposite to an old lady, who kept screws to crush the fingers of her female slaves.
I have stayed in a house where a young household mulatto, daily and hourly, was reviled, beaten, and persecuted enough to break the spirit of the lowest animal.
I have seen a little boy, six or seven years old, struck thrice with a horse-whip (before I could interfere) on his naked head, for having handed me a glass of water not quite clean; I saw his father tremble at a mere glance from his master's eye.
These latter cruelties were witnessed by me in a Spanish colony, in which it has always been said, that slaves are better treated than by the Portuguese, English, or other European nations.
I have seen at Rio de Janeiro a powerful negro afraid to ward off a blow directed, as he thought, at his face.
I was present when a kind-hearted man was on the point of separating forever the men, women, and little children of a large number of families who had long lived together.
I will not even allude to the many heart-sickening atrocities which I authentically heard of;--nor would I have mentioned the above revolting details, had I not met with several people, so blinded by the constitutional gaiety of the negro as to speak of
Such people have generally visited at the houses of the upper classes, where the domestic slaves are usually well treated, and they have not, like myself, lived amongst the lower classes.
Such inquirers will ask slaves about their condition; they forget that the slave must indeed be dull, who does not calculate on the chance of his answer reaching his master's ears.
It is argued that self-interest will prevent excessive cruelty; as if self-interest protected our domestic animals, which are far less likely than degraded slaves, to stir up the rage of their savage masters.
It is an argument long since protested against with noble feeling, and strikingly exemplified, by the ever-illustrious Humboldt.
It is often attempted to palliate slavery by comparing the state of slaves with our poorer countrymen: if the misery of our poor be caused not by the laws of nature, but by our institutions, great is our sin; but how this bears on slavery, I cannot see; as
Those who look tenderly at the slave owner, and with a cold heart at the slave, never seem to put themselves into the position of the latter; what a cheerless prospect, with not even a hope of change!
picture to yourself the chance, ever hanging over you, of your wife and your little children--those objects which nature urges even the slave to call his own--being torn from you and sold like beasts to the first bidder!
And these deeds are done and palliated by men, who profess to love their neighbours as themselves, who believe in God, and pray that his Will be done on earth!
It makes one's blood boil, yet heart tremble, to think that we Englishmen and our American descendants, with their boastful cry of liberty, have been and are so guilty: but it is a consolation to reflect, that we at least have made a greater sacrifice,
On the last day of August we anchored for the second time at Porto Praya in the Cape de Verd archipelago; thence we proceeded to the Azores, where we stayed six days.
On the 2nd of October we made the shore, of England; and at Falmouth I left the Beagle, having lived on board the good little vessel nearly five years.
Our Voyage having come to an end, I will take a short retrospect of the advantages and disadvantages, the pains and pleasures, of our circumnavigation of the world.
If a person asked my advice, before undertaking a long voyage, my answer would depend upon his possessing a decided taste for some branch of knowledge, which could by this means be advanced.
No doubt it is a high satisfaction to behold various countries and the many races of mankind, but the pleasures gained at the time do not counterbalance the evils.
It is necessary to look forward to a harvest, however distant that may be, when some fruit will be reaped, some good effected.
Many of the losses which must be experienced are obvious; such as that of the society of every old friend, and of the sight of those places with which every dearest remembrance is so intimately connected.
These losses, however, are at the time partly relieved by the exhaustless delight of anticipating the long wished-for day of return.
If, as poets say, life is a dream, I am sure in a voyage these are the visions which best serve to pass away the long night.
Other losses, although not at first felt, tell heavily after a period: these are the want of room, of seclusion, of rest; the jading feeling of constant hurry; the privation of small luxuries, the loss of domestic society and even of music and the other
When such trifles are mentioned, it is evident that the real grievances, excepting from accidents, of a sea-life are at an end.
The short space of sixty years has made an astonishing difference in the facility of distant navigation.
Even in the time of Cook, a man who left his fireside for such expeditions underwent severe privations.
A yacht now, with every luxury of life, can circumnavigate the globe.
Besides the vast improvements in ships and naval resources, the whole western shores of America are thrown open, and Australia has become the capital of a rising continent.
How different are the circumstances to a man shipwrecked at the present day in the Pacific, to what they were in the time of Cook!
Since his voyage a hemisphere has been added to the civilized world.
If a person suffer much from sea-sickness, let him weigh it heavily in the balance.
I speak from experience: it is no trifling evil, cured in a week.
If, on the other hand, he take pleasure in naval tactics, he will assuredly have full scope for his taste.
But it must be borne in mind, how large a proportion of the time, during a long voyage, is spent on the water, as compared with the days in harbour.
And what are the boasted glories of the illimitable ocean.
A tedious waste, a desert of water, as the Arabian calls it.
No doubt there are some delightful scenes.
A moonlight night, with the clear heavens and the dark glittering sea, and the white sails filled by the soft air of a gently blowing trade-wind, a dead calm, with the heaving surface polished like a mirror, and all still except the occasional flapping of
It is well once to behold a squall with its rising arch and coming fury, or the heavy gale of wind and mountainous waves.
I confess, however, my imagination had painted something more grand, more terrific in the full-grown storm.
It is an incomparably finer spectacle when beheld on shore, where the waving trees, the wild flight of the birds, the dark shadows and bright lights, the rushing of the torrents all proclaim the strife of the unloosed elements.
At sea the albatross and little petrel fly as if the storm were their proper sphere, the water rises and sinks as if fulfilling its usual task, the ship alone and its inhabitants seem the objects of wrath.
On a forlorn and weather-beaten coast, the scene is indeed different, but the feelings partake more of horror than of wild delight.
Let us now look at the brighter side of the past time.
The pleasure derived from beholding the scenery and the general aspect of the various countries we have visited, has decidedly been the most constant and highest source of enjoyment.
It is probable that the picturesque beauty of many parts of Europe exceeds anything which we beheld.
But there is a growing pleasure in comparing the character of the scenery in different countries, which to a certain degree is distinct from merely admiring its beauty.
It depends chiefly on an acquaintance with the individual parts of each view.
I am strongly induced to believe that as in music, the person who understands every note will, if he also possesses a proper taste, more thoroughly enjoy the whole, so he who examines each part of a fine view, may also thoroughly comprehend the full and
Hence, a traveller should be a botanist, for in all views plants form the chief embellishment.
Group masses of naked rock, even in the wildest forms, and they may for a time afford a sublime spectacle, but they will soon grow monotonous.
Paint them with bright and varied colours, as in Northern Chile, they will become fantastic; clothe them with vegetation, they must form a decent, if not a beautiful picture.
When I say that the scenery of parts of Europe is probably superior to anything which we beheld, I except, as a class by itself, that of the intertropical zones.
The two classes cannot be compared together; but I have already often enlarged on the grandeur of those regions.
As the force of impressions generally depends on preconceived ideas, I may add, that mine were taken from the vivid descriptions in the Personal Narrative of Humboldt, which far exceed in merit anything else which I have read.
Yet with these high-wrought ideas, my feelings were far from partaking of a tinge of disappointment on my first and final landing on the shores of Brazil.
Among the scenes which are deeply impressed on my mind, none exceed in sublimity the primeval forests undefaced by the hand of man; whether those of Brazil, where the powers of Life are predominant, or those of Tierra del Fuego, where Death and decay
Both are temples filled with the varied productions of the God of Nature:--no one can stand in these solitudes unmoved, and not feel that there is more in man than the mere breath of his body.
In calling up images of the past, I find that the plains of Patagonia frequently cross before my eyes; yet these plains are pronounced by all wretched and useless.
They can be described only by negative characters; without habitations, without water, without trees, without mountains, they support merely a few dwarf plants.
Why, then, and the case is not peculiar to myself, have these arid wastes taken so firm a hold on my memory?
Why have not the still more level, the greener and more fertile Pampas, which are serviceable to mankind, produced an equal impression?
I can scarcely analyze these feelings: but it must be partly owing to the free scope given to the imagination.
The plains of Patagonia are boundless, for they are scarcely passable, and hence unknown: they bear the stamp of having lasted, as they are now, for ages, and there appears no limit to their duration through future time.
If, as the ancients supposed, the flat earth was surrounded by an impassable breadth of water, or by deserts heated to an intolerable excess, who would not look at these last boundaries to man's knowledge with deep but ill-defined sensations?
Lastly, of natural scenery, the views from lofty mountains, through certainly in one sense not beautiful, are very memorable.
When looking down from the highest crest of the Cordillera, the mind, undisturbed by minute details, was filled with the stupendous dimensions of the surrounding masses.
Of individual objects, perhaps nothing is more certain to create astonishment than the first sight in his native haunt of a barbarian--of man in his lowest and most savage state.
One's mind hurries back over past centuries, and then asks, could our progenitors have been men like these?
--men, whose very signs and expressions are less intelligible to us than those of the domesticated animals; men, who do not possess the instinct of those animals, nor yet appear to boast of human reason, or at least of arts consequent on that reason.
I do not believe it is possible to describe or paint the difference between savage and civilized man.
It is the difference between a wild and tame animal: and part of the interest in beholding a savage, is the same which would lead every one to desire to see the lion in his desert, the tiger tearing his prey in the jungle, or the rhinoceros wandering over
Among the other most remarkable spectacles which we have beheld, may be ranked, the Southern Cross, the cloud of Magellan, and the other constellations of the southern hemisphere--the water-spout--the glacier leading its blue stream of ice, overhanging the
These latter phenomena, perhaps, possess for me a peculiar interest, from their intimate connection with the geological structure of the world.
The earthquake, however, must be to every one a most impressive event: the earth, considered from our earliest childhood as the type of solidity, has oscillated like a thin crust beneath our feet; and in seeing the laboured works of man in a moment
It has been said, that the love of the chase is an inherent delight in man--a relic of an instinctive passion.
If so, I am sure the pleasure of living in the open air, with the sky for a roof and the ground for a table, is part of the same feeling, it is the savage returning to his wild and native habits.
I always look back to our boat cruises, and my land journeys, when through unfrequented countries, with an extreme delight, which no scenes of civilization could have created.
I do not doubt that every traveller must remember the glowing sense of happiness which he experienced, when he first breathed in a foreign clime, where the civilized man had seldom or never trod.
There are several other sources of enjoyment in a long voyage, which are of a more reasonable nature.
The map of the world ceases to be a blank; it becomes a picture full of the most varied and animated figures.
Each part assumes its proper dimensions: continents are not looked at in the light of islands, or islands considered as mere specks, which are, in truth, larger than many kingdoms of Europe.
Africa, or North and South America, are well-sounding names, and easily pronounced; but it is not until having sailed for weeks along small portions of their shores, that one is thoroughly convinced what vast spaces on our immense world these names imply.
From seeing the present state, it is impossible not to look forward with high expectations to the future progress of nearly an entire hemisphere.
The march of improvement, consequent on the introduction of Christianity throughout the South Sea, probably stands by itself in the records of history.
It is the more striking when we remember that only sixty years since, Cook, whose excellent judgment none will dispute, could foresee no prospect of a change.
Yet these changes have now been effected by the philanthropic spirit of the British nation.
In the same quarter of the globe Australia is rising, or indeed may be said to have risen, into a grand centre of civilization, which, at some not very remote period, will rule as empress over the southern hemisphere.
It is impossible for an Englishman to behold these distant colonies, without a high pride and satisfaction.
To hoist the British flag, seems to draw with it as a certain consequence, wealth, prosperity, and civilization.
In conclusion, it appears to me that nothing can be more improving to a young naturalist, than a journey in distant countries.
It both sharpens, and partly allays that want and craving, which, as Sir J. Herschel remarks, a man experiences although every corporeal sense be fully satisfied.
The excitement from the novelty of objects, and the chance of success, stimulate him to increased activity.
Moreover, as a number of isolated facts soon become uninteresting, the habit of comparison leads to generalization.
On the other hand, as the traveller stays but a short time in each place, his descriptions must generally consist of mere sketches, instead of detailed observations.
Hence arises, as I have found to my cost, a constant tendency to fill up the wide gaps of knowledge, by inaccurate and superficial hypotheses.
But I have too deeply enjoyed the voyage, not to recommend any naturalist, although he must not expect to be so fortunate in his companions as I have been, to take all chances, and to start, on travels by land if possible, if otherwise, on a long voyage.
He may feel assured, he will meet with no difficulties or dangers, excepting in rare cases, nearly so bad as he beforehand anticipates.
In a moral point of view, the effect ought to be, to teach him good-humoured patience, freedom from selfishness, the habit of acting for himself, and of making the best of every occurrence.
In short, he ought to partake of the characteristic qualities of most sailors.
Travelling ought also to teach him distrust; but at the same time he will discover, how many truly kind-hearted people there are, with whom he never before had, or ever again will have any further communication, who yet are ready to offer him the most
[1] After the volumes of eloquence which have poured forth on this subject, it is dangerous even to mention the tomb.
A modern traveller, in twelve lines, burdens the poor little island with the following titles,--it is a grave, tomb, pyramid, cemetery, sepulchre, catacomb, sarcophagus, minaret, and mausoleum!
[2] It deserves notice, that all the many specimens of this shell found by me in one spot, differ as a marked variety, from another set of specimens procured from a different spot.
[3] Beatson's St. Helena.
Introductory chapter, p.
4.
[4] Among these few insects, I was surprised to find a small Aphodius (nov.
spec.
) and an Oryctes, both extremely numerous under dung.
When the island was discovered it certainly possessed no quadruped, excepting perhaps a mouse: it becomes, therefore, a difficult point to ascertain, whether these stercovorous insects have since been imported by accident, or if aborigines, on what food
On the banks of the Plata, where, from the vast number of cattle and horses, the fine plains of turf are richly manured, it is vain to seek the many kinds of dung-feeding beetles, which occur so abundantly in Europe.
I observed only an Oryctes (the insects of this genus in Europe generally feed on decayed vegetable matter) and two species of Phanaeus, common in such situations.
On the opposite side of the Cordillera in Chiloe, another species of Phanaeus is exceedingly abundant, and it buries the dung of the cattle in large earthen balls beneath the ground.
There is reason to believe that the genus Phanaeus, before the introduction of cattle, acted as scavengers to man.
In Europe, beetles, which find support in the matter which has already contributed towards the life of other and larger animals, are so numerous that there must be considerably more than one hundred different species.
Considering this, and observing what a quantity of food of this kind is lost on the plains of La Plata, I imagined I saw an instance where man had disturbed that chain, by which so many animals are linked together in their native country.
In Van Diemen's Land, however, I found four species of Onthophagus, two of Aphodius, and one of a third genus, very abundantly under the dung of cows; yet these latter animals had been then introduced only thirty-three years.
Previous to that time the kangaroo and some other small animals were the only quadrupeds; and their dung is of a very different quality from that of their successors introduced by man.
In England the greater number of stercovorous beetles are confined in their appetites; that is, they do not depend indifferently on any quadruped for the means of subsistence.
The change, therefore, in habits which must have taken place in Van Diemen's Land is highly remarkable.
I am indebted to the Rev.
F. W. Hope, who, I hope, will permit me to call him my master in Entomology, for giving me the names of the foregoing insects.
[5] Monats.
der Konig.
Akad.
d.
Wiss.
zu Berlin.
Vom April, 1845.
[6] I have described this Bar in detail, in the Lond.
and Edin.
Phil.
Mag.
, vol.
xix.
(1841), p.
257.