Produced by David Widger and Janet Blenkinship A CONNECTICUT YANKEE IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT by MARK TWAIN (Samuel L. Clemens) PREFACE The ungentle laws and customs touched upon in this tale are historical, and the episodes which are used to illustrate them
It is not pretended that these laws and customs existed in England in the sixth century; no, it is only pretended that inasmuch as they existed in the English and other civilizations of far later times, it is safe to consider that it is no libel upon the
One is quite justified in inferring that whatever one of these laws or customs was lacking in that remote time, its place was competently filled by a worse one.
The question as to whether there is such a thing as divine right of kings is not settled in this book.
It was found too difficult.
That the executive head of a nation should be a person of lofty character and extraordinary ability, was manifest and indisputable; that none but the Deity could select that head unerringly, was also manifest and indisputable; that the Deity ought to make
I mean, until the author of this book encountered the Pompadour, and Lady Castlemaine, and some other executive heads of that kind; these were found so difficult to work into the scheme, that it was judged better to take the other tack in this book (which
It is, of course, a thing which ought to be settled, and I am not going to have anything particular to do next winter anyway.
MARK TWAIN HARTFORD, July 21, 1889 A CONNECTICUT YANKEE IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT A WORD OF EXPLANATION It was in Warwick Castle that I came across the curious stranger whom I am going to talk about.
He attracted me by three things: his candid simplicity, his marvelous familiarity with ancient armor, and the restfulness of his company--for he did all the talking.
We fell together, as modest people will, in the tail of the herd that was being shown through, and he at once began to say things which interested me.
As he talked along, softly, pleasantly, flowingly, he seemed to drift away imperceptibly out of this world and time, and into some remote era and old forgotten country; and so he gradually wove such a spell about me that I seemed to move among the specters
Exactly as I would speak of my nearest personal friends or enemies, or my most familiar neighbors, he spoke of Sir Bedivere, Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Launcelot of the Lake, Sir Galahad, and all the other great names of the Table Round--and how old, old,
Presently he turned to me and said, just as one might speak of the weather, or any other common matter-- "You know about transmigration of souls; do you know about transposition of epochs--and bodies"?
I said I had not heard of it.
He was so little interested--just as when people speak of the weather--that he did not notice whether I made him any answer or not.
There was half a moment of silence, immediately interrupted by the droning voice of the salaried cicerone: "Ancient hauberk, date of the sixth century, time of King Arthur and the Round Table; said to have belonged to the knight Sir Sagramor le Desirous;
My acquaintance smiled--not a modern smile, but one that must have gone out of general use many, many centuries ago--and muttered apparently to himself: "Wit ye well, _I saw it done_".
Then, after a pause, added: "I did it myself".
By the time I had recovered from the electric surprise of this remark, he was gone.
All that evening I sat by my fire at the Warwick Arms, steeped in a dream of the olden time, while the rain beat upon the windows, and the wind roared about the eaves and corners.
From time to time I dipped into old Sir Thomas Malory's enchanting book, and fed at its rich feast of prodigies and adventures, breathed in the fragrance of its obsolete names, and dreamed again.
Midnight being come at length, I read another tale, for a nightcap--this which here follows, to wit: HOW SIR LAUNCELOT SLEW TWO GIANTS, AND MADE A CASTLE FREE Anon withal came there upon him two great giants, well armed, all save the heads, with two
Sir Launcelot put his shield afore him, and put the stroke away of the one giant, and with his sword he clave his head asunder.
When his fellow saw that, he ran away as he were wood [*demented], for fear of the horrible strokes, and Sir Launcelot after him with all his might, and smote him on the shoulder, and clave him to the middle.
Then Sir Launcelot went into the hall, and there came afore him three score ladies and damsels, and all kneeled unto him, and thanked God and him of their deliverance.
For, sir, said they, the most part of us have been here this seven year their prisoners, and we have worked all manner of silk works for our meat, and we are all great gentle-women born, and blessed be the time, knight, that ever thou wert born; for thou
Fair damsels, he said, my name is Sir Launcelot du Lake.
And so he departed from them and betaught them unto God.
And then he mounted upon his horse, and rode into many strange and wild countries, and through many waters and valleys, and evil was he lodged.
And at the last by fortune him happened against a night to come to a fair courtilage, and therein he found an old gentle-woman that lodged him with a good-will, and there he had good cheer for him and his horse.
And when time was, his host brought him into a fair garret over the gate to his bed.
There Sir Launcelot unarmed him, and set his harness by him, and went to bed, and anon he fell on sleep.
So, soon after there came one on horseback, and knocked at the gate in great haste.
And when Sir Launcelot heard this he rose up, and looked out at the window, and saw by the moonlight three knights come riding after that one man, and all three lashed on him at once with swords, and that one knight turned on them knightly again and
Truly, said Sir Launcelot, yonder one knight shall I help, for it were shame for me to see three knights on one, and if he be slain I am partner of his death.
And therewith he took his harness and went out at a window by a sheet down to the four knights, and then Sir Launcelot said on high, Turn you knights unto me, and leave your fighting with that knight.
And then they all three left Sir Kay, and turned unto Sir Launcelot, and there began great battle, for they alight all three, and strake many strokes at Sir Launcelot, and assailed him on every side.
Then Sir Kay dressed him for to have holpen Sir Launcelot.
Nay, sir, said he, I will none of your help, therefore as ye will have my help let me alone with them.
Sir Kay for the pleasure of the knight suffered him for to do his will, and so stood aside.
And then anon within six strokes Sir Launcelot had stricken them to the earth.
And then they all three cried, Sir Knight, we yield us unto you as man of might matchless.
As to that, said Sir Launcelot, I will not take your yielding unto me, but so that ye yield you unto Sir Kay the seneschal, on that covenant I will save your lives and else not.
Fair knight, said they, that were we loath to do; for as for Sir Kay we chased him hither, and had overcome him had ye not been; therefore, to yield us unto him it were no reason.
Well, as to that, said Sir Launcelot, advise you well, for ye may choose whether ye will die or live, for an ye be yielden, it shall be unto Sir Kay.
Fair knight, then they said, in saving our lives we will do as thou commandest us.
Then shall ye, said Sir Launcelot, on Whitsunday next coming go unto the court of King Arthur, and there shall ye yield you unto Queen Guenever, and put you all three in her grace and mercy, and say that Sir Kay sent you thither to be her prisoners.
On the morn Sir Launcelot arose early, and left Sir Kay sleeping; and Sir Launcelot took Sir Kay's armor and his shield and armed him, and so he went to the stable and took his horse, and took his leave of his host, and so he departed.
Then soon after arose Sir Kay and missed Sir Launcelot; and then he espied that he had his armor and his horse.
Now by my faith I know well that he will grieve some of the court of King Arthur; for on him knights will be bold, and deem that it is I, and that will beguile them; and because of his armor and shield I am sure I shall ride in peace.
And then soon after departed Sir Kay, and thanked his host.
As I laid the book down there was a knock at the door, and my stranger came in.
I gave him a pipe and a chair, and made him welcome.
I also comforted him with a hot Scotch whisky; gave him another one; then still another--hoping always for his story.
After a fourth persuader, he drifted into it himself, in a quite simple and natural way: THE STRANGER'S HISTORY I am an American.
I was born and reared in Hartford, in the State of Connecticut--anyway, just over the river, in the country.
So I am a Yankee of the Yankees--and practical; yes, and nearly barren of sentiment, I suppose--or poetry, in other words.
My father was a blacksmith, my uncle was a horse doctor, and I was both, along at first.
Then I went over to the great arms factory and learned my real trade; learned all there was to it; learned to make everything: guns, revolvers, cannon, boilers, engines, all sorts of labor-saving machinery.
Why, I could make anything a body wanted--anything in the world, it didn't make any difference what; and if there wasn't any quick new-fangled way to make a thing, I could invent one--and do it as easy as rolling off a log.
I became head superintendent; had a couple of thousand men under me.
Well, a man like that is a man that is full of fight--that goes without saying.
With a couple of thousand rough men under one, one has plenty of that sort of amusement.
I had, anyway.
At last I met my match, and I got my dose.
It was during a misunderstanding conducted with crowbars with a fellow we used to call Hercules.
He laid me out with a crusher alongside the head that made everything crack, and seemed to spring every joint in my skull and made it overlap its neighbor.
Then the world went out in darkness, and I didn't feel anything more, and didn't know anything at all --at least for a while.
When I came to again, I was sitting under an oak tree, on the grass, with a whole beautiful and broad country landscape all to myself--nearly.
Not entirely; for there was a fellow on a horse, looking down at me--a fellow fresh out of a picture-book.
He was in old-time iron armor from head to heel, with a helmet on his head the shape of a nail-keg with slits in it; and he had a shield, and a sword, and a prodigious spear; and his horse had armor on, too, and a steel horn projecting from his forehead,
"Fair sir, will ye just"?
said this fellow.
"Will I which"?
"Will ye try a passage of arms for land or lady or for--" "What are you giving me"?
I said.
"Get along back to your circus, or I'll report you".
Now what does this man do but fall back a couple of hundred yards and then come rushing at me as hard as he could tear, with his nail-keg bent down nearly to his horse's neck and his long spear pointed straight ahead.
I saw he meant business, so I was up the tree when he arrived.
He allowed that I was his property, the captive of his spear.
There was argument on his side--and the bulk of the advantage --so I judged it best to humor him.
We fixed up an agreement whereby I was to go with him and he was not to hurt me.
I came down, and we started away, I walking by the side of his horse.
We marched comfortably along, through glades and over brooks which I could not remember to have seen before--which puzzled me and made me wonder--and yet we did not come to any circus or sign of a circus.
So I gave up the idea of a circus, and concluded he was from an asylum.
But we never came to an asylum--so I was up a stump, as you may say.
I asked him how far we were from Hartford.
He said he had never heard of the place; which I took to be a lie, but allowed it to go at that.
At the end of an hour we saw a far-away town sleeping in a valley by a winding river; and beyond it on a hill, a vast gray fortress, with towers and turrets, the first I had ever seen out of a picture.
"Bridgeport"?
said I, pointing.
"Camelot," said he.
My stranger had been showing signs of sleepiness.
He caught himself nodding, now, and smiled one of those pathetic, obsolete smiles of his, and said: "I find I can't go on; but come with me, I've got it all written out, and you can read it if you like".
In his chamber, he said: "First, I kept a journal; then by and by, after years, I took the journal and turned it into a book.
How long ago that was"!
He handed me his manuscript, and pointed out the place where I should begin: "Begin here--I've already told you what goes before".
He was steeped in drowsiness by this time.
As I went out at his door I heard him murmur sleepily: "Give you good den, fair sir".
I sat down by my fire and examined my treasure.
The first part of it--the great bulk of it--was parchment, and yellow with age.
I scanned a leaf particularly and saw that it was a palimpsest.
Under the old dim writing of the Yankee historian appeared traces of a penmanship which was older and dimmer still--Latin words and sentences: fragments from old monkish legends, evidently.
I turned to the place indicated by my stranger and began to read --as follows: THE TALE OF THE LOST LAND CHAPTER I CAMELOT "Camelot--Camelot," said I to myself.
"I don't seem to remember hearing of it before.
Name of the asylum, likely".
It was a soft, reposeful summer landscape, as lovely as a dream, and as lonesome as Sunday.
The air was full of the smell of flowers, and the buzzing of insects, and the twittering of birds, and there were no people, no wagons, there was no stir of life, nothing going on.
The road was mainly a winding path with hoof-prints in it, and now and then a faint trace of wheels on either side in the grass--wheels that apparently had a tire as broad as one's hand.
Presently a fair slip of a girl, about ten years old, with a cataract of golden hair streaming down over her shoulders, came along.
Around her head she wore a hoop of flame-red poppies.
It was as sweet an outfit as ever I saw, what there was of it.
She walked indolently along, with a mind at rest, its peace reflected in her innocent face.
The circus man paid no attention to her; didn't even seem to see her.
And she--she was no more startled at his fantastic make-up than if she was used to his like every day of her life.
She was going by as indifferently as she might have gone by a couple of cows; but when she happened to notice me, _then_ there was a change!
Up went her hands, and she was turned to stone; her mouth dropped open, her eyes stared wide and timorously, she was the picture of astonished curiosity touched with fear.
And there she stood gazing, in a sort of stupefied fascination, till we turned a corner of the wood and were lost to her view.
That she should be startled at me instead of at the other man, was too many for me; I couldn't make head or tail of it.
And that she should seem to consider me a spectacle, and totally overlook her own merits in that respect, was another puzzling thing, and a display of magnanimity, too, that was surprising in one so young.
There was food for thought here.
I moved along as one in a dream.
As we approached the town, signs of life began to appear.
At intervals we passed a wretched cabin, with a thatched roof, and about it small fields and garden patches in an indifferent state of cultivation.
There were people, too; brawny men, with long, coarse, uncombed hair that hung down over their faces and made them look like animals.
They and the women, as a rule, wore a coarse tow-linen robe that came well below the knee, and a rude sort of sandal, and many wore an iron collar.
The small boys and girls were always naked; but nobody seemed to know it.
All of these people stared at me, talked about me, ran into the huts and fetched out their families to gape at me; but nobody ever noticed that other fellow, except to make him humble salutation and get no response for their pains.
In the town were some substantial windowless houses of stone scattered among a wilderness of thatched cabins; the streets were mere crooked alleys, and unpaved; troops of dogs and nude children played in the sun and made life and noise; hogs roamed and
Presently there was a distant blare of military music; it came nearer, still nearer, and soon a noble cavalcade wound into view, glorious with plumed helmets and flashing mail and flaunting banners and rich doublets and horse-cloths and gilded spearheads;
Followed through one winding alley and then another,--and climbing, always climbing--till at last we gained the breezy height where the huge castle stood.
There was an exchange of bugle blasts; then a parley from the walls, where men-at-arms, in hauberk and morion, marched back and forth with halberd at shoulder under flapping banners with the rude figure of a dragon displayed upon them; and then the great
CHAPTER II KING ARTHUR'S COURT The moment I got a chance I slipped aside privately and touched an ancient common looking man on the shoulder and said, in an insinuating, confidential way: "Friend, do me a kindness.
Do you belong to the asylum, or are you just on a visit or something like that"?
He looked me over stupidly, and said: "Marry, fair sir, me seemeth--" "That will do," I said; "I reckon you are a patient".
I moved away, cogitating, and at the same time keeping an eye out for any chance passenger in his right mind that might come along and give me some light.
I judged I had found one, presently; so I drew him aside and said in his ear: "If I could see the head keeper a minute--only just a minute--" "Prithee do not let me".
"Let you _what_"?
"_Hinder_ me, then, if the word please thee better.
Then he went on to say he was an under-cook and could not stop to gossip, though he would like it another time; for it would comfort his very liver to know where I got my clothes.
As he started away he pointed and said yonder was one who was idle enough for my purpose, and was seeking me besides, no doubt.
This was an airy slim boy in shrimp-colored tights that made him look like a forked carrot, the rest of his gear was blue silk and dainty laces and ruffles; and he had long yellow curls, and wore a plumed pink satin cap tilted complacently over his ear.
By his look, he was good-natured; by his gait, he was satisfied with himself.
He was pretty enough to frame.
He arrived, looked me over with a smiling and impudent curiosity; said he had come for me, and informed me that he was a page.
"Go 'long," I said; "you ain't more than a paragraph".
It was pretty severe, but I was nettled.
However, it never phazed him; he didn't appear to know he was hurt.
He began to talk and laugh, in happy, thoughtless, boyish fashion, as we walked along, and made himself old friends with me at once; asked me all sorts of questions about myself and about my clothes, but never waited for an answer--always chattered
It made the cold chills creep over me!
I stopped and said, a little faintly: "Maybe I didn't hear you just right.
Say it again--and say it slow.
What year was it"?
"513".
"513!
You don't look it!
Come, my boy, I am a stranger and friendless; be honest and honorable with me.
Are you in your right mind"?
He said he was.
"Are these other people in their right minds"?
He said they were.
"And this isn't an asylum?
I mean, it isn't a place where they cure crazy people"?
He said it wasn't.
"Well, then," I said, "either I am a lunatic, or something just as awful has happened.
Now tell me, honest and true, where am I"?
"IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT".
I waited a minute, to let that idea shudder its way home, and then said: "And according to your notions, what year is it now"?
"528--nineteenth of June".
I felt a mournful sinking at the heart, and muttered: "I shall never see my friends again--never, never again.
They will not be born for more than thirteen hundred years yet".
I seemed to believe the boy, I didn't know why.
_Something_ in me seemed to believe him--my consciousness, as you may say; but my reason didn't.
My reason straightway began to clamor; that was natural.
I didn't know how to go about satisfying it, because I knew that the testimony of men wouldn't serve--my reason would say they were lunatics, and throw out their evidence.
But all of a sudden I stumbled on the very thing, just by luck.
I knew that the only total eclipse of the sun in the first half of the sixth century occurred on the 21st of June, A.D. 528, O.S., and began at 3 minutes after 12 noon.
I also knew that no total eclipse of the sun was due in what to _me_ was the present year--i.
e.
, 1879.
So, if I could keep my anxiety and curiosity from eating the heart out of me for forty-eight hours, I should then find out for certain whether this boy was telling me the truth or not.
Wherefore, being a practical Connecticut man, I now shoved this whole problem clear out of my mind till its appointed day and hour should come, in order that I might turn all my attention to the circumstances of the present moment, and be alert and ready
One thing at a time, is my motto--and just play that thing for all it is worth, even if it's only two pair and a jack.
I made up my mind to two things: if it was still the nineteenth century and I was among lunatics and couldn't get away, I would presently boss that asylum or know the reason why; and if, on the other hand, it was really the sixth century, all right, I
I'm not a man to waste time after my mind's made up and there's work on hand; so I said to the page: "Now, Clarence, my boy--if that might happen to be your name --I'll get you to post me up a little if you don't mind.
What is the name of that apparition that brought me here"?
"My master and thine?
That is the good knight and great lord Sir Kay the Seneschal, foster brother to our liege the king".
"Very good; go on, tell me everything".
He made a long story of it; but the part that had immediate interest for me was this: He said I was Sir Kay's prisoner, and that in the due course of custom I would be flung into a dungeon and left there on scant commons until my friends ransomed
I saw that the last chance had the best show, but I didn't waste any bother about that; time was too precious.
The page said, further, that dinner was about ended in the great hall by this time, and that as soon as the sociability and the heavy drinking should begin, Sir Kay would have me in and exhibit me before King Arthur and his illustrious knights seated at
Get word to my friends!
I thanked him; I couldn't do less; and about this time a lackey came to say I was wanted; so Clarence led me in and took me off to one side and sat down by me.
Well, it was a curious kind of spectacle, and interesting.
It was an immense place, and rather naked--yes, and full of loud contrasts.
It was very, very lofty; so lofty that the banners depending from the arched beams and girders away up there floated in a sort of twilight; there was a stone-railed gallery at each end, high up, with musicians in the one, and women, clothed in stunning
The floor was of big stone flags laid in black and white squares, rather battered by age and use, and needing repair.
As to ornament, there wasn't any, strictly speaking; though on the walls hung some huge tapestries which were probably taxed as works of art; battle-pieces, they were, with horses shaped like those which children cut out of paper or create in gingerbread;
There was a fireplace big enough to camp in; and its projecting sides and hood, of carved and pillared stonework, had the look of a cathedral door.
Along the walls stood men-at-arms, in breastplate and morion, with halberds for their only weapon --rigid as statues; and that is what they looked like.
In the middle of this groined and vaulted public square was an oaken table which they called the Table Round.
It was as large as a circus ring; and around it sat a great company of men dressed in such various and splendid colors that it hurt one's eyes to look at them.
They wore their plumed hats, right along, except that whenever one addressed himself directly to the king, he lifted his hat a trifle just as he was beginning his remark.
Mainly they were drinking--from entire ox horns; but a few were still munching bread or gnawing beef bones.
There was about an average of two dogs to one man; and these sat in expectant attitudes till a spent bone was flung to them, and then they went for it by brigades and divisions, with a rush, and there ensued a fight which filled the prospect with a
In the end, the winning dog stretched himself out comfortably with his bone between his paws, and proceeded to growl over it, and gnaw it, and grease the floor with it, just as fifty others were already doing; and the rest of the court resumed their
As a rule, the speech and behavior of these people were gracious and courtly; and I noticed that they were good and serious listeners when anybody was telling anything--I mean in a dog-fightless interval.
And plainly, too, they were a childlike and innocent lot; telling lies of the stateliest pattern with a most gentle and winning naivety, and ready and willing to listen to anybody else's lie, and believe it, too.
It was hard to associate them with anything cruel or dreadful; and yet they dealt in tales of blood and suffering with a guileless relish that made me almost forget to shudder.
I was not the only prisoner present.
There were twenty or more.
Poor devils, many of them were maimed, hacked, carved, in a frightful way; and their hair, their faces, their clothing, were caked with black and stiffened drenchings of blood.
They were suffering sharp physical pain, of course; and weariness, and hunger and thirst, no doubt; and at least none had given them the comfort of a wash, or even the poor charity of a lotion for their wounds; yet you never heard them utter a moan or a
The thought was forced upon me: "The rascals--_they_ have served other people so in their day; it being their own turn, now, they were not expecting any better treatment than this; so their philosophical bearing is not an outcome of mental training,
CHAPTER III KNIGHTS OF THE TABLE ROUND Mainly the Round Table talk was monologues--narrative accounts of the adventures in which these prisoners were captured and their friends and backers killed and stripped of their steeds and armor.
As a general thing--as far as I could make out--these murderous adventures were not forays undertaken to avenge injuries, nor to settle old disputes or sudden fallings out; no, as a rule they were simply duels between strangers--duels between people who
Many a time I had seen a couple of boys, strangers, meet by chance, and say simultaneously, "I can lick you," and go at it on the spot; but I had always imagined until now that that sort of thing belonged to children only, and was a sign and mark of
Yet there was something very engaging about these great simple-hearted creatures, something attractive and lovable.
There did not seem to be brains enough in the entire nursery, so to speak, to bait a fish-hook with; but you didn't seem to mind that, after a little, because you soon saw that brains were not needed in a society like that, and indeed would have marred it,
There was a fine manliness observable in almost every face; and in some a certain loftiness and sweetness that rebuked your belittling criticisms and stilled them.
A most noble benignity and purity reposed in the countenance of him they called Sir Galahad, and likewise in the king's also; and there was majesty and greatness in the giant frame and high bearing of Sir Launcelot of the Lake.
There was presently an incident which centered the general interest upon this Sir Launcelot.
At a sign from a sort of master of ceremonies, six or eight of the prisoners rose and came forward in a body and knelt on the floor and lifted up their hands toward the ladies' gallery and begged the grace of a word with the queen.
The most conspicuously situated lady in that massed flower-bed of feminine show and finery inclined her head by way of assent, and then the spokesman of the prisoners delivered himself and his fellows into her hands for free pardon, ransom, captivity, or
Surprise and astonishment flashed from face to face all over the house; the queen's gratified smile faded out at the name of Sir Kay, and she looked disappointed; and the page whispered in my ear with an accent and manner expressive of extravagant
Oh, call me pet names, dearest, call me a marine!
In twice a thousand years shall the unholy invention of man labor at odds to beget the fellow to this majestic lie"!
Every eye was fastened with severe inquiry upon Sir Kay.
But he was equal to the occasion.
He got up and played his hand like a major--and took every trick.
He said he would state the case exactly according to the facts; he would tell the simple straightforward tale, without comment of his own; "and then," said he, "if ye find glory and honor due, ye will give it unto him who is the mightiest man of his hands
and he pointed to Sir Launcelot.
Ah, he fetched them; it was a rattling good stroke.
Then he went on and told how Sir Launcelot, seeking adventures, some brief time gone by, killed seven giants at one sweep of his sword, and set a hundred and forty-two captive maidens free; and then went further, still seeking adventures, and found him
Well, it was touching to see the queen blush and smile, and look embarrassed and happy, and fling furtive glances at Sir Launcelot that would have got him shot in Arkansas, to a dead certainty.
Everybody praised the valor and magnanimity of Sir Launcelot; and as for me, I was perfectly amazed, that one man, all by himself, should have been able to beat down and capture such battalions of practiced fighters.
I said as much to Clarence; but this mocking featherhead only said: "An Sir Kay had had time to get another skin of sour wine into him, ye had seen the accompt doubled".
I looked at the boy in sorrow; and as I looked I saw the cloud of a deep despondency settle upon his countenance.
I followed the direction of his eye, and saw that a very old and white-bearded man, clothed in a flowing black gown, had risen and was standing at the table upon unsteady legs, and feebly swaying his ancient head and surveying the company with his watery
The same suffering look that was in the page's face was observable in all the faces around--the look of dumb creatures who know that they must endure and make no moan.
"Marry, we shall have it again," sighed the boy; "that same old weary tale that he hath told a thousand times in the same words, and that he _will_ tell till he dieth, every time he hath gotten his barrel full and feeleth his exaggeration-mill a-working.
Would God I had died or I saw this day"!
"Who is it"?
"Merlin, the mighty liar and magician, perdition singe him for the weariness he worketh with his one tale!
But that men fear him for that he hath the storms and the lightnings and all the devils that be in hell at his beck and call, they would have dug his entrails out these many years ago to get at that tale and squelch it.
He telleth it always in the third person, making believe he is too modest to glorify himself--maledictions light upon him, misfortune be his dole!
Good friend, prithee call me for evensong".
The boy nestled himself upon my shoulder and pretended to go to sleep.
The old man began his tale; and presently the lad was asleep in reality; so also were the dogs, and the court, the lackeys, and the files of men-at-arms.
The droning voice droned on; a soft snoring arose on all sides and supported it like a deep and subdued accompaniment of wind instruments.
Some heads were bowed upon folded arms, some lay back with open mouths that issued unconscious music; the flies buzzed and bit, unmolested, the rats swarmed softly out from a hundred holes, and pattered about, and made themselves at home everywhere; and
It was a tranquil scene, and restful to the weary eye and the jaded spirit.
This was the old man's tale.
He said: "Right so the king and Merlin departed, and went until an hermit that was a good man and a great leech.
So the hermit searched all his wounds and gave him good salves; so the king was there three days, and then were his wounds well amended that he might ride and go, and so departed.
And as they rode, Arthur said, I have no sword.
No force,* [*Footnote from M.T.: No matter.
] said Merlin, hereby is a sword that shall be yours and I may.
So they rode till they came to a lake, the which was a fair water and broad, and in the midst of the lake Arthur was ware of an arm clothed in white samite, that held a fair sword in that hand.
Lo, said Merlin, yonder is that sword that I spake of.
With that they saw a damsel going upon the lake.
What damsel is that?
said Arthur.
That is the Lady of the lake, said Merlin; and within that lake is a rock, and therein is as fair a place as any on earth, and richly beseen, and this damsel will come to you anon, and then speak ye fair to her that she will give you that sword.
Anon withal came the damsel unto Arthur and saluted him, and he her again.
Damsel, said Arthur, what sword is that, that yonder the arm holdeth above the water?
I would it were mine, for I have no sword.
Sir Arthur King, said the damsel, that sword is mine, and if ye will give me a gift when I ask it you, ye shall have it.
By my faith, said Arthur, I will give you what gift ye will ask.
Well, said the damsel, go ye into yonder barge and row yourself to the sword, and take it and the scabbard with you, and I will ask my gift when I see my time.
So Sir Arthur and Merlin alight, and tied their horses to two trees, and so they went into the ship, and when they came to the sword that the hand held, Sir Arthur took it up by the handles, and took it with him.
And the arm and the hand went under the water; and so they came unto the land and rode forth.
And then Sir Arthur saw a rich pavilion.
What signifieth yonder pavilion?
It is the knight's pavilion, said Merlin, that ye fought with last, Sir Pellinore, but he is out, he is not there; he hath ado with a knight of yours, that hight Egglame, and they have fought together, but at the last Egglame fled, and else he had been
That is well said, said Arthur, now have I a sword, now will I wage battle with him, and be avenged on him.
Sir, ye shall not so, said Merlin, for the knight is weary of fighting and chasing, so that ye shall have no worship to have ado with him; also, he will not lightly be matched of one knight living; and therefore it is my counsel, let him pass, for he shall
Also ye shall see that day in short space ye shall be right glad to give him your sister to wed.
When I see him, I will do as ye advise me, said Arthur.
Then Sir Arthur looked on the sword, and liked it passing well.
Whether liketh you better, said Merlin, the sword or the scabbard?
Me liketh better the sword, said Arthur.
Ye are more unwise, said Merlin, for the scabbard is worth ten of the sword, for while ye have the scabbard upon you ye shall never lose no blood, be ye never so sore wounded; therefore, keep well the scabbard always with you.
So they rode into Carlion, and by the way they met with Sir Pellinore; but Merlin had done such a craft that Pellinore saw not Arthur, and he passed by without any words.
I marvel, said Arthur, that the knight would not speak.
Sir, said Merlin, he saw you not; for and he had seen you ye had not lightly departed.
So they came unto Carlion, whereof his knights were passing glad.
And when they heard of his adventures they marveled that he would jeopard his person so alone.
But all men of worship said it was merry to be under such a chieftain that would put his person in adventure as other poor knights did".
CHAPTER IV SIR DINADAN THE HUMORIST It seemed to me that this quaint lie was most simply and beautifully told; but then I had heard it only once, and that makes a difference; it was pleasant to the others when it was fresh, no doubt.
Sir Dinadan the Humorist was the first to awake, and he soon roused the rest with a practical joke of a sufficiently poor quality.
He tied some metal mugs to a dog's tail and turned him loose, and he tore around and around the place in a frenzy of fright, with all the other dogs bellowing after him and battering and crashing against everything that came in their way and making
It was just like so many children.
Sir Dinadan was so proud of his exploit that he could not keep from telling over and over again, to weariness, how the immortal idea happened to occur to him; and as is the way with humorists of his breed, he was still laughing at it after everybody else
He was so set up that he concluded to make a speech --of course a humorous speech.
I think I never heard so many old played-out jokes strung together in my life.
He was worse than the minstrels, worse than the clown in the circus.
It seemed peculiarly sad to sit here, thirteen hundred years before I was born, and listen again to poor, flat, worm-eaten jokes that had given me the dry gripes when I was a boy thirteen hundred years afterwards.
It about convinced me that there isn't any such thing as a new joke possible.
Everybody laughed at these antiquities --but then they always do; I had noticed that, centuries later.
However, of course the scoffer didn't laugh--I mean the boy.
No, he scoffed; there wasn't anything he wouldn't scoff at.
He said the most of Sir Dinadan's jokes were rotten and the rest were petrified.
I said "petrified" was good; as I believed, myself, that the only right way to classify the majestic ages of some of those jokes was by geologic periods.
But that neat idea hit the boy in a blank place, for geology hadn't been invented yet.
However, I made a note of the remark, and calculated to educate the commonwealth up to it if I pulled through.
It is no use to throw a good thing away merely because the market isn't ripe yet.
Now Sir Kay arose and began to fire up on his history-mill with me for fuel.
It was time for me to feel serious, and I did.
Sir Kay told how he had encountered me in a far land of barbarians, who all wore the same ridiculous garb that I did--a garb that was a work of enchantment, and intended to make the wearer secure from hurt by human hands.
However he had nullified the force of the enchantment by prayer, and had killed my thirteen knights in a three hours' battle, and taken me prisoner, sparing my life in order that so strange a curiosity as I was might be exhibited to the wonder and
He spoke of me all the time, in the blandest way, as "this prodigious giant," and "this horrible sky-towering monster," and "this tusked and taloned man-devouring ogre", and everybody took in all this bosh in the naivest way, and never smiled or seemed to
He said that in trying to escape from him I sprang into the top of a tree two hundred cubits high at a single bound, but he dislodged me with a stone the size of a cow, which "all-to brast" the most of my bones, and then swore me to appear at Arthur's
He ended by condemning me to die at noon on the 21st; and was so little concerned about it that he stopped to yawn before he named the date.
I was in a dismal state by this time; indeed, I was hardly enough in my right mind to keep the run of a dispute that sprung up as to how I had better be killed, the possibility of the killing being doubted by some, because of the enchantment in my clothes.
And yet it was nothing but an ordinary suit of fifteen-dollar slop-shops.
Still, I was sane enough to notice this detail, to wit: many of the terms used in the most matter-of-fact way by this great assemblage of the first ladies and gentlemen in the land would have made a Comanche blush.
Indelicacy is too mild a term to convey the idea.
However, I had read "Tom Jones," and "Roderick Random," and other books of that kind, and knew that the highest and first ladies and gentlemen in England had remained little or no cleaner in their talk, and in the morals and conduct which such talk
Suppose Sir Walter, instead of putting the conversations into the mouths of his characters, had allowed the characters to speak for themselves?
We should have had talk from Rebecca and Ivanhoe and the soft lady Rowena which would embarrass a tramp in our day.
However, to the unconsciously indelicate all things are delicate.
King Arthur's people were not aware that they were indecent and I had presence of mind enough not to mention it.
They were so troubled about my enchanted clothes that they were mightily relieved, at last, when old Merlin swept the difficulty away for them with a common-sense hint.
He asked them why they were so dull--why didn't it occur to them to strip me.
In half a minute I was as naked as a pair of tongs!
And dear, dear, to think of it: I was the only embarrassed person there.
Everybody discussed me; and did it as unconcernedly as if I had been a cabbage.
Queen Guenever was as naively interested as the rest, and said she had never seen anybody with legs just like mine before.
It was the only compliment I got--if it was a compliment.
Finally I was carried off in one direction, and my perilous clothes in another.
I was shoved into a dark and narrow cell in a dungeon, with some scant remnants for dinner, some moldy straw for a bed, and no end of rats for company.
CHAPTER V AN INSPIRATION I was so tired that even my fears were not able to keep me awake long.
When I next came to myself, I seemed to have been asleep a very long time.
My first thought was, "Well, what an astonishing dream I've had!
I reckon I've waked only just in time to keep from being hanged or drowned or burned or something...
.
I'll nap again till the whistle blows, and then I'll go down to the arms factory and have it out with Hercules".
But just then I heard the harsh music of rusty chains and bolts, a light flashed in my eyes, and that butterfly, Clarence, stood before me!
I gasped with surprise; my breath almost got away from me.
"What"!
I said, "you here yet?
Go along with the rest of the dream!
scatter"!
But he only laughed, in his light-hearted way, and fell to making fun of my sorry plight.
"All right," I said resignedly, "let the dream go on; I'm in no hurry".
"Prithee what dream"?
"What dream?
Why, the dream that I am in Arthur's court--a person who never existed; and that I am talking to you, who are nothing but a work of the imagination".
"Oh, la, indeed!
and is it a dream that you're to be burned to-morrow?
Ho-ho--answer me that"!
The shock that went through me was distressing.
I now began to reason that my situation was in the last degree serious, dream or no dream; for I knew by past experience of the lifelike intensity of dreams, that to be burned to death, even in a dream, would be very far from being a jest, and was a thing
So I said beseechingly: "Ah, Clarence, good boy, only friend I've got,--for you _are_ my friend, aren't you?
--don't fail me; help me to devise some way of escaping from this place"!
"Now do but hear thyself!
Escape?
Why, man, the corridors are in guard and keep of men-at-arms".
"No doubt, no doubt.
But how many, Clarence?
Not many, I hope"?
"Full a score.
One may not hope to escape".
After a pause --hesitatingly: "and there be other reasons--and weightier".
"Other ones?
What are they"?
"Well, they say--oh, but I daren't, indeed daren't"!
"Why, poor lad, what is the matter?
Why do you blench?
Why do you tremble so"?
"Oh, in sooth, there is need!
I do want to tell you, but--" "Come, come, be brave, be a man--speak out, there's a good lad"!
He hesitated, pulled one way by desire, the other way by fear; then he stole to the door and peeped out, listening; and finally crept close to me and put his mouth to my ear and told me his fearful news in a whisper, and with all the cowering apprehension
"Merlin, in his malice, has woven a spell about this dungeon, and there bides not the man in these kingdoms that would be desperate enough to essay to cross its lines with you!
Now God pity me, I have told it!
Ah, be kind to me, be merciful to a poor boy who means thee well; for an thou betray me I am lost"!
I laughed the only really refreshing laugh I had had for some time; and shouted: "Merlin has wrought a spell!
_Merlin_, forsooth!
That cheap old humbug, that maundering old ass?
Bosh, pure bosh, the silliest bosh in the world!
Why, it does seem to me that of all the childish, idiotic, chuckle-headed, chicken-livered superstitions that ev --oh, damn Merlin"!
But Clarence had slumped to his knees before I had half finished, and he was like to go out of his mind with fright.
"Oh, beware!
These are awful words!
Any moment these walls may crumble upon us if you say such things.
Oh call them back before it is too late"!
Now this strange exhibition gave me a good idea and set me to thinking.
If everybody about here was so honestly and sincerely afraid of Merlin's pretended magic as Clarence was, certainly a superior man like me ought to be shrewd enough to contrive some way to take advantage of such a state of things.
I went on thinking, and worked out a plan.
Then I said: "Get up.
Pull yourself together; look me in the eye.
Do you know why I laughed"?
"No--but for our blessed Lady's sake, do it no more".
"Well, I'll tell you why I laughed.
Because I'm a magician myself".
"Thou"!
The boy recoiled a step, and caught his breath, for the thing hit him rather sudden; but the aspect which he took on was very, very respectful.
I took quick note of that; it indicated that a humbug didn't need to have a reputation in this asylum; people stood ready to take him at his word, without that.
I resumed.
"I've known Merlin seven hundred years, and he--" "Seven hun--" "Don't interrupt me.
He has died and come alive again thirteen times, and traveled under a new name every time: Smith, Jones, Robinson, Jackson, Peters, Haskins, Merlin--a new alias every time he turns up.
I knew him in Egypt three hundred years ago; I knew him in India five hundred years ago--he is always blethering around in my way, everywhere I go; he makes me tired.
He don't amount to shucks, as a magician; knows some of the old common tricks, but has never got beyond the rudiments, and never will.
He is well enough for the provinces--one-night stands and that sort of thing, you know--but dear me, _he_ oughtn't to set up for an expert--anyway not where there's a real artist.
Now look here, Clarence, I am going to stand your friend, right along, and in return you must be mine.
I want you to do me a favor.
I want you to get word to the king that I am a magician myself--and the Supreme Grand High-yu-Muck-amuck and head of the tribe, at that; and I want him to be made to understand that I am just quietly arranging a little calamity here that will make the fur
Will you get that to the king for me"?
The poor boy was in such a state that he could hardly answer me.
It was pitiful to see a creature so terrified, so unnerved, so demoralized.
But he promised everything; and on my side he made me promise over and over again that I would remain his friend, and never turn against him or cast any enchantments upon him.
Then he worked his way out, staying himself with his hand along the wall, like a sick person.
Presently this thought occurred to me: how heedless I have been!
When the boy gets calm, he will wonder why a great magician like me should have begged a boy like him to help me get out of this place; he will put this and that together, and will see that I am a humbug.
I worried over that heedless blunder for an hour, and called myself a great many hard names, meantime.
But finally it occurred to me all of a sudden that these animals didn't reason; that _they_ never put this and that together; that all their talk showed that they didn't know a discrepancy when they saw it.
I was at rest, then.
But as soon as one is at rest, in this world, off he goes on something else to worry about.
It occurred to me that I had made another blunder: I had sent the boy off to alarm his betters with a threat--I intending to invent a calamity at my leisure; now the people who are the readiest and eagerest and willingest to swallow miracles are the very
Suppose I should be asked to name my calamity?
Yes, I had made a blunder; I ought to have invented my calamity first.
"What shall I do?
what can I say, to gain a little time"?
I was in trouble again; in the deepest kind of trouble...
"There's a footstep!
--they're coming.
If I had only just a moment to think...
.
Good, I've got it.
I'm all right".
You see, it was the eclipse.
It came into my mind in the nick of time, how Columbus, or Cortez, or one of those people, played an eclipse as a saving trump once, on some savages, and I saw my chance.
I could play it myself, now, and it wouldn't be any plagiarism, either, because I should get it in nearly a thousand years ahead of those parties.
Clarence came in, subdued, distressed, and said: "I hasted the message to our liege the king, and straightway he had me to his presence.
He was frighted even to the marrow, and was minded to give order for your instant enlargement, and that you be clothed in fine raiment and lodged as befitted one so great; but then came Merlin and spoiled all; for he persuaded the king that you are mad,
They disputed long, but in the end, Merlin, scoffing, said, 'Wherefore hath he not _named_ his brave calamity?
Verily it is because he cannot.
' This thrust did in a most sudden sort close the king's mouth, and he could offer naught to turn the argument; and so, reluctant, and full loth to do you the discourtesy, he yet prayeth you to consider his perplexed case, as noting how the matter stands,
Oh, prithee delay not; to delay at such a time were to double and treble the perils that already compass thee about.
Oh, be thou wise--name the calamity"!
I allowed silence to accumulate while I got my impressiveness together, and then said: "How long have I been shut up in this hole"?
"Ye were shut up when yesterday was well spent.
It is 9 of the morning now".
"No!
Then I have slept well, sure enough.
Nine in the morning now!
And yet it is the very complexion of midnight, to a shade.
This is the 20th, then"?
"The 20th--yes".
"And I am to be burned alive to-morrow".
The boy shuddered.
"At what hour"?
"At high noon".
"Now then, I will tell you what to say".
I paused, and stood over that cowering lad a whole minute in awful silence; then, in a voice deep, measured, charged with doom, I began, and rose by dramatically graded stages to my colossal climax, which I delivered in as sublime and noble a way as ever I
I had to carry the boy out myself, he sunk into such a collapse.
I handed him over to the soldiers, and went back.
CHAPTER VI THE ECLIPSE In the stillness and the darkness, realization soon began to supplement knowledge.
The mere knowledge of a fact is pale; but when you come to _realize_ your fact, it takes on color.
It is all the difference between hearing of a man being stabbed to the heart, and seeing it done.
In the stillness and the darkness, the knowledge that I was in deadly danger took to itself deeper and deeper meaning all the time; a something which was realization crept inch by inch through my veins and turned me cold.
But it is a blessed provision of nature that at times like these, as soon as a man's mercury has got down to a certain point there comes a revulsion, and he rallies.
Hope springs up, and cheerfulness along with it, and then he is in good shape to do something for himself, if anything can be done.
When my rally came, it came with a bound.
I said to myself that my eclipse would be sure to save me, and make me the greatest man in the kingdom besides; and straightway my mercury went up to the top of the tube, and my solicitudes all vanished.
I was as happy a man as there was in the world.
I was even impatient for to-morrow to come, I so wanted to gather in that great triumph and be the center of all the nation's wonder and reverence.
Besides, in a business way it would be the making of me; I knew that.
Meantime there was one thing which had got pushed into the background of my mind.
That was the half-conviction that when the nature of my proposed calamity should be reported to those superstitious people, it would have such an effect that they would want to compromise.
So, by and by when I heard footsteps coming, that thought was recalled to me, and I said to myself, "As sure as anything, it's the compromise.
Well, if it is good, all right, I will accept; but if it isn't, I mean to stand my ground and play my hand for all it is worth".
The door opened, and some men-at-arms appeared.
The leader said: "The stake is ready.
Come"!
The stake!
The strength went out of me, and I almost fell down.
It is hard to get one's breath at such a time, such lumps come into one's throat, and such gaspings; but as soon as I could speak, I said: "But this is a mistake--the execution is to-morrow".
"Order changed; been set forward a day.
Haste thee"!
I was lost.
There was no help for me.
I was dazed, stupefied; I had no command over myself, I only wandered purposely about, like one out of his mind; so the soldiers took hold of me, and pulled me along with them, out of the cell and along the maze of underground corridors, and finally into
As we stepped into the vast enclosed court of the castle I got a shock; for the first thing I saw was the stake, standing in the center, and near it the piled fagots and a monk.
On all four sides of the court the seated multitudes rose rank above rank, forming sloping terraces that were rich with color.
The king and the queen sat in their thrones, the most conspicuous figures there, of course.
To note all this, occupied but a second.
The next second Clarence had slipped from some place of concealment and was pouring news into my ear, his eyes beaming with triumph and gladness.
He said: "Tis through _me_ the change was wrought!
And main hard have I worked to do it, too.
But when I revealed to them the calamity in store, and saw how mighty was the terror it did engender, then saw I also that this was the time to strike!
Wherefore I diligently pretended, unto this and that and the other one, that your power against the sun could not reach its full until the morrow; and so if any would save the sun and the world, you must be slain to-day, while your enchantments are but in
Odsbodikins, it was but a dull lie, a most indifferent invention, but you should have seen them seize it and swallow it, in the frenzy of their fright, as it were salvation sent from heaven; and all the while was I laughing in my sleeve the one moment, to
Ah how happy has the matter sped!
You will not need to do the sun a _real_ hurt--ah, forget not that, on your soul forget it not!
Only make a little darkness--only the littlest little darkness, mind, and cease with that.
It will be sufficient.
They will see that I spoke falsely,--being ignorant, as they will fancy --and with the falling of the first shadow of that darkness you shall see them go mad with fear; and they will set you free and make you great!
Go to thy triumph, now!
But remember--ah, good friend, I implore thee remember my supplication, and do the blessed sun no hurt.
For _my_ sake, thy true friend".
I choked out some words through my grief and misery; as much as to say I would spare the sun; for which the lad's eyes paid me back with such deep and loving gratitude that I had not the heart to tell him his good-hearted foolishness had ruined me and sent
As the soldiers assisted me across the court the stillness was so profound that if I had been blindfold I should have supposed I was in a solitude instead of walled in by four thousand people.
There was not a movement perceptible in those masses of humanity; they were as rigid as stone images, and as pale; and dread sat upon every countenance.
This hush continued while I was being chained to the stake; it still continued while the fagots were carefully and tediously piled about my ankles, my knees, my thighs, my body.
Then there was a pause, and a deeper hush, if possible, and a man knelt down at my feet with a blazing torch; the multitude strained forward, gazing, and parting slightly from their seats without knowing it; the monk raised his hands above my head, and his
I waited two or three moments; then looked up; he was standing there petrified.
With a common impulse the multitude rose slowly up and stared into the sky.
I followed their eyes, as sure as guns, there was my eclipse beginning!
The life went boiling through my veins; I was a new man!
The rim of black spread slowly into the sun's disk, my heart beat higher and higher, and still the assemblage and the priest stared into the sky, motionless.
I knew that this gaze would be turned upon me, next.
When it was, I was ready.
I was in one of the most grand attitudes I ever struck, with my arm stretched up pointing to the sun.
It was a noble effect.
You could _see_ the shudder sweep the mass like a wave.
Two shouts rang out, one close upon the heels of the other: "Apply the torch"!
"I forbid it"!
The one was from Merlin, the other from the king.
Merlin started from his place--to apply the torch himself, I judged.
I said: "Stay where you are.
If any man moves--even the king--before I give him leave, I will blast him with thunder, I will consume him with lightnings"!
The multitude sank meekly into their seats, and I was just expecting they would.
Merlin hesitated a moment or two, and I was on pins and needles during that little while.
Then he sat down, and I took a good breath; for I knew I was master of the situation now.
The king said: "Be merciful, fair sir, and essay no further in this perilous matter, lest disaster follow.
It was reported to us that your powers could not attain unto their full strength until the morrow; but--" "Your Majesty thinks the report may have been a lie?
It _was_ a lie".
That made an immense effect; up went appealing hands everywhere, and the king was assailed with a storm of supplications that I might be bought off at any price, and the calamity stayed.
The king was eager to comply.
He said: "Name any terms, reverend sir, even to the halving of my kingdom; but banish this calamity, spare the sun"!
My fortune was made.
I would have taken him up in a minute, but I couldn't stop an eclipse; the thing was out of the question.
So I asked time to consider.
The king said: "How long--ah, how long, good sir?
Be merciful; look, it groweth darker, moment by moment.
Prithee how long"?
"Not long.
Half an hour--maybe an hour".
There were a thousand pathetic protests, but I couldn't shorten up any, for I couldn't remember how long a total eclipse lasts.
I was in a puzzled condition, anyway, and wanted to think.
Something was wrong about that eclipse, and the fact was very unsettling.
If this wasn't the one I was after, how was I to tell whether this was the sixth century, or nothing but a dream?
Dear me, if I could only prove it was the latter!
Here was a glad new hope.
If the boy was right about the date, and this was surely the 20th, it _wasn't_ the sixth century.
I reached for the monk's sleeve, in considerable excitement, and asked him what day of the month it was.
Hang him, he said it was the _twenty-first_!
It made me turn cold to hear him.
I begged him not to make any mistake about it; but he was sure; he knew it was the 21st.
So, that feather-headed boy had botched things again!
The time of the day was right for the eclipse; I had seen that for myself, in the beginning, by the dial that was near by.
Yes, I was in King Arthur's court, and I might as well make the most out of it I could.
The darkness was steadily growing, the people becoming more and more distressed.
I now said: "I have reflected, Sir King.
For a lesson, I will let this darkness proceed, and spread night in the world; but whether I blot out the sun for good, or restore it, shall rest with you.
These are the terms, to wit: You shall remain king over all your dominions, and receive all the glories and honors that belong to the kingship; but you shall appoint me your perpetual minister and executive, and give me for my services one per cent of such
If I can't live on that, I sha'n't ask anybody to give me a lift.
Is it satisfactory"?
There was a prodigious roar of applause, and out of the midst of it the king's voice rose, saying: "Away with his bonds, and set him free!
and do him homage, high and low, rich and poor, for he is become the king's right hand, is clothed with power and authority, and his seat is upon the highest step of the throne!
Now sweep away this creeping night, and bring the light and cheer again, that all the world may bless thee".
But I said: "That a common man should be shamed before the world, is nothing; but it were dishonor to the _king_ if any that saw his minister naked should not also see him delivered from his shame.
If I might ask that my clothes be brought again--" "They are not meet," the king broke in.
"Fetch raiment of another sort; clothe him like a prince"!
My idea worked.
I wanted to keep things as they were till the eclipse was total, otherwise they would be trying again to get me to dismiss the darkness, and of course I couldn't do it.
Sending for the clothes gained some delay, but not enough.
So I had to make another excuse.
I said it would be but natural if the king should change his mind and repent to some extent of what he had done under excitement; therefore I would let the darkness grow a while, and if at the end of a reasonable time the king had kept his mind the same,
Neither the king nor anybody else was satisfied with that arrangement, but I had to stick to my point.
It grew darker and darker and blacker and blacker, while I struggled with those awkward sixth-century clothes.
It got to be pitch dark, at last, and the multitude groaned with horror to feel the cold uncanny night breezes fan through the place and see the stars come out and twinkle in the sky.
At last the eclipse was total, and I was very glad of it, but everybody else was in misery; which was quite natural.
I said: "The king, by his silence, still stands to the terms".
Then I lifted up my hands--stood just so a moment--then I said, with the most awful solemnity: "Let the enchantment dissolve and pass harmless away"!
There was no response, for a moment, in that deep darkness and that graveyard hush.
But when the silver rim of the sun pushed itself out, a moment or two later, the assemblage broke loose with a vast shout and came pouring down like a deluge to smother me with blessings and gratitude; and Clarence was not the last of the wash, to be sure.
CHAPTER VII MERLIN'S TOWER Inasmuch as I was now the second personage in the Kingdom, as far as political power and authority were concerned, much was made of me.
My raiment was of silks and velvets and cloth of gold, and by consequence was very showy, also uncomfortable.
But habit would soon reconcile me to my clothes; I was aware of that.
I was given the choicest suite of apartments in the castle, after the king's.
They were aglow with loud-colored silken hangings, but the stone floors had nothing but rushes on them for a carpet, and they were misfit rushes at that, being not all of one breed.
As for conveniences, properly speaking, there weren't any.
I mean _little_ conveniences; it is the little conveniences that make the real comfort of life.
The big oaken chairs, graced with rude carvings, were well enough, but that was the stopping place.
There was no soap, no matches, no looking-glass--except a metal one, about as powerful as a pail of water.
And not a chromo.
I had been used to chromos for years, and I saw now that without my suspecting it a passion for art had got worked into the fabric of my being, and was become a part of me.
It made me homesick to look around over this proud and gaudy but heartless barrenness and remember that in our house in East Hartford, all unpretending as it was, you couldn't go into a room but you would find an insurance-chromo, or at least a three-color
But here, even in my grand room of state, there wasn't anything in the nature of a picture except a thing the size of a bedquilt, which was either woven or knitted (it had darned places in it), and nothing in it was the right color or the right shape; and
Raphael was a bird.
We had several of his chromos; one was his "Miraculous Draught of Fishes," where he puts in a miracle of his own--puts three men into a canoe which wouldn't have held a dog without upsetting.
I always admired to study R.'s art, it was so fresh and unconventional.
There wasn't even a bell or a speaking-tube in the castle.
I had a great many servants, and those that were on duty lolled in the anteroom; and when I wanted one of them I had to go and call for him.
There was no gas, there were no candles; a bronze dish half full of boarding-house butter with a blazing rag floating in it was the thing that produced what was regarded as light.
A lot of these hung along the walls and modified the dark, just toned it down enough to make it dismal.
If you went out at night, your servants carried torches.
There were no books, pens, paper or ink, and no glass in the openings they believed to be windows.
It is a little thing--glass is--until it is absent, then it becomes a big thing.
But perhaps the worst of all was, that there wasn't any sugar, coffee, tea, or tobacco.
I saw that I was just another Robinson Crusoe cast away on an uninhabited island, with no society but some more or less tame animals, and if I wanted to make life bearable I must do as he did--invent, contrive, create, reorganize things; set brain and hand
Well, that was in my line.
One thing troubled me along at first--the immense interest which people took in me.
Apparently the whole nation wanted a look at me.
It soon transpired that the eclipse had scared the British world almost to death; that while it lasted the whole country, from one end to the other, was in a pitiable state of panic, and the churches, hermitages, and monkeries overflowed with praying and
Then had followed the news that the producer of this awful event was a stranger, a mighty magician at Arthur's court; that he could have blown out the sun like a candle, and was just going to do it when his mercy was purchased, and he then dissolved his
Now if you consider that everybody believed that, and not only believed it, but never even dreamed of doubting it, you will easily understand that there was not a person in all Britain that would not have walked fifty miles to get a sight of me.
Of course I was all the talk--all other subjects were dropped; even the king became suddenly a person of minor interest and notoriety.
Within twenty-four hours the delegations began to arrive, and from that time onward for a fortnight they kept coming.
The village was crowded, and all the countryside.
I had to go out a dozen times a day and show myself to these reverent and awe-stricken multitudes.
It came to be a great burden, as to time and trouble, but of course it was at the same time compensatingly agreeable to be so celebrated and such a center of homage.
It turned Brer Merlin green with envy and spite, which was a great satisfaction to me.
But there was one thing I couldn't understand--nobody had asked for an autograph.
I spoke to Clarence about it.
By George!
I had to explain to him what it was.
Then he said nobody in the country could read or write but a few dozen priests.
Land!
think of that.
There was another thing that troubled me a little.
Those multitudes presently began to agitate for another miracle.
That was natural.
To be able to carry back to their far homes the boast that they had seen the man who could command the sun, riding in the heavens, and be obeyed, would make them great in the eyes of their neighbors, and envied by them all; but to be able to also say they
The pressure got to be pretty strong.
There was going to be an eclipse of the moon, and I knew the date and hour, but it was too far away.
Two years.
I would have given a good deal for license to hurry it up and use it now when there was a big market for it.
It seemed a great pity to have it wasted so, and come lagging along at a time when a body wouldn't have any use for it, as like as not.
If it had been booked for only a month away, I could have sold it short; but, as matters stood, I couldn't seem to cipher out any way to make it do me any good, so I gave up trying.
Next, Clarence found that old Merlin was making himself busy on the sly among those people.
He was spreading a report that I was a humbug, and that the reason I didn't accommodate the people with a miracle was because I couldn't.
I saw that I must do something.
I presently thought out a plan.
By my authority as executive I threw Merlin into prison--the same cell I had occupied myself.
Then I gave public notice by herald and trumpet that I should be busy with affairs of state for a fortnight, but about the end of that time I would take a moment's leisure and blow up Merlin's stone tower by fires from heaven; in the meantime, whoso
Furthermore, I would perform but this one miracle at this time, and no more; if it failed to satisfy and any murmured, I would turn the murmurers into horses, and make them useful.
Quiet ensued.
I took Clarence into my confidence, to a certain degree, and we went to work privately.
I told him that this was a sort of miracle that required a trifle of preparation, and that it would be sudden death to ever talk about these preparations to anybody.
That made his mouth safe enough.
Clandestinely we made a few bushels of first-rate blasting powder, and I superintended my armorers while they constructed a lightning-rod and some wires.
This old stone tower was very massive--and rather ruinous, too, for it was Roman, and four hundred years old.
Yes, and handsome, after a rude fashion, and clothed with ivy from base to summit, as with a shirt of scale mail.
It stood on a lonely eminence, in good view from the castle, and about half a mile away.
Working by night, we stowed the powder in the tower--dug stones out, on the inside, and buried the powder in the walls themselves, which were fifteen feet thick at the base.
We put in a peck at a time, in a dozen places.
We could have blown up the Tower of London with these charges.
When the thirteenth night was come we put up our lightning-rod, bedded it in one of the batches of powder, and ran wires from it to the other batches.
Everybody had shunned that locality from the day of my proclamation, but on the morning of the fourteenth I thought best to warn the people, through the heralds, to keep clear away--a quarter of a mile away.
Then added, by command, that at some time during the twenty-four hours I would consummate the miracle, but would first give a brief notice; by flags on the castle towers if in the daytime, by torch-baskets in the same places if at night.
Thunder-showers had been tolerably frequent of late, and I was not much afraid of a failure; still, I shouldn't have cared for a delay of a day or two; I should have explained that I was busy with affairs of state yet, and the people must wait.
Of course, we had a blazing sunny day--almost the first one without a cloud for three weeks; things always happen so.
I kept secluded, and watched the weather.
Clarence dropped in from time to time and said the public excitement was growing and growing all the time, and the whole country filling up with human masses as far as one could see from the battlements.
At last the wind sprang up and a cloud appeared--in the right quarter, too, and just at nightfall.
For a little while I watched that distant cloud spread and blacken, then I judged it was time for me to appear.
I ordered the torch-baskets to be lit, and Merlin liberated and sent to me.
A quarter of an hour later I ascended the parapet and there found the king and the court assembled and gazing off in the darkness toward Merlin's Tower.
Already the darkness was so heavy that one could not see far; these people and the old turrets, being partly in deep shadow and partly in the red glow from the great torch-baskets overhead, made a good deal of a picture.
Merlin arrived in a gloomy mood.
I said: "You wanted to burn me alive when I had not done you any harm, and latterly you have been trying to injure my professional reputation.
Therefore I am going to call down fire and blow up your tower, but it is only fair to give you a chance; now if you think you can break my enchantments and ward off the fires, step to the bat, it's your innings".
"I can, fair sir, and I will.
Doubt it not".
He drew an imaginary circle on the stones of the roof, and burnt a pinch of powder in it, which sent up a small cloud of aromatic smoke, whereat everybody fell back and began to cross themselves and get uncomfortable.
Then he began to mutter and make passes in the air with his hands.
He worked himself up slowly and gradually into a sort of frenzy, and got to thrashing around with his arms like the sails of a windmill.
By this time the storm had about reached us; the gusts of wind were flaring the torches and making the shadows swash about, the first heavy drops of rain were falling, the world abroad was black as pitch, the lightning began to wink fitfully.
Of course, my rod would be loading itself now.
In fact, things were imminent.
So I said: "You have had time enough.
I have given you every advantage, and not interfered.
It is plain your magic is weak.
It is only fair that I begin now".
I made about three passes in the air, and then there was an awful crash and that old tower leaped into the sky in chunks, along with a vast volcanic fountain of fire that turned night to noonday, and showed a thousand acres of human beings groveling on the
Well, it rained mortar and masonry the rest of the week.
This was the report; but probably the facts would have modified it.
It was an effective miracle.
The great bothersome temporary population vanished.
There were a good many thousand tracks in the mud the next morning, but they were all outward bound.
If I had advertised another miracle I couldn't have raised an audience with a sheriff.
Merlin's stock was flat.
The king wanted to stop his wages; he even wanted to banish him, but I interfered.
I said he would be useful to work the weather, and attend to small matters like that, and I would give him a lift now and then when his poor little parlor-magic soured on him.
There wasn't a rag of his tower left, but I had the government rebuild it for him, and advised him to take boarders; but he was too high-toned for that.
And as for being grateful, he never even said thank you.
He was a rather hard lot, take him how you might; but then you couldn't fairly expect a man to be sweet that had been set back so.
CHAPTER VIII THE BOSS To be vested with enormous authority is a fine thing; but to have the on-looking world consent to it is a finer.
The tower episode solidified my power, and made it impregnable.
If any were perchance disposed to be jealous and critical before that, they experienced a change of heart, now.
There was not any one in the kingdom who would have considered it good judgment to meddle with my matters.
I was fast getting adjusted to my situation and circumstances.
For a time, I used to wake up, mornings, and smile at my "dream," and listen for the Colt's factory whistle; but that sort of thing played itself out, gradually, and at last I was fully able to realize that I was actually living in the sixth century, and
After that, I was just as much at home in that century as I could have been in any other; and as for preference, I wouldn't have traded it for the twentieth.
Look at the opportunities here for a man of knowledge, brains, pluck, and enterprise to sail in and grow up with the country.
The grandest field that ever was; and all my own; not a competitor; not a man who wasn't a baby to me in acquirements and capacities; whereas, what would I amount to in the twentieth century?
I should be foreman of a factory, that is about all; and could drag a seine down street any day and catch a hundred better men than myself.
What a jump I had made!
I couldn't keep from thinking about it, and contemplating it, just as one does who has struck oil.
There was nothing back of me that could approach it, unless it might be Joseph's case; and Joseph's only approached it, it didn't equal it, quite.
For it stands to reason that as Joseph's splendid financial ingenuities advantaged nobody but the king, the general public must have regarded him with a good deal of disfavor, whereas I had done my entire public a kindness in sparing the sun, and was
I was no shadow of a king; I was the substance; the king himself was the shadow.
My power was colossal; and it was not a mere name, as such things have generally been, it was the genuine article.
I stood here, at the very spring and source of the second great period of the world's history; and could see the trickling stream of that history gather and deepen and broaden, and roll its mighty tides down the far centuries; and I could note the
I was a Unique; and glad to know that that fact could not be dislodged or challenged for thirteen centuries and a half, for sure.
Yes, in power I was equal to the king.
At the same time there was another power that was a trifle stronger than both of us put together.
That was the Church.
I do not wish to disguise that fact.
I couldn't, if I wanted to.
But never mind about that, now; it will show up, in its proper place, later on.
It didn't cause me any trouble in the beginning --at least any of consequence.
Well, it was a curious country, and full of interest.
And the people!
They were the quaintest and simplest and trustingest race; why, they were nothing but rabbits.
It was pitiful for a person born in a wholesome free atmosphere to listen to their humble and hearty outpourings of loyalty toward their king and Church and nobility; as if they had any more occasion to love and honor king and Church and noble than a slave
Why, dear me, _any_ kind of royalty, howsoever modified, _any_ kind of aristocracy, howsoever pruned, is rightly an insult; but if you are born and brought up under that sort of arrangement you probably never find it out for yourself, and don't believe it
It is enough to make a body ashamed of his race to think of the sort of froth that has always occupied its thrones without shadow of right or reason, and the seventh-rate people that have always figured as its aristocracies--a company of monarchs and
The most of King Arthur's British nation were slaves, pure and simple, and bore that name, and wore the iron collar on their necks; and the rest were slaves in fact, but without the name; they imagined themselves men and freemen, and called themselves so.
The truth was, the nation as a body was in the world for one object, and one only: to grovel before king and Church and noble; to slave for them, sweat blood for them, starve that they might be fed, work that they might play, drink misery to the dregs that
And for all this, the thanks they got were cuffs and contempt; and so poor-spirited were they that they took even this sort of attention as an honor.
Inherited ideas are a curious thing, and interesting to observe and examine.
I had mine, the king and his people had theirs.
In both cases they flowed in ruts worn deep by time and habit, and the man who should have proposed to divert them by reason and argument would have had a long contract on his hands.
For instance, those people had inherited the idea that all men without title and a long pedigree, whether they had great natural gifts and acquirements or hadn't, were creatures of no more consideration than so many animals, bugs, insects; whereas I had
The way I was looked upon was odd, but it was natural.
You know how the keeper and the public regard the elephant in the menagerie: well, that is the idea.
They are full of admiration of his vast bulk and his prodigious strength; they speak with pride of the fact that he can do a hundred marvels which are far and away beyond their own powers; and they speak with the same pride of the fact that in his wrath he
But does that make him one of _them_?
No; the raggedest tramp in the pit would smile at the idea.
He couldn't comprehend it; couldn't take it in; couldn't in any remote way conceive of it.
Well, to the king, the nobles, and all the nation, down to the very slaves and tramps, I was just that kind of an elephant, and nothing more.
I was admired, also feared; but it was as an animal is admired and feared.
The animal is not reverenced, neither was I; I was not even respected.
I had no pedigree, no inherited title; so in the king's and nobles' eyes I was mere dirt; the people regarded me with wonder and awe, but there was no reverence mixed with it; through the force of inherited ideas they were not able to conceive of anything
There you see the hand of that awful power, the Roman Catholic Church.
In two or three little centuries it had converted a nation of men to a nation of worms.
Before the day of the Church's supremacy in the world, men were men, and held their heads up, and had a man's pride and spirit and independence; and what of greatness and position a person got, he got mainly by achievement, not by birth.
But then the Church came to the front, with an axe to grind; and she was wise, subtle, and knew more than one way to skin a cat--or a nation; she invented "divine right of kings," and propped it all around, brick by brick, with the Beatitudes --wrenching
Even down to my birth-century that poison was still in the blood of Christendom, and the best of English commoners was still content to see his inferiors impudently continuing to hold a number of positions, such as lordships and the throne, to which the
It seems to show that there isn't anything you can't stand, if you are only born and bred to it.
Of course that taint, that reverence for rank and title, had been in our American blood, too--I know that; but when I left America it had disappeared--at least to all intents and purposes.
The remnant of it was restricted to the dudes and dudesses.
When a disease has worked its way down to that level, it may fairly be said to be out of the system.
But to return to my anomalous position in King Arthur's kingdom.
Here I was, a giant among pigmies, a man among children, a master intelligence among intellectual moles: by all rational measurement the one and only actually great man in that whole British world; and yet there and then, just as in the remote England of
Such a personage was fawned upon in Arthur's realm and reverently looked up to by everybody, even though his dispositions were as mean as his intelligence, and his morals as base as his lineage.
There were times when _he_ could sit down in the king's presence, but I couldn't.
I could have got a title easily enough, and that would have raised me a large step in everybody's eyes; even in the king's, the giver of it.
But I didn't ask for it; and I declined it when it was offered.
I couldn't have enjoyed such a thing with my notions; and it wouldn't have been fair, anyway, because as far back as I could go, our tribe had always been short of the bar sinister.
I couldn't have felt really and satisfactorily fine and proud and set-up over any title except one that should come from the nation itself, the only legitimate source; and such an one I hoped to win; and in the course of years of honest and honorable
This title fell casually from the lips of a blacksmith, one day, in a village, was caught up as a happy thought and tossed from mouth to mouth with a laugh and an affirmative vote; in ten days it had swept the kingdom, and was become as familiar as the
I was never known by any other designation afterward, whether in the nation's talk or in grave debate upon matters of state at the council-board of the sovereign.
This title, translated into modern speech, would be THE BOSS.
Elected by the nation.
That suited me.
And it was a pretty high title.
There were very few THE'S, and I was one of them.
If you spoke of the duke, or the earl, or the bishop, how could anybody tell which one you meant?
But if you spoke of The King or The Queen or The Boss, it was different.
Well, I liked the king, and as king I respected him--respected the office; at least respected it as much as I was capable of respecting any unearned supremacy; but as MEN I looked down upon him and his nobles--privately.
And he and they liked me, and respected my office; but as an animal, without birth or sham title, they looked down upon me--and were not particularly private about it, either.
I didn't charge for my opinion about them, and they didn't charge for their opinion about me: the account was square, the books balanced, everybody was satisfied.
CHAPTER IX THE TOURNAMENT They were always having grand tournaments there at Camelot; and very stirring and picturesque and ridiculous human bull-fights they were, too, but just a little wearisome to the practical mind.
However, I was generally on hand--for two reasons: a man must not hold himself aloof from the things which his friends and his community have at heart if he would be liked--especially as a statesman; and both as business man and statesman I wanted to study
That reminds me to remark, in passing, that the very first official thing I did, in my administration--and it was on the very first day of it, too--was to start a patent office; for I knew that a country without a patent office and good patent laws was
Things ran along, a tournament nearly every week; and now and then the boys used to want me to take a hand--I mean Sir Launcelot and the rest--but I said I would by and by; no hurry yet, and too much government machinery to oil up and set to rights and
We had one tournament which was continued from day to day during more than a week, and as many as five hundred knights took part in it, from first to last.
They were weeks gathering.
They came on horseback from everywhere; from the very ends of the country, and even from beyond the sea; and many brought ladies, and all brought squires and troops of servants.
It was a most gaudy and gorgeous crowd, as to costumery, and very characteristic of the country and the time, in the way of high animal spirits, innocent indecencies of language, and happy-hearted indifference to morals.
It was fight or look on, all day and every day; and sing, gamble, dance, carouse half the night every night.
They had a most noble good time.
You never saw such people.
Those banks of beautiful ladies, shining in their barbaric splendors, would see a knight sprawl from his horse in the lists with a lanceshaft the thickness of your ankle clean through him and the blood spouting, and instead of fainting they would clap
The noise at night would have been annoying to me ordinarily, but I didn't mind it in the present circumstances, because it kept me from hearing the quacks detaching legs and arms from the day's cripples.
They ruined an uncommon good old cross-cut saw for me, and broke the saw-buck, too, but I let it pass.
And as for my axe--well, I made up my mind that the next time I lent an axe to a surgeon I would pick my century.
I not only watched this tournament from day to day, but detailed an intelligent priest from my Department of Public Morals and Agriculture, and ordered him to report it; for it was my purpose by and by, when I should have gotten the people along far
The first thing you want in a new country, is a patent office; then work up your school system; and after that, out with your paper.
A newspaper has its faults, and plenty of them, but no matter, it's hark from the tomb for a dead nation, and don't you forget it.
You can't resurrect a dead nation without it; there isn't any way.
So I wanted to sample things, and be finding out what sort of reporter-material I might be able to rake together out of the sixth century when I should come to need it.
Well, the priest did very well, considering.
He got in all the details, and that is a good thing in a local item: you see, he had kept books for the undertaker-department of his church when he was younger, and there, you know, the money's in the details; the more details, the more swag: bearers,
And he had a good knack at getting in the complimentary thing here and there about a knight that was likely to advertise--no, I mean a knight that had influence; and he also had a neat gift of exaggeration, for in his time he had kept door for a pious
Of course this novice's report lacked whoop and crash and lurid description, and therefore wanted the true ring; but its antique wording was quaint and sweet and simple, and full of the fragrances and flavors of the time, and these little merits made up in
Here is an extract from it: Then Sir Brian de les Isles and Grummore Grummorsum, knights of the castle, encountered with Sir Aglovale and Sir Tor, and Sir Tor smote down Sir Grummore Grummorsum to the earth.
Then came Sir Carados of the dolorous tower, and Sir Turquine, knights of the castle, and there encountered with them Sir Percivale de Galis and Sir Lamorak de Galis, that were two brethren, and there encountered Sir Percivale with Sir Carados, and either
And Sir Arnold, and Sir Gauter, knights of the castle, encountered with Sir Brandiles and Sir Kay, and these four knights encountered mightily, and brake their spears to their hands.
Then came Sir Pertolope from the castle, and there encountered with him Sir Lionel, and there Sir Pertolope the green knight smote down Sir Lionel, brother to Sir Launcelot.
All this was marked by noble heralds, who bare him best, and their names.
Then Sir Bleobaris brake his spear upon Sir Gareth, but of that stroke Sir Bleobaris fell to the earth.
When Sir Galihodin saw that, he bad Sir Gareth keep him, and Sir Gareth smote him to the earth.
Then Sir Galihud gat a spear to avenge his brother, and in the same wise Sir Gareth served him, and Sir Dinadan and his brother La Cote Male Taile, and Sir Sagramore le Disirous, and Sir Dodinas le Savage; all these he bare down with one spear.
When King Aswisance of Ireland saw Sir Gareth fare so he marvelled what he might be, that one time seemed green, and another time, at his again coming, he seemed blue.
And thus at every course that he rode to and fro he changed his color, so that there might neither king nor knight have ready cognizance of him.
Then Sir Agwisance the King of Ireland encountered with Sir Gareth, and there Sir Gareth smote him from his horse, saddle and all.
And then came King Carados of Scotland, and Sir Gareth smote him down horse and man.
And in the same wise he served King Uriens of the land of Gore.
And then there came in Sir Bagdemagus, and Sir Gareth smote him down horse and man to the earth.
And Bagdemagus's son Meliganus brake a spear upon Sir Gareth mightily and knightly.
And then Sir Galahault the noble prince cried on high, Knight with the many colors, well hast thou justed; now make thee ready that I may just with thee.
Sir Gareth heard him, and he gat a great spear, and so they encountered together, and there the prince brake his spear; but Sir Gareth smote him upon the left side of the helm, that he reeled here and there, and he had fallen down had not his men recovered
Truly, said King Arthur, that knight with the many colors is a good knight.
Wherefore the king called unto him Sir Launcelot, and prayed him to encounter with that knight.
Sir, said Launcelot, I may as well find in my heart for to forbear him at this time, for he hath had travail enough this day, and when a good knight doth so well upon some day, it is no good knight's part to let him of his worship, and, namely, when he
There was an unpleasant little episode that day, which for reasons of state I struck out of my priest's report.
You will have noticed that Garry was doing some great fighting in the engagement.
When I say Garry I mean Sir Gareth.
Garry was my private pet name for him; it suggests that I had a deep affection for him, and that was the case.
But it was a private pet name only, and never spoken aloud to any one, much less to him; being a noble, he would not have endured a familiarity like that from me.
Well, to proceed: I sat in the private box set apart for me as the king's minister.
While Sir Dinadan was waiting for his turn to enter the lists, he came in there and sat down and began to talk; for he was always making up to me, because I was a stranger and he liked to have a fresh market for his jokes, the most of them having reached
I had always responded to his efforts as well as I could, and felt a very deep and real kindness for him, too, for the reason that if by malice of fate he knew the one particular anecdote which I had heard oftenest and had most hated and most loathed all
It was one which I had heard attributed to every humorous person who had ever stood on American soil, from Columbus down to Artemus Ward.
It was about a humorous lecturer who flooded an ignorant audience with the killingest jokes for an hour and never got a laugh; and then when he was leaving, some gray simpletons wrung him gratefully by the hand and said it had been the funniest thing they
That anecdote never saw the day that it was worth the telling; and yet I had sat under the telling of it hundreds and thousands and millions and billions of times, and cried and cursed all the way through.
Then who can hope to know what my feelings were, to hear this armor-plated ass start in on it again, in the murky twilight of tradition, before the dawn of history, while even Lactantius might be referred to as "the late Lactantius," and the Crusades
Just as he finished, the call-boy came; so, haw-hawing like a demon, he went rattling and clanking out like a crate of loose castings, and I knew nothing more.
It was some minutes before I came to, and then I opened my eyes just in time to see Sir Gareth fetch him an awful welt, and I unconsciously out with the prayer, "I hope to gracious he's killed"!
But by ill-luck, before I had got half through with the words, Sir Gareth crashed into Sir Sagramor le Desirous and sent him thundering over his horse's crupper, and Sir Sagramor caught my remark and thought I meant it for _him_.
Well, whenever one of those people got a thing into his head, there was no getting it out again.
I knew that, so I saved my breath, and offered no explanations.
As soon as Sir Sagramor got well, he notified me that there was a little account to settle between us, and he named a day three or four years in the future; place of settlement, the lists where the offense had been given.
I said I would be ready when he got back.
You see, he was going for the Holy Grail.
The boys all took a flier at the Holy Grail now and then.
It was a several years' cruise.
They always put in the long absence snooping around, in the most conscientious way, though none of them had any idea where the Holy Grail really was, and I don't think any of them actually expected to find it, or would have known what to do with it if he
You see, it was just the Northwest Passage of that day, as you may say; that was all.
Every year expeditions went out holy grailing, and next year relief expeditions went out to hunt for _them_.
There was worlds of reputation in it, but no money.
Why, they actually wanted _me_ to put in!
Well, I should smile.
CHAPTER X BEGINNINGS OF CIVILIZATION The Round Table soon heard of the challenge, and of course it was a good deal discussed, for such things interested the boys.
The king thought I ought now to set forth in quest of adventures, so that I might gain renown and be the more worthy to meet Sir Sagramor when the several years should have rolled away.
I excused myself for the present; I said it would take me three or four years yet to get things well fixed up and going smoothly; then I should be ready; all the chances were that at the end of that time Sir Sagramor would still be out grailing, so no
I was pretty well satisfied with what I had already accomplished.
In various quiet nooks and corners I had the beginnings of all sorts of industries under way--nuclei of future vast factories, the iron and steel missionaries of my future civilization.
In these were gathered together the brightest young minds I could find, and I kept agents out raking the country for more, all the time.
I was training a crowd of ignorant folk into experts--experts in every sort of handiwork and scientific calling.
These nurseries of mine went smoothly and privately along undisturbed in their obscure country retreats, for nobody was allowed to come into their precincts without a special permit--for I was afraid of the Church.
I had started a teacher-factory and a lot of Sunday-schools the first thing; as a result, I now had an admirable system of graded schools in full blast in those places, and also a complete variety of Protestant congregations all in a prosperous and growing
Everybody could be any kind of a Christian he wanted to; there was perfect freedom in that matter.
But I confined public religious teaching to the churches and the Sunday-schools, permitting nothing of it in my other educational buildings.
I could have given my own sect the preference and made everybody a Presbyterian without any trouble, but that would have been to affront a law of human nature: spiritual wants and instincts are as various in the human family as are physical appetites,
All mines were royal property, and there were a good many of them.
They had formerly been worked as savages always work mines--holes grubbed in the earth and the mineral brought up in sacks of hide by hand, at the rate of a ton a day; but I had begun to put the mining on a scientific basis as early as I could.
Yes, I had made pretty handsome progress when Sir Sagramor's challenge struck me.
Four years rolled by--and then!
Well, you would never imagine it in the world.
Unlimited power is the ideal thing when it is in safe hands.
The despotism of heaven is the one absolutely perfect government.
An earthly despotism would be the absolutely perfect earthly government, if the conditions were the same, namely, the despot the perfectest individual of the human race, and his lease of life perpetual.
But as a perishable perfect man must die, and leave his despotism in the hands of an imperfect successor, an earthly despotism is not merely a bad form of government, it is the worst form that is possible.
My works showed what a despot could do with the resources of a kingdom at his command.
Unsuspected by this dark land, I had the civilization of the nineteenth century booming under its very nose!
It was fenced away from the public view, but there it was, a gigantic and unassailable fact--and to be heard from, yet, if I lived and had luck.
There it was, as sure a fact and as substantial a fact as any serene volcano, standing innocent with its smokeless summit in the blue sky and giving no sign of the rising hell in its bowels.
My schools and churches were children four years before; they were grown-up now; my shops of that day were vast factories now; where I had a dozen trained men then, I had a thousand now; where I had one brilliant expert then, I had fifty now.
I stood with my hand on the cock, so to speak, ready to turn it on and flood the midnight world with light at any moment.
But I was not going to do the thing in that sudden way.
It was not my policy.
The people could not have stood it; and, moreover, I should have had the Established Roman Catholic Church on my back in a minute.
No, I had been going cautiously all the while.
I had had confidential agents trickling through the country some time, whose office was to undermine knighthood by imperceptible degrees, and to gnaw a little at this and that and the other superstition, and so prepare the way gradually for a better order
I was turning on my light one-candle-power at a time, and meant to continue to do so.
I had scattered some branch schools secretly about the kingdom, and they were doing very well.
I meant to work this racket more and more, as time wore on, if nothing occurred to frighten me.
One of my deepest secrets was my West Point--my military academy.
I kept that most jealously out of sight; and I did the same with my naval academy which I had established at a remote seaport.
Both were prospering to my satisfaction.
Clarence was twenty-two now, and was my head executive, my right hand.
He was a darling; he was equal to anything; there wasn't anything he couldn't turn his hand to.
Of late I had been training him for journalism, for the time seemed about right for a start in the newspaper line; nothing big, but just a small weekly for experimental circulation in my civilization-nurseries.
He took to it like a duck; there was an editor concealed in him, sure.
Already he had doubled himself in one way; he talked sixth century and wrote nineteenth.
His journalistic style was climbing, steadily; it was already up to the back settlement Alabama mark, and couldn't be told from the editorial output of that region either by matter or flavor.
We had another large departure on hand, too.
This was a telegraph and a telephone; our first venture in this line.
These wires were for private service only, as yet, and must be kept private until a riper day should come.
We had a gang of men on the road, working mainly by night.
They were stringing ground wires; we were afraid to put up poles, for they would attract too much inquiry.
Ground wires were good enough, in both instances, for my wires were protected by an insulation of my own invention which was perfect.
My men had orders to strike across country, avoiding roads, and establishing connection with any considerable towns whose lights betrayed their presence, and leaving experts in charge.
Nobody could tell you how to find any place in the kingdom, for nobody ever went intentionally to any place, but only struck it by accident in his wanderings, and then generally left it without thinking to inquire what its name was.
At one time and another we had sent out topographical expeditions to survey and map the kingdom, but the priests had always interfered and raised trouble.
So we had given the thing up, for the present; it would be poor wisdom to antagonize the Church.
As for the general condition of the country, it was as it had been when I arrived in it, to all intents and purposes.
I had made changes, but they were necessarily slight, and they were not noticeable.
Thus far, I had not even meddled with taxation, outside of the taxes which provided the royal revenues.
I had systematized those, and put the service on an effective and righteous basis.
As a result, these revenues were already quadrupled, and yet the burden was so much more equably distributed than before, that all the kingdom felt a sense of relief, and the praises of my administration were hearty and general.
Personally, I struck an interruption, now, but I did not mind it, it could not have happened at a better time.
Earlier it could have annoyed me, but now everything was in good hands and swimming right along.
The king had reminded me several times, of late, that the postponement I had asked for, four years before, had about run out now.
It was a hint that I ought to be starting out to seek adventures and get up a reputation of a size to make me worthy of the honor of breaking a lance with Sir Sagramor, who was still out grailing, but was being hunted for by various relief expeditions, and
So you see I was expecting this interruption; it did not take me by surprise.
CHAPTER XI THE YANKEE IN SEARCH OF ADVENTURES There never was such a country for wandering liars; and they were of both sexes.
Hardly a month went by without one of these tramps arriving; and generally loaded with a tale about some princess or other wanting help to get her out of some far-away castle where she was held in captivity by a lawless scoundrel, usually a giant.
Now you would think that the first thing the king would do after listening to such a novelette from an entire stranger, would be to ask for credentials--yes, and a pointer or two as to locality of castle, best route to it, and so on.
But nobody ever thought of so simple and common-sense a thing at that.
No, everybody swallowed these people's lies whole, and never asked a question of any sort or about anything.
Well, one day when I was not around, one of these people came along--it was a she one, this time--and told a tale of the usual pattern.
Her mistress was a captive in a vast and gloomy castle, along with forty-four other young and beautiful girls, pretty much all of them princesses; they had been languishing in that cruel captivity for twenty-six years; the masters of the castle were three
Sort of fruit not mentioned; their usual slovenliness in statistics.
Would you believe it?
The king and the whole Round Table were in raptures over this preposterous opportunity for adventure.
Every knight of the Table jumped for the chance, and begged for it; but to their vexation and chagrin the king conferred it upon me, who had not asked for it at all.
By an effort, I contained my joy when Clarence brought me the news.
But he--he could not contain his.
His mouth gushed delight and gratitude in a steady discharge--delight in my good fortune, gratitude to the king for this splendid mark of his favor for me.
He could keep neither his legs nor his body still, but pirouetted about the place in an airy ecstasy of happiness.
On my side, I could have cursed the kindness that conferred upon me this benefaction, but I kept my vexation under the surface for policy's sake, and did what I could to let on to be glad.
Indeed, I _said_ I was glad.
And in a way it was true; I was as glad as a person is when he is scalped.
Well, one must make the best of things, and not waste time with useless fretting, but get down to business and see what can be done.
In all lies there is wheat among the chaff; I must get at the wheat in this case: so I sent for the girl and she came.
She was a comely enough creature, and soft and modest, but, if signs went for anything, she didn't know as much as a lady's watch.
I said: "My dear, have you been questioned as to particulars"?
She said she hadn't.
"Well, I didn't expect you had, but I thought I would ask, to make sure; it's the way I've been raised.
Now you mustn't take it unkindly if I remind you that as we don't know you, we must go a little slow.
You may be all right, of course, and we'll hope that you are; but to take it for granted isn't business.
_You_ understand that.
I'm obliged to ask you a few questions; just answer up fair and square, and don't be afraid.
Where do you live, when you are at home"?
"In the land of Moder, fair sir".
"Land of Moder.
I don't remember hearing of it before.
Parents living"?
"As to that, I know not if they be yet on live, sith it is many years that I have lain shut up in the castle".
"Your name, please"?
"I hight the Demoiselle Alisande la Carteloise, an it please you".
"Do you know anybody here who can identify you"?
"That were not likely, fair lord, I being come hither now for the first time".
"Have you brought any letters--any documents--any proofs that you are trustworthy and truthful"?
"Of a surety, no; and wherefore should I?
Have I not a tongue, and cannot I say all that myself"?
"But _your_ saying it, you know, and somebody else's saying it, is different".
"Different?
How might that be?
I fear me I do not understand".
"Don't _understand_?
Land of--why, you see--you see--why, great Scott, can't you understand a little thing like that?
Can't you understand the difference between your--_why_ do you look so innocent and idiotic"!
"I?
In truth I know not, but an it were the will of God".
"Yes, yes, I reckon that's about the size of it.
Don't mind my seeming excited; I'm not.
Let us change the subject.
Now as to this castle, with forty-five princesses in it, and three ogres at the head of it, tell me--where is this harem"?
"Harem"?
"The _castle_, you understand; where is the castle"?
"Oh, as to that, it is great, and strong, and well beseen, and lieth in a far country.
Yes, it is many leagues".
"_How_ many"?
"Ah, fair sir, it were woundily hard to tell, they are so many, and do so lap the one upon the other, and being made all in the same image and tincted with the same color, one may not know the one league from its fellow, nor how to count them except they
What's the direction from here"?
"Ah, please you sir, it hath no direction from here; by reason that the road lieth not straight, but turneth evermore; wherefore the direction of its place abideth not, but is some time under the one sky and anon under another, whereso if ye be minded that
a man can't keep his functions regular on spring chickens thirteen hundred years old.
But come--never mind about that; let's--have you got such a thing as a map of that region about you?
Now a good map--" "Is it peradventure that manner of thing which of late the unbelievers have brought from over the great seas, which, being boiled in oil, and an onion and salt added thereto, doth--" "What, a map?
What are you talking about?
Don't you know what a map is?
There, there, never mind, don't explain, I hate explanations; they fog a thing up so that you can't tell anything about it.
Run along, dear; good-day; show her the way, Clarence".
Oh, well, it was reasonably plain, now, why these donkeys didn't prospect these liars for details.
It may be that this girl had a fact in her somewhere, but I don't believe you could have sluiced it out with a hydraulic; nor got it with the earlier forms of blasting, even; it was a case for dynamite.
Why, she was a perfect ass; and yet the king and his knights had listened to her as if she had been a leaf out of the gospel.
It kind of sizes up the whole party.
And think of the simple ways of this court: this wandering wench hadn't any more trouble to get access to the king in his palace than she would have had to get into the poorhouse in my day and country.
In fact, he was glad to see her, glad to hear her tale; with that adventure of hers to offer, she was as welcome as a corpse is to a coroner.
Just as I was ending-up these reflections, Clarence came back.
I remarked upon the barren result of my efforts with the girl; hadn't got hold of a single point that could help me to find the castle.
The youth looked a little surprised, or puzzled, or something, and intimated that he had been wondering to himself what I had wanted to ask the girl all those questions for.
"Why, great guns," I said, "don't I want to find the castle?
And how else would I go about it"?
"La, sweet your worship, one may lightly answer that, I ween.
She will go with thee.
They always do.
She will ride with thee".
"Ride with me?
Nonsense"!
"But of a truth she will.
She will ride with thee.
Thou shalt see".
"What?
She browse around the hills and scour the woods with me --alone--and I as good as engaged to be married?
Why, it's scandalous.
Think how it would look".
My, the dear face that rose before me!
The boy was eager to know all about this tender matter.
I swore him to secrecy and then whispered her name--"Puss Flanagan".
He looked disappointed, and said he didn't remember the countess.
How natural it was for the little courtier to give her a rank.
He asked me where she lived.
"In East Har--" I came to myself and stopped, a little confused; then I said, "Never mind, now; I'll tell you some time".
And might he see her?
Would I let him see her some day?
It was but a little thing to promise--thirteen hundred years or so--and he so eager; so I said Yes.
But I sighed; I couldn't help it.
And yet there was no sense in sighing, for she wasn't born yet.
But that is the way we are made: we don't reason, where we feel; we just feel.
My expedition was all the talk that day and that night, and the boys were very good to me, and made much of me, and seemed to have forgotten their vexation and disappointment, and come to be as anxious for me to hive those ogres and set those ripe old
Well, they _were_ good children--but just children, that is all.
And they gave me no end of points about how to scout for giants, and how to scoop them in; and they told me all sorts of charms against enchantments, and gave me salves and other rubbish to put on my wounds.
But it never occurred to one of them to reflect that if I was such a wonderful necromancer as I was pretending to be, I ought not to need salves or instructions, or charms against enchantments, and, least of all, arms and armor, on a foray of any
I was to have an early breakfast, and start at dawn, for that was the usual way; but I had the demon's own time with my armor, and this delayed me a little.
It is troublesome to get into, and there is so much detail.
First you wrap a layer or two of blanket around your body, for a sort of cushion and to keep off the cold iron; then you put on your sleeves and shirt of chain mail--these are made of small steel links woven together, and they form a fabric so flexible
Next you buckle your greaves on your legs, and your cuisses on your thighs; then come your backplate and your breastplate, and you begin to feel crowded; then you hitch onto the breastplate the half-petticoat of broad overlapping bands of steel which hangs
This is no time to dance.
Well, a man that is packed away like that is a nut that isn't worth the cracking, there is so little of the meat, when you get down to it, by comparison with the shell.
The boys helped me, or I never could have got in.
Just as we finished, Sir Bedivere happened in, and I saw that as like as not I hadn't chosen the most convenient outfit for a long trip.
How stately he looked; and tall and broad and grand.
He had on his head a conical steel casque that only came down to his ears, and for visor had only a narrow steel bar that extended down to his upper lip and protected his nose; and all the rest of him, from neck to heel, was flexible chain mail, trousers
But pretty much all of him was hidden under his outside garment, which of course was of chain mail, as I said, and hung straight from his shoulders to his ankles; and from his middle to the bottom, both before and behind, was divided, so that he could ride
He was going grailing, and it was just the outfit for it, too.
I would have given a good deal for that ulster, but it was too late now to be fooling around.
The sun was just up, the king and the court were all on hand to see me off and wish me luck; so it wouldn't be etiquette for me to tarry.
You don't get on your horse yourself; no, if you tried it you would get disappointed.
They carry you out, just as they carry a sun-struck man to the drug store, and put you on, and help get you to rights, and fix your feet in the stirrups; and all the while you do feel so strange and stuffy and like somebody else--like somebody that has
Then they stood up the mast they called a spear, in its socket by my left foot, and I gripped it with my hand; lastly they hung my shield around my neck, and I was all complete and ready to up anchor and get to sea.
Everybody was as good to me as they could be, and a maid of honor gave me the stirrup-cup her own self.
There was nothing more to do now, but for that damsel to get up behind me on a pillion, which she did, and put an arm or so around me to hold on.
And so we started, and everybody gave us a goodbye and waved their handkerchiefs or helmets.
And everybody we met, going down the hill and through the village was respectful to us, except some shabby little boys on the outskirts.
They said: "Oh, what a guy"!
And hove clods at us.
In my experience boys are the same in all ages.
They don't respect anything, they don't care for anything or anybody.
They say "Go up, baldhead" to the prophet going his unoffending way in the gray of antiquity; they sass me in the holy gloom of the Middle Ages; and I had seen them act the same way in Buchanan's administration; I remember, because I was there and helped.
The prophet had his bears and settled with his boys; and I wanted to get down and settle with mine, but it wouldn't answer, because I couldn't have got up again.
I hate a country without a derrick.
CHAPTER XII SLOW TORTURE Straight off, we were in the country.
It was most lovely and pleasant in those sylvan solitudes in the early cool morning in the first freshness of autumn.
From hilltops we saw fair green valleys lying spread out below, with streams winding through them, and island groves of trees here and there, and huge lonely oaks scattered about and casting black blots of shade; and beyond the valleys we saw the ranges of
We crossed broad natural lawns sparkling with dew, and we moved like spirits, the cushioned turf giving out no sound of footfall; we dreamed along through glades in a mist of green light that got its tint from the sun-drenched roof of leaves overhead, and
And by and by out we would swing again into the glare.
About the third or fourth or fifth time that we swung out into the glare--it was along there somewhere, a couple of hours or so after sun-up--it wasn't as pleasant as it had been.
It was beginning to get hot.
This was quite noticeable.
We had a very long pull, after that, without any shade.
Now it is curious how progressively little frets grow and multiply after they once get a start.
Things which I didn't mind at all, at first, I began to mind now--and more and more, too, all the time.
The first ten or fifteen times I wanted my handkerchief I didn't seem to care; I got along, and said never mind, it isn't any matter, and dropped it out of my mind.
But now it was different; I wanted it all the time; it was nag, nag, nag, right along, and no rest; I couldn't get it out of my mind; and so at last I lost my temper and said hang a man that would make a suit of armor without any pockets in it.
You see I had my handkerchief in my helmet; and some other things; but it was that kind of a helmet that you can't take off by yourself.
That hadn't occurred to me when I put it there; and in fact I didn't know it.
I supposed it would be particularly convenient there.
And so now, the thought of its being there, so handy and close by, and yet not get-at-able, made it all the worse and the harder to bear.
Yes, the thing that you can't get is the thing that you want, mainly; every one has noticed that.
Well, it took my mind off from everything else; took it clear off, and centered it in my helmet; and mile after mile, there it stayed, imagining the handkerchief, picturing the handkerchief; and it was bitter and aggravating to have the salt sweat keep
It seems like a little thing, on paper, but it was not a little thing at all; it was the most real kind of misery.
I would not say it if it was not so.
I made up my mind that I would carry along a reticule next time, let it look how it might, and people say what they would.
Of course these iron dudes of the Round Table would think it was scandalous, and maybe raise Sheol about it, but as for me, give me comfort first, and style afterwards.
So we jogged along, and now and then we struck a stretch of dust, and it would tumble up in clouds and get into my nose and make me sneeze and cry; and of course I said things I oughtn't to have said, I don't deny that.
I am not better than others.
We couldn't seem to meet anybody in this lonesome Britain, not even an ogre; and, in the mood I was in then, it was well for the ogre; that is, an ogre with a handkerchief.
Most knights would have thought of nothing but getting his armor; but so I got his bandanna, he could keep his hardware, for all of me.
Meantime, it was getting hotter and hotter in there.
You see, the sun was beating down and warming up the iron more and more all the time.
Well, when you are hot, that way, every little thing irritates you.
When I trotted, I rattled like a crate of dishes, and that annoyed me; and moreover I couldn't seem to stand that shield slatting and banging, now about my breast, now around my back; and if I dropped into a walk my joints creaked and screeched in that
And you had to be always changing hands, and passing your spear over to the other foot, it got so irksome for one hand to hold it long at a time.
Well, you know, when you perspire that way, in rivers, there comes a time when you--when you--well, when you itch.
You are inside, your hands are outside; so there you are; nothing but iron between.
It is not a light thing, let it sound as it may.
First it is one place; then another; then some more; and it goes on spreading and spreading, and at last the territory is all occupied, and nobody can imagine what you feel like, nor how unpleasant it is.
And when it had got to the worst, and it seemed to me that I could not stand anything more, a fly got in through the bars and settled on my nose, and the bars were stuck and wouldn't work, and I couldn't get the visor up; and I could only shake my head,
So I gave in, and got Alisande to unship the helmet and relieve me of it.
Then she emptied the conveniences out of it and fetched it full of water, and I drank and then stood up, and she poured the rest down inside the armor.
One cannot think how refreshing it was.
She continued to fetch and pour until I was well soaked and thoroughly comfortable.
It was good to have a rest--and peace.
But nothing is quite perfect in this life, at any time.
I had made a pipe a while back, and also some pretty fair tobacco; not the real thing, but what some of the Indians use: the inside bark of the willow, dried.
These comforts had been in the helmet, and now I had them again, but no matches.
Gradually, as the time wore along, one annoying fact was borne in upon my understanding--that we were weather-bound.
An armed novice cannot mount his horse without help and plenty of it.
Sandy was not enough; not enough for me, anyway.
We had to wait until somebody should come along.
Waiting, in silence, would have been agreeable enough, for I was full of matter for reflection, and wanted to give it a chance to work.
I wanted to try and think out how it was that rational or even half-rational men could ever have learned to wear armor, considering its inconveniences; and how they had managed to keep up such a fashion for generations when it was plain that what I had
I wanted to think that out; and moreover I wanted to think out some way to reform this evil and persuade the people to let the foolish fashion die out; but thinking was out of the question in the circumstances.
You couldn't think, where Sandy was.
She was a quite biddable creature and good-hearted, but she had a flow of talk that was as steady as a mill, and made your head sore like the drays and wagons in a city.
If she had had a cork she would have been a comfort.
But you can't cork that kind; they would die.
Her clack was going all day, and you would think something would surely happen to her works, by and by; but no, they never got out of order; and she never had to slack up for words.
She could grind, and pump, and churn, and buzz by the week, and never stop to oil up or blow out.
And yet the result was just nothing but wind.
She never had any ideas, any more than a fog has.
She was a perfect blatherskite; I mean for jaw, jaw, jaw, talk, talk, talk, jabber, jabber, jabber; but just as good as she could be.
I hadn't minded her mill that morning, on account of having that hornets' nest of other troubles; but more than once in the afternoon I had to say: "Take a rest, child; the way you are using up all the domestic air, the kingdom will have to go to importing
CHAPTER XIII FREEMEN Yes, it is strange how little a while at a time a person can be contented.
Only a little while back, when I was riding and suffering, what a heaven this peace, this rest, this sweet serenity in this secluded shady nook by this purling stream would have seemed, where I could keep perfectly comfortable all the time by pouring a
Here was another illustration of the childlike improvidence of this age and people.
A man in armor always trusted to chance for his food on a journey, and would have been scandalized at the idea of hanging a basket of sandwiches on his spear.
There was probably not a knight of all the Round Table combination who would not rather have died than been caught carrying such a thing as that on his flagstaff.
And yet there could not be anything more sensible.
It had been my intention to smuggle a couple of sandwiches into my helmet, but I was interrupted in the act, and had to make an excuse and lay them aside, and a dog got them.
Night approached, and with it a storm.
The darkness came on fast.
We must camp, of course.
I found a good shelter for the demoiselle under a rock, and went off and found another for myself.
But I was obliged to remain in my armor, because I could not get it off by myself and yet could not allow Alisande to help, because it would have seemed so like undressing before folk.
It would not have amounted to that in reality, because I had clothes on underneath; but the prejudices of one's breeding are not gotten rid of just at a jump, and I knew that when it came to stripping off that bob-tailed iron petticoat I should be
With the storm came a change of weather; and the stronger the wind blew, and the wilder the rain lashed around, the colder and colder it got.
Pretty soon, various kinds of bugs and ants and worms and things began to flock in out of the wet and crawl down inside my armor to get warm; and while some of them behaved well enough, and snuggled up amongst my clothes and got quiet, the majority were of
It would be my advice to persons situated in this way, to not roll or thrash around, because this excites the interest of all the different sorts of animals and makes every last one of them want to turn out and see what is going on, and this makes things
Still, if one did not roll and thrash around he would die; so perhaps it is as well to do one way as the other; there is no real choice.
Even after I was frozen solid I could still distinguish that tickling, just as a corpse does when he is taking electric treatment.
I said I would never wear armor after this trip.
All those trying hours whilst I was frozen and yet was in a living fire, as you may say, on account of that swarm of crawlers, that same unanswerable question kept circling and circling through my tired head: How do people stand this miserable armor?
How have they managed to stand it all these generations?
How can they sleep at night for dreading the tortures of next day?
When the morning came at last, I was in a bad enough plight: seedy, drowsy, fagged, from want of sleep; weary from thrashing around, famished from long fasting; pining for a bath, and to get rid of the animals; and crippled with rheumatism.
And how had it fared with the nobly born, the titled aristocrat, the Demoiselle Alisande la Carteloise?
Why, she was as fresh as a squirrel; she had slept like the dead; and as for a bath, probably neither she nor any other noble in the land had ever had one, and so she was not missing it.
Measured by modern standards, they were merely modified savages, those people.
This noble lady showed no impatience to get to breakfast--and that smacks of the savage, too.
On their journeys those Britons were used to long fasts, and knew how to bear them; and also how to freight up against probable fasts before starting, after the style of the Indian and the anaconda.
As like as not, Sandy was loaded for a three-day stretch.
We were off before sunrise, Sandy riding and I limping along behind.
In half an hour we came upon a group of ragged poor creatures who had assembled to mend the thing which was regarded as a road.
They were as humble as animals to me; and when I proposed to breakfast with them, they were so flattered, so overwhelmed by this extraordinary condescension of mine that at first they were not able to believe that I was in earnest.
My lady put up her scornful lip and withdrew to one side; she said in their hearing that she would as soon think of eating with the other cattle--a remark which embarrassed these poor devils merely because it referred to them, and not because it insulted
And yet they were not slaves, not chattels.
By a sarcasm of law and phrase they were freemen.
Seven-tenths of the free population of the country were of just their class and degree: small "independent" farmers, artisans, etc.
; which is to say, they were the nation, the actual Nation; they were about all of it that was useful, or worth saving, or really respect-worthy, and to subtract them would have been to subtract the Nation and leave behind some dregs, some refuse, in the
And yet, by ingenious contrivance, this gilded minority, instead of being in the tail of the procession where it belonged, was marching head up and banners flying, at the other end of it; had elected itself to be the Nation, and these innumerable clams had
The priests had told their fathers and themselves that this ironical state of things was ordained of God; and so, not reflecting upon how unlike God it would be to amuse himself with sarcasms, and especially such poor transparent ones as this, they had
The talk of these meek people had a strange enough sound in a formerly American ear.
They were freemen, but they could not leave the estates of their lord or their bishop without his permission; they could not prepare their own bread, but must have their corn ground and their bread baked at his mill and his bakery, and pay roundly for the
And here were these freemen assembled in the early morning to work on their lord the bishop's road three days each--gratis; every head of a family, and every son of a family, three days each, gratis, and a day or so added for their servants.
Why, it was like reading about France and the French, before the ever memorable and blessed Revolution, which swept a thousand years of such villany away in one swift tidal-wave of blood--one: a settlement of that hoary debt in the proportion of half a
There were two "Reigns of Terror," if we would but remember it and consider it; the one wrought murder in hot passion, the other in heartless cold blood; the one lasted mere months, the other had lasted a thousand years; the one inflicted death upon ten
What is swift death by lightning compared with death by slow fire at the stake?
A city cemetery could contain the coffins filled by that brief Terror which we have all been so diligently taught to shiver at and mourn over; but all France could hardly contain the coffins filled by that older and real Terror --that unspeakably bitter
These poor ostensible freemen who were sharing their breakfast and their talk with me, were as full of humble reverence for their king and Church and nobility as their worst enemy could desire.
There was something pitifully ludicrous about it.
I asked them if they supposed a nation of people ever existed, who, with a free vote in every man's hand, would elect that a single family and its descendants should reign over it forever, whether gifted or boobies, to the exclusion of all other
They all looked unhit, and said they didn't know; that they had never thought about it before, and it hadn't ever occurred to them that a nation could be so situated that every man _could_ have a say in the government.
I said I had seen one--and that it would last until it had an Established Church.
Again they were all unhit--at first.
But presently one man looked up and asked me to state that proposition again; and state it slowly, so it could soak into his understanding.
I did it; and after a little he had the idea, and he brought his fist down and said _he_ didn't believe a nation where every man had a vote would voluntarily get down in the mud and dirt in any such way; and that to steal from a nation its will and
I said to myself: "This one's a man.
If I were backed by enough of his sort, I would make a strike for the welfare of this country, and try to prove myself its loyalest citizen by making a wholesome change in its system of government".
You see my kind of loyalty was loyalty to one's country, not to its institutions or its office-holders.
The country is the real thing, the substantial thing, the eternal thing; it is the thing to watch over, and care for, and be loyal to; institutions are extraneous, they are its mere clothing, and clothing can wear out, become ragged, cease to be
To be loyal to rags, to shout for rags, to worship rags, to die for rags--that is a loyalty of unreason, it is pure animal; it belongs to monarchy, was invented by monarchy; let monarchy keep it.
I was from Connecticut, whose Constitution declares "that all political power is inherent in the people, and all free governments are founded on their authority and instituted for their benefit; and that they have _at all times_ an undeniable and
Under that gospel, the citizen who thinks he sees that the commonwealth's political clothes are worn out, and yet holds his peace and does not agitate for a new suit, is disloyal; he is a traitor.
That he may be the only one who thinks he sees this decay, does not excuse him; it is his duty to agitate anyway, and it is the duty of the others to vote him down if they do not see the matter as he does.
And now here I was, in a country where a right to say how the country should be governed was restricted to six persons in each thousand of its population.
For the nine hundred and ninety-four to express dissatisfaction with the regnant system and propose to change it, would have made the whole six shudder as one man, it would have been so disloyal, so dishonorable, such putrid black treason.
So to speak, I was become a stockholder in a corporation where nine hundred and ninety-four of the members furnished all the money and did all the work, and the other six elected themselves a permanent board of direction and took all the dividends.
It seemed to me that what the nine hundred and ninety-four dupes needed was a new deal.
The thing that would have best suited the circus side of my nature would have been to resign the Boss-ship and get up an insurrection and turn it into a revolution; but I knew that the Jack Cade or the Wat Tyler who tries such a thing without first
I had never been accustomed to getting left, even if I do say it myself.
Wherefore, the "deal" which had been for some time working into shape in my mind was of a quite different pattern from the Cade-Tyler sort.
So I did not talk blood and insurrection to that man there who sat munching black bread with that abused and mistaught herd of human sheep, but took him aside and talked matter of another sort to him.
After I had finished, I got him to lend me a little ink from his veins; and with this and a sliver I wrote on a piece of bark-- Put him in the Man-factory-- and gave it to him, and said: "Take it to the palace at Camelot and give it into the hands of Amyas
"He is a priest, then," said the man, and some of the enthusiasm went out of his face.
"How--a priest?
Didn't I tell you that no chattel of the Church, no bond-slave of pope or bishop can enter my Man-Factory?
Didn't I tell you that _you_ couldn't enter unless your religion, whatever it might be, was your own free property"?
"Marry, it is so, and for that I was glad; wherefore it liked me not, and bred in me a cold doubt, to hear of this priest being there".
"But he isn't a priest, I tell you".
The man looked far from satisfied.
He said: "He is not a priest, and yet can read"?
"He is not a priest and yet can read--yes, and write, too, for that matter.
I taught him myself".
The man's face cleared.
"And it is the first thing that you yourself will be taught in that Factory--" "I?
I would give blood out of my heart to know that art.
Why, I will be your slave, your--" "No you won't, you won't be anybody's slave.
Take your family and go along.
Your lord the bishop will confiscate your small property, but no matter.
Clarence will fix you all right".
CHAPTER XIV "DEFEND THEE, LORD" I paid three pennies for my breakfast, and a most extravagant price it was, too, seeing that one could have breakfasted a dozen persons for that money; but I was feeling good by this time, and I had always been a kind of
I spent money rather too freely in those days, it is true; but one reason for it was that I hadn't got the proportions of things entirely adjusted, even yet, after so long a sojourn in Britain--hadn't got along to where I was able to absolutely realize
If my start from Camelot could have been delayed a very few days I could have paid these people in beautiful new coins from our own mint, and that would have pleased me; and them, too, not less.
I had adopted the American values exclusively.
In a week or two now, cents, nickels, dimes, quarters, and half-dollars, and also a trifle of gold, would be trickling in thin but steady streams all through the commercial veins of the kingdom, and I looked to see this new blood freshen up its life.
The farmers were bound to throw in something, to sort of offset my liberality, whether I would or no; so I let them give me a flint and steel; and as soon as they had comfortably bestowed Sandy and me on our horse, I lit my pipe.
When the first blast of smoke shot out through the bars of my helmet, all those people broke for the woods, and Sandy went over backwards and struck the ground with a dull thud.
They thought I was one of those fire-belching dragons they had heard so much about from knights and other professional liars.
I had infinite trouble to persuade those people to venture back within explaining distance.
Then I told them that this was only a bit of enchantment which would work harm to none but my enemies.
And I promised, with my hand on my heart, that if all who felt no enmity toward me would come forward and pass before me they should see that only those who remained behind would be struck dead.
The procession moved with a good deal of promptness.
There were no casualties to report, for nobody had curiosity enough to remain behind to see what would happen.
I lost some time, now, for these big children, their fears gone, became so ravished with wonder over my awe-compelling fireworks that I had to stay there and smoke a couple of pipes out before they would let me go.
Still the delay was not wholly unproductive, for it took all that time to get Sandy thoroughly wonted to the new thing, she being so close to it, you know.
It plugged up her conversation mill, too, for a considerable while, and that was a gain.
But above all other benefits accruing, I had learned something.
I was ready for any giant or any ogre that might come along, now.
We tarried with a holy hermit, that night, and my opportunity came about the middle of the next afternoon.
We were crossing a vast meadow by way of short-cut, and I was musing absently, hearing nothing, seeing nothing, when Sandy suddenly interrupted a remark which she had begun that morning, with the cry: "Defend thee, lord!
--peril of life is toward"!
And she slipped down from the horse and ran a little way and stood.
I looked up and saw, far off in the shade of a tree, half a dozen armed knights and their squires; and straightway there was bustle among them and tightening of saddle-girths for the mount.
My pipe was ready and would have been lit, if I had not been lost in thinking about how to banish oppression from this land and restore to all its people their stolen rights and manhood without disobliging anybody.
I lit up at once, and by the time I had got a good head of reserved steam on, here they came.
All together, too; none of those chivalrous magnanimities which one reads so much about --one courtly rascal at a time, and the rest standing by to see fair play.
No, they came in a body, they came with a whirr and a rush, they came like a volley from a battery; came with heads low down, plumes streaming out behind, lances advanced at a level.
It was a handsome sight, a beautiful sight--for a man up a tree.
I laid my lance in rest and waited, with my heart beating, till the iron wave was just ready to break over me, then spouted a column of white smoke through the bars of my helmet.
You should have seen the wave go to pieces and scatter!
This was a finer sight than the other one.
But these people stopped, two or three hundred yards away, and this troubled me.
My satisfaction collapsed, and fear came; I judged I was a lost man.
But Sandy was radiant; and was going to be eloquent--but I stopped her, and told her my magic had miscarried, somehow or other, and she must mount, with all despatch, and we must ride for life.
No, she wouldn't.
She said that my enchantment had disabled those knights; they were not riding on, because they couldn't; wait, they would drop out of their saddles presently, and we would get their horses and harness.
I could not deceive such trusting simplicity, so I said it was a mistake; that when my fireworks killed at all, they killed instantly; no, the men would not die, there was something wrong about my apparatus, I couldn't tell what; but we must hurry and get
Sandy laughed, and said: "Lack-a-day, sir, they be not of that breed!
Sir Launcelot will give battle to dragons, and will abide by them, and will assail them again, and yet again, and still again, until he do conquer and destroy them; and so likewise will Sir Pellinore and Sir Aglovale and Sir Carados, and mayhap others, but
And, la, as to yonder base rufflers, think ye they have not their fill, but yet desire more"?
"Well, then, what are they waiting for?
Why don't they leave?
Nobody's hindering.
Good land, I'm willing to let bygones be bygones, I'm sure".
"Leave, is it?
Oh, give thyself easement as to that.
They dream not of it, no, not they.
They wait to yield them".
"Come--really, is that 'sooth'--as you people say?
If they want to, why don't they"?
"It would like them much; but an ye wot how dragons are esteemed, ye would not hold them blamable.
They fear to come".
"Well, then, suppose I go to them instead, and--" "Ah, wit ye well they would not abide your coming.
I will go".
And she did.
She was a handy person to have along on a raid.
I would have considered this a doubtful errand, myself.
I presently saw the knights riding away, and Sandy coming back.
That was a relief.
I judged she had somehow failed to get the first innings --I mean in the conversation; otherwise the interview wouldn't have been so short.
But it turned out that she had managed the business well; in fact, admirably.
She said that when she told those people I was The Boss, it hit them where they lived: "smote them sore with fear and dread" was her word; and then they were ready to put up with anything she might require.
So she swore them to appear at Arthur's court within two days and yield them, with horse and harness, and be my knights henceforth, and subject to my command.
How much better she managed that thing than I should have done it myself!
She was a daisy.
CHAPTER XV SANDY'S TALE "And so I'm proprietor of some knights," said I, as we rode off.
"Who would ever have supposed that I should live to list up assets of that sort.
I shan't know what to do with them; unless I raffle them off.
How many of them are there, Sandy"?
"Seven, please you, sir, and their squires".
"It is a good haul.
Who are they?
Where do they hang out"?
"Where do they hang out"?
"Yes, where do they live"?
"Ah, I understood thee not.
That will I tell eftsoons".
Then she said musingly, and softly, turning the words daintily over her tongue: "Hang they out--hang they out--where hang--where do they hang out; eh, right so; where do they hang out.
Of a truth the phrase hath a fair and winsome grace, and is prettily worded withal.
I will repeat it anon and anon in mine idlesse, whereby I may peradventure learn it.
Where do they hang out.
Even so!
already it falleth trippingly from my tongue, and forasmuch as--" "Don't forget the cowboys, Sandy".
"Cowboys"?
"Yes; the knights, you know: You were going to tell me about them.
A while back, you remember.
Figuratively speaking, game's called".
"Game--" "Yes, yes, yes!
Go to the bat.
I mean, get to work on your statistics, and don't burn so much kindling getting your fire started.
Tell me about the knights".
"I will well, and lightly will begin.
So they two departed and rode into a great forest.
And--" "Great Scott"!
You see, I recognized my mistake at once.
I had set her works a-going; it was my own fault; she would be thirty days getting down to those facts.
And she generally began without a preface and finished without a result.
If you interrupted her she would either go right along without noticing, or answer with a couple of words, and go back and say the sentence over again.
So, interruptions only did harm; and yet I had to interrupt, and interrupt pretty frequently, too, in order to save my life; a person would die if he let her monotony drip on him right along all day.
"Great Scott"!
I said in my distress.
She went right back and began over again: "So they two departed and rode into a great forest.
And--" "_Which_ two"?
"Sir Gawaine and Sir Uwaine.
And so they came to an abbey of monks, and there were well lodged.
So on the morn they heard their masses in the abbey, and so they rode forth till they came to a great forest; then was Sir Gawaine ware in a valley by a turret, of twelve fair damsels, and two knights armed on great horses, and the damsels went to and fro
And then was Sir Gawaine ware how there hung a white shield on that tree, and ever as the damsels came by it they spit upon it, and some threw mire upon the shield--" "Now, if I hadn't seen the like myself in this country, Sandy, I wouldn't believe it.
But I've seen it, and I can just see those creatures now, parading before that shield and acting like that.
The women here do certainly act like all possessed.
Yes, and I mean your best, too, society's very choicest brands.
The humblest hello-girl along ten thousand miles of wire could teach gentleness, patience, modesty, manners, to the highest duchess in Arthur's land".
"Hello-girl"?
"Yes, but don't you ask me to explain; it's a new kind of a girl; they don't have them here; one often speaks sharply to them when they are not the least in fault, and he can't get over feeling sorry for it and ashamed of himself in thirteen hundred years,
"Even so be it, sith ye are so minded.
Then Sir Gawaine and Sir Uwaine went and saluted them, and asked them why they did that despite to the shield.
Sirs, said the damsels, we shall tell you.
There is a knight in this country that owneth this white shield, and he is a passing good man of his hands, but he hateth all ladies and gentlewomen, and therefore we do all this despite to the shield.
I will say you, said Sir Gawaine, it beseemeth evil a good knight to despise all ladies and gentlewomen, and peradventure though he hate you he hath some cause, and peradventure he loveth in some other places ladies and gentlewomen, and to be loved again,
Man of brains--that is a thing they never think of.
Tom Sayers --John Heenan--John L. Sullivan--pity but you could be here.
You would have your legs under the Round Table and a 'Sir' in front of your names within the twenty-four hours; and you could bring about a new distribution of the married princesses and duchesses of the Court in another twenty-four.
The fact is, it is just a sort of polished-up court of Comanches, and there isn't a squaw in it who doesn't stand ready at the dropping of a hat to desert to the buck with the biggest string of scalps at his belt".
"--and he be such a man of prowess as ye speak of, said Sir Gawaine.
Now, what is his name?
Sir, said they, his name is Marhaus the king's son of Ireland".
"Son of the king of Ireland, you mean; the other form doesn't mean anything.
And look out and hold on tight, now, we must jump this gully...
.
There, we are all right now.
This horse belongs in the circus; he is born before his time".
"I know him well, said Sir Uwaine, he is a passing good knight as any is on live".
"_On live_.
If you've got a fault in the world, Sandy, it is that you are a shade too archaic.
But it isn't any matter".
"--for I saw him once proved at a justs where many knights were gathered, and that time there might no man withstand him.
Ah, said Sir Gawaine, damsels, methinketh ye are to blame, for it is to suppose he that hung that shield there will not be long therefrom, and then may those knights match him on horseback, and that is more your worship than thus; for I will abide no
And therewith Sir Uwaine and Sir Gawaine departed a little from them, and then were they ware where Sir Marhaus came riding on a great horse straight toward them.
And when the twelve damsels saw Sir Marhaus they fled into the turret as they were wild, so that some of them fell by the way.
Then the one of the knights of the tower dressed his shield, and said on high, Sir Marhaus defend thee.
And so they ran together that the knight brake his spear on Marhaus, and Sir Marhaus smote him so hard that he brake his neck and the horse's back--" "Well, that is just the trouble about this state of things, it ruins so many horses".
"That saw the other knight of the turret, and dressed him toward Marhaus, and they went so eagerly together, that the knight of the turret was soon smitten down, horse and man, stark dead--" "_Another_ horse gone; I tell you it is a custom that ought to be
I don't see how people with any feeling can applaud and support it".
.
.
.
.
"So these two knights came together with great random--" I saw that I had been asleep and missed a chapter, but I didn't say anything.
I judged that the Irish knight was in trouble with the visitors by this time, and this turned out to be the case.
"--that Sir Uwaine smote Sir Marhaus that his spear brast in pieces on the shield, and Sir Marhaus smote him so sore that horse and man he bare to the earth, and hurt Sir Uwaine on the left side--" "The truth is, Alisande, these archaics are a little _too_
a body ought to discriminate--they come together with great random, and a spear is brast, and one party brake his shield and the other one goes down, horse and man, over his horse-tail and brake his neck, and then the next candidate comes randoming in, and
why, it's pale and noiseless--just ghosts scuffling in a fog.
Dear me, what would this barren vocabulary get out of the mightiest spectacle?
--the burning of Rome in Nero's time, for instance?
Why, it would merely say, 'Town burned down; no insurance; boy brast a window, fireman brake his neck!
' Why, _that_ ain't a picture"!
It was a good deal of a lecture, I thought, but it didn't disturb Sandy, didn't turn a feather; her steam soared steadily up again, the minute I took off the lid: "Then Sir Marhaus turned his horse and rode toward Gawaine with his spear.
And when Sir Gawaine saw that, he dressed his shield, and they aventred their spears, and they came together with all the might of their horses, that either knight smote other so hard in the midst of their shields, but Sir Gawaine's spear brake--" "I knew
--"but Sir Marhaus's spear held; and therewith Sir Gawaine and his horse rushed down to the earth--" "Just so--and brake his back".
--"and lightly Sir Gawaine rose upon his feet and pulled out his sword, and dressed him toward Sir Marhaus on foot, and therewith either came unto other eagerly, and smote together with their swords, that their shields flew in cantels, and they bruised
But Sir Gawaine, fro it passed nine of the clock, waxed by the space of three hours ever stronger and stronger and thrice his might was increased.
All this espied Sir Marhaus, and had great wonder how his might increased, and so they wounded other passing sore; and then when it was come noon--" The pelting sing-song of it carried me forward to scenes and sounds of my boyhood days: "N-e-e-ew Haven!
ten minutes for refreshments--knductr'll strike the gong-bell two minutes before train leaves--passengers for the Shore line please take seats in the rear k'yar, this k'yar don't go no furder--_ahh_-pls, _aw_-rnjz, b'_nan_ners, _s-a-n-d_'ches,
--"and waxed past noon and drew toward evensong.
Sir Gawaine's strength feebled and waxed passing faint, that unnethes he might dure any longer, and Sir Marhaus was then bigger and bigger--" "Which strained his armor, of course; and yet little would one of these people mind a small thing like that".
--"and so, Sir Knight, said Sir Marhaus, I have well felt that ye are a passing good knight, and a marvelous man of might as ever I felt any, while it lasteth, and our quarrels are not great, and therefore it were a pity to do you hurt, for I feel you are
Ah, said Sir Gawaine, gentle knight, ye say the word that I should say.
And therewith they took off their helms and either kissed other, and there they swore together either to love other as brethren--" But I lost the thread there, and dozed off to slumber, thinking about what a pity it was that men with such superb strength
Take a jackass, for instance: a jackass has that kind of strength, and puts it to a useful purpose, and is valuable to this world because he is a jackass; but a nobleman is not valuable because he is a jackass.
It is a mixture that is always ineffectual, and should never have been attempted in the first place.
And yet, once you start a mistake, the trouble is done and you never know what is going to come of it.
When I came to myself again and began to listen, I perceived that I had lost another chapter, and that Alisande had wandered a long way off with her people.
"And so they rode and came into a deep valley full of stones, and thereby they saw a fair stream of water; above thereby was the head of the stream, a fair fountain, and three damsels sitting thereby.
In this country, said Sir Marhaus, came never knight since it was christened, but he found strange adventures--" "This is not good form, Alisande.
Sir Marhaus the king's son of Ireland talks like all the rest; you ought to give him a brogue, or at least a characteristic expletive; by this means one would recognize him as soon as he spoke, without his ever being named.
It is a common literary device with the great authors.
You should make him say, 'In this country, be jabers, came never knight since it was christened, but he found strange adventures, be jabers.
' You see how much better that sounds".
--"came never knight but he found strange adventures, be jabers.
Of a truth it doth indeed, fair lord, albeit 'tis passing hard to say, though peradventure that will not tarry but better speed with usage.
And then they rode to the damsels, and either saluted other, and the eldest had a garland of gold about her head, and she was threescore winter of age or more--" "The _damsel_ was"?
"Even so, dear lord--and her hair was white under the garland--" "Celluloid teeth, nine dollars a set, as like as not--the loose-fit kind, that go up and down like a portcullis when you eat, and fall out when you laugh".
"The second damsel was of thirty winter of age, with a circlet of gold about her head.
The third damsel was but fifteen year of age--" Billows of thought came rolling over my soul, and the voice faded out of my hearing!
Fifteen!
Break--my heart!
oh, my lost darling!
Just her age who was so gentle, and lovely, and all the world to me, and whom I shall never see again!
How the thought of her carries me back over wide seas of memory to a vague dim time, a happy time, so many, many centuries hence, when I used to wake in the soft summer mornings, out of sweet dreams of her, and say "Hello, Central"!
just to hear her dear voice come melting back to me with a "Hello, Hank"!
that was music of the spheres to my enchanted ear.
She got three dollars a week, but she was worth it.
I could not follow Alisande's further explanation of who our captured knights were, now--I mean in case she should ever get to explaining who they were.
My interest was gone, my thoughts were far away, and sad.
By fitful glimpses of the drifting tale, caught here and there and now and then, I merely noted in a vague way that each of these three knights took one of these three damsels up behind him on his horse, and one rode north, another east, the other south,
Year and day--and without baggage.
It was of a piece with the general simplicity of the country.
The sun was now setting.
It was about three in the afternoon when Alisande had begun to tell me who the cowboys were; so she had made pretty good progress with it--for her.
She would arrive some time or other, no doubt, but she was not a person who could be hurried.
We were approaching a castle which stood on high ground; a huge, strong, venerable structure, whose gray towers and battlements were charmingly draped with ivy, and whose whole majestic mass was drenched with splendors flung from the sinking sun.
It was the largest castle we had seen, and so I thought it might be the one we were after, but Sandy said no.
She did not know who owned it; she said she had passed it without calling, when she went down to Camelot.
CHAPTER XVI MORGAN LE FAY If knights errant were to be believed, not all castles were desirable places to seek hospitality in.
As a matter of fact, knights errant were _not_ persons to be believed--that is, measured by modern standards of veracity; yet, measured by the standards of their own time, and scaled accordingly, you got the truth.
It was very simple: you discounted a statement ninety-seven per cent; the rest was fact.
Now after making this allowance, the truth remained that if I could find out something about a castle before ringing the door-bell--I mean hailing the warders--it was the sensible thing to do.
So I was pleased when I saw in the distance a horseman making the bottom turn of the road that wound down from this castle.
As we approached each other, I saw that he wore a plumed helmet, and seemed to be otherwise clothed in steel, but bore a curious addition also--a stiff square garment like a herald's tabard.
However, I had to smile at my own forgetfulness when I got nearer and read this sign on his tabard: "Persimmon's Soap -- All the Prime-Donna Use It".
That was a little idea of my own, and had several wholesome purposes in view toward the civilizing and uplifting of this nation.
In the first place, it was a furtive, underhand blow at this nonsense of knight errantry, though nobody suspected that but me.
I had started a number of these people out--the bravest knights I could get--each sandwiched between bulletin-boards bearing one device or another, and I judged that by and by when they got to be numerous enough they would begin to look ridiculous; and
Secondly, these missionaries would gradually, and without creating suspicion or exciting alarm, introduce a rudimentary cleanliness among the nobility, and from them it would work down to the people, if the priests could be kept quiet.
This would undermine the Church.
I mean would be a step toward that.
Next, education--next, freedom --and then she would begin to crumble.
It being my conviction that any Established Church is an established crime, an established slave-pen, I had no scruples, but was willing to assail it in any way or with any weapon that promised to hurt it.
Why, in my own former day--in remote centuries not yet stirring in the womb of time--there were old Englishmen who imagined that they had been born in a free country: a "free" country with the Corporation Act and the Test still in force in it--timbers
My missionaries were taught to spell out the gilt signs on their tabards--the showy gilding was a neat idea, I could have got the king to wear a bulletin-board for the sake of that barbaric splendor--they were to spell out these signs and then explain to
The missionary's next move was to get the family together and try it on himself; he was to stop at no experiment, however desperate, that could convince the nobility that soap was harmless; if any final doubt remained, he must catch a hermit--the woods
They were unspeakably holy, and worked miracles, and everybody stood in awe of them.
If a hermit could survive a wash, and that failed to convince a duke, give him up, let him alone.
Whenever my missionaries overcame a knight errant on the road they washed him, and when he got well they swore him to go and get a bulletin-board and disseminate soap and civilization the rest of his days.
As a consequence the workers in the field were increasing by degrees, and the reform was steadily spreading.
My soap factory felt the strain early.
At first I had only two hands; but before I had left home I was already employing fifteen, and running night and day; and the atmospheric result was getting so pronounced that the king went sort of fainting and gasping around and said he did not believe he
There were ladies present, too, but much these people ever cared for that; they would swear before children, if the wind was their way when the factory was going.
This missionary knight's name was La Cote Male Taile, and he said that this castle was the abode of Morgan le Fay, sister of King Arthur, and wife of King Uriens, monarch of a realm about as big as the District of Columbia--you could stand in the middle of
"Kings" and "Kingdoms" were as thick in Britain as they had been in little Palestine in Joshua's time, when people had to sleep with their knees pulled up because they couldn't stretch out without a passport.
La Cote was much depressed, for he had scored here the worst failure of his campaign.
He had not worked off a cake; yet he had tried all the tricks of the trade, even to the washing of a hermit; but the hermit died.
This was, indeed, a bad failure, for this animal would now be dubbed a martyr, and would take his place among the saints of the Roman calendar.
Thus made he his moan, this poor Sir La Cote Male Taile, and sorrowed passing sore.
And so my heart bled for him, and I was moved to comfort and stay him.
Wherefore I said: "Forbear to grieve, fair knight, for this is not a defeat.
We have brains, you and I; and for such as have brains there are no defeats, but only victories.
Observe how we will turn this seeming disaster into an advertisement; an advertisement for our soap; and the biggest one, to draw, that was ever thought of; an advertisement that will transform that Mount Washington defeat into a Matterhorn victory.
We will put on your bulletin-board, '_Patronized by the elect_.
' How does that strike you"?
"Verily, it is wonderly bethought"!
"Well, a body is bound to admit that for just a modest little one-line ad, it's a corker".
So the poor colporteur's griefs vanished away.
He was a brave fellow, and had done mighty feats of arms in his time.
His chief celebrity rested upon the events of an excursion like this one of mine, which he had once made with a damsel named Maledisant, who was as handy with her tongue as was Sandy, though in a different way, for her tongue churned forth only railings
I knew his story well, and so I knew how to interpret the compassion that was in his face when he bade me farewell.
He supposed I was having a bitter hard time of it.
Sandy and I discussed his story, as we rode along, and she said that La Cote's bad luck had begun with the very beginning of that trip; for the king's fool had overthrown him on the first day, and in such cases it was customary for the girl to desert to
But, said I, suppose the victor should decline to accept his spoil?
She said that that wouldn't answer--he must.
He couldn't decline; it wouldn't be regular.
I made a note of that.
If Sandy's music got to be too burdensome, some time, I would let a knight defeat me, on the chance that she would desert to him.
In due time we were challenged by the warders, from the castle walls, and after a parley admitted.
I have nothing pleasant to tell about that visit.
But it was not a disappointment, for I knew Mrs. le Fay by reputation, and was not expecting anything pleasant.
She was held in awe by the whole realm, for she had made everybody believe she was a great sorceress.
All her ways were wicked, all her instincts devilish.
She was loaded to the eyelids with cold malice.
All her history was black with crime; and among her crimes murder was common.
I was most curious to see her; as curious as I could have been to see Satan.
To my surprise she was beautiful; black thoughts had failed to make her expression repulsive, age had failed to wrinkle her satin skin or mar its bloomy freshness.
She could have passed for old Uriens' granddaughter, she could have been mistaken for sister to her own son.
As soon as we were fairly within the castle gates we were ordered into her presence.
King Uriens was there, a kind-faced old man with a subdued look; and also the son, Sir Uwaine le Blanchemains, in whom I was, of course, interested on account of the tradition that he had once done battle with thirty knights, and also on account of his
But Morgan was the main attraction, the conspicuous personality here; she was head chief of this household, that was plain.
She caused us to be seated, and then she began, with all manner of pretty graces and graciousnesses, to ask me questions.
Dear me, it was like a bird or a flute, or something, talking.
I felt persuaded that this woman must have been misrepresented, lied about.
She trilled along, and trilled along, and presently a handsome young page, clothed like the rainbow, and as easy and undulatory of movement as a wave, came with something on a golden salver, and, kneeling to present it to her, overdid his graces and lost
She slipped a dirk into him in as matter-of-course a way as another person would have harpooned a rat!
Poor child!
he slumped to the floor, twisted his silken limbs in one great straining contortion of pain, and was dead.
Out of the old king was wrung an involuntary "O-h"!
of compassion.
The look he got, made him cut it suddenly short and not put any more hyphens in it.
Sir Uwaine, at a sign from his mother, went to the anteroom and called some servants, and meanwhile madame went rippling sweetly along with her talk.
I saw that she was a good housekeeper, for while she talked she kept a corner of her eye on the servants to see that they made no balks in handling the body and getting it out; when they came with fresh clean towels, she sent back for the other kind; and
It was plain to me that La Cote Male Taile had failed to see the mistress of the house.
Often, how louder and clearer than any tongue, does dumb circumstantial evidence speak.
Morgan le Fay rippled along as musically as ever.
Marvelous woman.
And what a glance she had: when it fell in reproof upon those servants, they shrunk and quailed as timid people do when the lightning flashes out of a cloud.
I could have got the habit myself.
It was the same with that poor old Brer Uriens; he was always on the ragged edge of apprehension; she could not even turn toward him but he winced.
In the midst of the talk I let drop a complimentary word about King Arthur, forgetting for the moment how this woman hated her brother.
That one little compliment was enough.
She clouded up like storm; she called for her guards, and said: "Hale me these varlets to the dungeons".
That struck cold on my ears, for her dungeons had a reputation.
Nothing occurred to me to say--or do.
But not so with Sandy.
As the guard laid a hand upon me, she piped up with the tranquilest confidence, and said: "God's wounds, dost thou covet destruction, thou maniac?
It is The Boss"!
Now what a happy idea that was!
--and so simple; yet it would never have occurred to me.
I was born modest; not all over, but in spots; and this was one of the spots.
The effect upon madame was electrical.
It cleared her countenance and brought back her smiles and all her persuasive graces and blandishments; but nevertheless she was not able to entirely cover up with them the fact that she was in a ghastly fright.
She said: "La, but do list to thine handmaid!
as if one gifted with powers like to mine might say the thing which I have said unto one who has vanquished Merlin, and not be jesting.
By mine enchantments I foresaw your coming, and by them I knew you when you entered here.
I did but play this little jest with hope to surprise you into some display of your art, as not doubting you would blast the guards with occult fires, consuming them to ashes on the spot, a marvel much beyond mine own ability, yet one which I have long
The guards were less curious, and got out as soon as they got permission.
CHAPTER XVII A ROYAL BANQUET Madame, seeing me pacific and unresentful, no doubt judged that I was deceived by her excuse; for her fright dissolved away, and she was soon so importunate to have me give an exhibition and kill somebody, that the thing grew
However, to my relief she was presently interrupted by the call to prayers.
I will say this much for the nobility: that, tyrannical, murderous, rapacious, and morally rotten as they were, they were deeply and enthusiastically religious.
Nothing could divert them from the regular and faithful performance of the pieties enjoined by the Church.
More than once I had seen a noble who had gotten his enemy at a disadvantage, stop to pray before cutting his throat; more than once I had seen a noble, after ambushing and despatching his enemy, retire to the nearest wayside shrine and humbly give thanks,
There was to be nothing finer or sweeter in the life of even Benvenuto Cellini, that rough-hewn saint, ten centuries later.
All the nobles of Britain, with their families, attended divine service morning and night daily, in their private chapels, and even the worst of them had family worship five or six times a day besides.
The credit of this belonged entirely to the Church.
Although I was no friend to that Catholic Church, I was obliged to admit this.
And often, in spite of me, I found myself saying, "What would this country be without the Church"?
After prayers we had dinner in a great banqueting hall which was lighted by hundreds of grease-jets, and everything was as fine and lavish and rudely splendid as might become the royal degree of the hosts.
At the head of the hall, on a dais, was the table of the king, queen, and their son, Prince Uwaine.
Stretching down the hall from this, was the general table, on the floor.
At this, above the salt, sat the visiting nobles and the grown members of their families, of both sexes,--the resident Court, in effect--sixty-one persons; below the salt sat minor officers of the household, with their principal subordinates: altogether a
It was a very fine show.
In a gallery a band with cymbals, horns, harps, and other horrors, opened the proceedings with what seemed to be the crude first-draft or original agony of the wail known to later centuries as "In the Sweet Bye and Bye".
It was new, and ought to have been rehearsed a little more.
For some reason or other the queen had the composer hanged, after dinner.
After this music, the priest who stood behind the royal table said a noble long grace in ostensible Latin.
Then the battalion of waiters broke away from their posts, and darted, rushed, flew, fetched and carried, and the mighty feeding began; no words anywhere, but absorbing attention to business.
The rows of chops opened and shut in vast unison, and the sound of it was like to the muffled burr of subterranean machinery.
The havoc continued an hour and a half, and unimaginable was the destruction of substantials.
Of the chief feature of the feast --the huge wild boar that lay stretched out so portly and imposing at the start--nothing was left but the semblance of a hoop-skirt; and he was but the type and symbol of what had happened to all the other dishes.
With the pastries and so on, the heavy drinking began--and the talk.
Gallon after gallon of wine and mead disappeared, and everybody got comfortable, then happy, then sparklingly joyous--both sexes, --and by and by pretty noisy.
Men told anecdotes that were terrific to hear, but nobody blushed; and when the nub was sprung, the assemblage let go with a horse-laugh that shook the fortress.
Ladies answered back with historiettes that would almost have made Queen Margaret of Navarre or even the great Elizabeth of England hide behind a handkerchief, but nobody hid here, but only laughed --howled, you may say.
In pretty much all of these dreadful stories, ecclesiastics were the hardy heroes, but that didn't worry the chaplain any, he had his laugh with the rest; more than that, upon invitation he roared out a song which was of as daring a sort as any that was
By midnight everybody was fagged out, and sore with laughing; and, as a rule, drunk: some weepingly, some affectionately, some hilariously, some quarrelsomely, some dead and under the table.
Of the ladies, the worst spectacle was a lovely young duchess, whose wedding-eve this was; and indeed she was a spectacle, sure enough.
Just as she was she could have sat in advance for the portrait of the young daughter of the Regent d'Orleans, at the famous dinner whence she was carried, foul-mouthed, intoxicated, and helpless, to her bed, in the lost and lamented days of the Ancient
Suddenly, even while the priest was lifting his hands, and all conscious heads were bowed in reverent expectation of the coming blessing, there appeared under the arch of the far-off door at the bottom of the hall an old and bent and white-haired lady,
Everybody crossed himself in a grisly fright, for a curse was an awful thing to those people; but the queen rose up majestic, with the death-light in her eye, and flung back this ruthless command: "Lay hands on her!
To the stake with her"!
The guards left their posts to obey.
It was a shame; it was a cruel thing to see.
What could be done?
Sandy gave me a look; I knew she had another inspiration.
I said: "Do what you choose".
She was up and facing toward the queen in a moment.
She indicated me, and said: "Madame, _he_ saith this may not be.
Recall the commandment, or he will dissolve the castle and it shall vanish away like the instable fabric of a dream"!
Confound it, what a crazy contract to pledge a person to!
What if the queen-- But my consternation subsided there, and my panic passed off; for the queen, all in a collapse, made no show of resistance but gave a countermanding sign and sunk into her seat.
When she reached it she was sober.
So were many of the others.
The assemblage rose, whiffed ceremony to the winds, and rushed for the door like a mob; overturning chairs, smashing crockery, tugging, struggling, shouldering, crowding--anything to get out before I should change my mind and puff the castle into the
Well, well, well, they _were_ a superstitious lot.
It is all a body can do to conceive of it.
The poor queen was so scared and humbled that she was even afraid to hang the composer without first consulting me.
I was very sorry for her--indeed, any one would have been, for she was really suffering; so I was willing to do anything that was reasonable, and had no desire to carry things to wanton extremities.
I therefore considered the matter thoughtfully, and ended by having the musicians ordered into our presence to play that Sweet Bye and Bye again, which they did.
Then I saw that she was right, and gave her permission to hang the whole band.
This little relaxation of sternness had a good effect upon the queen.
A statesman gains little by the arbitrary exercise of iron-clad authority upon all occasions that offer, for this wounds the just pride of his subordinates, and thus tends to undermine his strength.
A little concession, now and then, where it can do no harm, is the wiser policy.
Now that the queen was at ease in her mind once more, and measurably happy, her wine naturally began to assert itself again, and it got a little the start of her.
I mean it set her music going--her silver bell of a tongue.
Dear me, she was a master talker.
It would not become me to suggest that it was pretty late and that I was a tired man and very sleepy.
I wished I had gone off to bed when I had the chance.
Now I must stick it out; there was no other way.
So she tinkled along and along, in the otherwise profound and ghostly hush of the sleeping castle, until by and by there came, as if from deep down under us, a far-away sound, as of a muffled shriek --with an expression of agony about it that made my flesh
The queen stopped, and her eyes lighted with pleasure; she tilted her graceful head as a bird does when it listens.
The sound bored its way up through the stillness again.
"What is it"?
I said.
"It is truly a stubborn soul, and endureth long.
It is many hours now".
"Endureth what"?
"The rack.
Come--ye shall see a blithe sight.
An he yield not his secret now, ye shall see him torn asunder".
What a silky smooth hellion she was; and so composed and serene, when the cords all down my legs were hurting in sympathy with that man's pain.
Conducted by mailed guards bearing flaring torches, we tramped along echoing corridors, and down stone stairways dank and dripping, and smelling of mould and ages of imprisoned night --a chill, uncanny journey and a long one, and not made the shorter or
He had been accused by an anonymous informer, of having killed a stag in the royal preserves.
I said: "Anonymous testimony isn't just the right thing, your Highness.
It were fairer to confront the accused with the accuser".
"I had not thought of that, it being but of small consequence.
But an I would, I could not, for that the accuser came masked by night, and told the forester, and straightway got him hence again, and so the forester knoweth him not".
"Then is this Unknown the only person who saw the stag killed"?
"Marry, _no_ man _saw_ the killing, but this Unknown saw this hardy wretch near to the spot where the stag lay, and came with right loyal zeal and betrayed him to the forester".
"So the Unknown was near the dead stag, too?
Isn't it just possible that he did the killing himself?
His loyal zeal--in a mask--looks just a shade suspicious.
But what is your highness's idea for racking the prisoner?
Where is the profit"?
"He will not confess, else; and then were his soul lost.
For his crime his life is forfeited by the law--and of a surety will I see that he payeth it!
--but it were peril to my own soul to let him die unconfessed and unabsolved.
Nay, I were a fool to fling me into hell for _his_ accommodation".
"But, your Highness, suppose he has nothing to confess"?
"As to that, we shall see, anon.
An I rack him to death and he confess not, it will peradventure show that he had indeed naught to confess--ye will grant that that is sooth?
Then shall I not be damned for an unconfessed man that had naught to confess --wherefore, I shall be safe".
It was the stubborn unreasoning of the time.
It was useless to argue with her.
Arguments have no chance against petrified training; they wear it as little as the waves wear a cliff.
And her training was everybody's.
The brightest intellect in the land would not have been able to see that her position was defective.
As we entered the rack-cell I caught a picture that will not go from me; I wish it would.
A native young giant of thirty or thereabouts lay stretched upon the frame on his back, with his wrists and ankles tied to ropes which led over windlasses at either end.
There was no color in him; his features were contorted and set, and sweat-drops stood upon his forehead.
A priest bent over him on each side; the executioner stood by; guards were on duty; smoking torches stood in sockets along the walls; in a corner crouched a poor young creature, her face drawn with anguish, a half-wild and hunted look in her eyes, and in
Just as we stepped across the threshold the executioner gave his machine a slight turn, which wrung a cry from both the prisoner and the woman; but I shouted, and the executioner released the strain without waiting to see who spoke.
I could not let this horror go on; it would have killed me to see it.
I asked the queen to let me clear the place and speak to the prisoner privately; and when she was going to object I spoke in a low voice and said I did not want to make a scene before her servants, but I must have my way; for I was King Arthur's
She saw she had to yield.
I asked her to indorse me to these people, and then leave me.
It was not pleasant for her, but she took the pill; and even went further than I was meaning to require.
I only wanted the backing of her own authority; but she said: "Ye will do in all things as this lord shall command.
It is The Boss".
It was certainly a good word to conjure with: you could see it by the squirming of these rats.
The queen's guards fell into line, and she and they marched away, with their torch-bearers, and woke the echoes of the cavernous tunnels with the measured beat of their retreating footfalls.
I had the prisoner taken from the rack and placed upon his bed, and medicaments applied to his hurts, and wine given him to drink.
The woman crept near and looked on, eagerly, lovingly, but timorously,--like one who fears a repulse; indeed, she tried furtively to touch the man's forehead, and jumped back, the picture of fright, when I turned unconsciously toward her.
It was pitiful to see.
"Lord," I said, "stroke him, lass, if you want to.
Do anything you're a mind to; don't mind me".
Why, her eyes were as grateful as an animal's, when you do it a kindness that it understands.
The baby was out of her way and she had her cheek against the man's in a minute and her hands fondling his hair, and her happy tears running down.
The man revived and caressed his wife with his eyes, which was all he could do.
I judged I might clear the den, now, and I did; cleared it of all but the family and myself.
Then I said: "Now, my friend, tell me your side of this matter; I know the other side".
The man moved his head in sign of refusal.
But the woman looked pleased--as it seemed to me--pleased with my suggestion.
I went on-- "You know of me"?
"Yes.
All do, in Arthur's realms".
"If my reputation has come to you right and straight, you should not be afraid to speak".
The woman broke in, eagerly: "Ah, fair my lord, do thou persuade him!
Thou canst an thou wilt.
Ah, he suffereth so; and it is for me--for _me_!
And how can I bear it?
I would I might see him die--a sweet, swift death; oh, my Hugo, I cannot bear this one"!
And she fell to sobbing and grovelling about my feet, and still imploring.
Imploring what?
The man's death?
I could not quite get the bearings of the thing.
But Hugo interrupted her and said: "Peace!
Ye wit not what ye ask.
Shall I starve whom I love, to win a gentle death?
I wend thou knewest me better".
"Well," I said, "I can't quite make this out.
It is a puzzle.
Now--" "Ah, dear my lord, an ye will but persuade him!
Consider how these his tortures wound me!
Oh, and he will not speak!
--whereas, the healing, the solace that lie in a blessed swift death--" "What _are_ you maundering about?
He's going out from here a free man and whole--he's not going to die".
The man's white face lit up, and the woman flung herself at me in a most surprising explosion of joy, and cried out: "He is saved!
--for it is the king's word by the mouth of the king's servant--Arthur, the king whose word is gold"!
"Well, then you do believe I can be trusted, after all.
Why didn't you before"?
"Who doubted?
Not I, indeed; and not she".
"Well, why wouldn't you tell me your story, then"?
"Ye had made no promise; else had it been otherwise".
"I see, I see...
.
And yet I believe I don't quite see, after all.
You stood the torture and refused to confess; which shows plain enough to even the dullest understanding that you had nothing to confess--" "I, my lord?
How so?
It was I that killed the deer"!
"You _did_?
Oh, dear, this is the most mixed-up business that ever--" "Dear lord, I begged him on my knees to confess, but--" "You _did_!
It gets thicker and thicker.
What did you want him to do that for"?
"Sith it would bring him a quick death and save him all this cruel pain".
"Well--yes, there is reason in that.
But _he_ didn't want the quick death".
"He?
Why, of a surety he _did_".
"Well, then, why in the world _didn't_ he confess"?
"Ah, sweet sir, and leave my wife and chick without bread and shelter"?
"Oh, heart of gold, now I see it!
The bitter law takes the convicted man's estate and beggars his widow and his orphans.
They could torture you to death, but without conviction or confession they could not rob your wife and baby.
You stood by them like a man; and _you_--true wife and the woman that you are--you would have bought him release from torture at cost to yourself of slow starvation and death--well, it humbles a body to think what your sex can do when it comes to
I'll book you both for my colony; you'll like it there; it's a Factory where I'm going to turn groping and grubbing automata into _men_".
CHAPTER XVIII IN THE QUEEN'S DUNGEONS Well, I arranged all that; and I had the man sent to his home.
I had a great desire to rack the executioner; not because he was a good, painstaking and paingiving official,--for surely it was not to his discredit that he performed his functions well--but to pay him back for wantonly cuffing and otherwise distressing
The priests told me about this, and were generously hot to have him punished.
Something of this disagreeable sort was turning up every now and then.
I mean, episodes that showed that not all priests were frauds and self-seekers, but that many, even the great majority, of these that were down on the ground among the common people, were sincere and right-hearted, and devoted to the alleviation of human
Well, it was a thing which could not be helped, so I seldom fretted about it, and never many minutes at a time; it has never been my way to bother much about things which you can't cure.
But I did not like it, for it was just the sort of thing to keep people reconciled to an Established Church.
We _must_ have a religion --it goes without saying--but my idea is, to have it cut up into forty free sects, so that they will police each other, as had been the case in the United States in my time.
Concentration of power in a political machine is bad; and an Established Church is only a political machine; it was invented for that; it is nursed, cradled, preserved for that; it is an enemy to human liberty, and does no good which it could not better do
That wasn't law; it wasn't gospel: it was only an opinion--my opinion, and I was only a man, one man: so it wasn't worth any more than the pope's--or any less, for that matter.
Well, I couldn't rack the executioner, neither would I overlook the just complaint of the priests.
The man must be punished somehow or other, so I degraded him from his office and made him leader of the band--the new one that was to be started.
He begged hard, and said he couldn't play--a plausible excuse, but too thin; there wasn't a musician in the country that could.
The queen was a good deal outraged, next morning when she found she was going to have neither Hugo's life nor his property.
But I told her she must bear this cross; that while by law and custom she certainly was entitled to both the man's life and his property, there were extenuating circumstances, and so in Arthur the king's name I had pardoned him.
The deer was ravaging the man's fields, and he had killed it in sudden passion, and not for gain; and he had carried it into the royal forest in the hope that that might make detection of the misdoer impossible.
Confound her, I couldn't make her see that sudden passion is an extenuating circumstance in the killing of venison--or of a person--so I gave it up and let her sulk it out.
I _did_ think I was going to make her see it by remarking that her own sudden passion in the case of the page modified that crime.
"Crime"!
she exclaimed.
"How thou talkest!
Crime, forsooth!
Man, I am going to _pay_ for him"!
Oh, it was no use to waste sense on her.
Training--training is everything; training is all there is _to_ a person.
We speak of nature; it is folly; there is no such thing as nature; what we call by that misleading name is merely heredity and training.
We have no thoughts of our own, no opinions of our own; they are transmitted to us, trained into us.
All that is original in us, and therefore fairly creditable or discreditable to us, can be covered up and hidden by the point of a cambric needle, all the rest being atoms contributed by, and inherited from, a procession of ancestors that stretches back a
And as for me, all that I think about in this plodding sad pilgrimage, this pathetic drift between the eternities, is to look out and humbly live a pure and high and blameless life, and save that one microscopic atom in me that is truly _me_: the rest may
No, confound her, her intellect was good, she had brains enough, but her training made her an ass--that is, from a many-centuries-later point of view.
To kill the page was no crime--it was her right; and upon her right she stood, serenely and unconscious of offense.
She was a result of generations of training in the unexamined and unassailed belief that the law which permitted her to kill a subject when she chose was a perfectly right and righteous one.
Well, we must give even Satan his due.
She deserved a compliment for one thing; and I tried to pay it, but the words stuck in my throat.
She had a right to kill the boy, but she was in no wise obliged to pay for him.
That was law for some other people, but not for her.
She knew quite well that she was doing a large and generous thing to pay for that lad, and that I ought in common fairness to come out with something handsome about it, but I couldn't--my mouth refused.
I couldn't help seeing, in my fancy, that poor old grandma with the broken heart, and that fair young creature lying butchered, his little silken pomps and vanities laced with his golden blood.
How could she _pay_ for him!
_Whom_ could she pay?
And so, well knowing that this woman, trained as she had been, deserved praise, even adulation, I was yet not able to utter it, trained as I had been.
The best I could do was to fish up a compliment from outside, so to speak--and the pity of it was, that it was true: "Madame, your people will adore you for this".
Quite true, but I meant to hang her for it some day if I lived.
Some of those laws were too bad, altogether too bad.
A master might kill his slave for nothing--for mere spite, malice, or to pass the time--just as we have seen that the crowned head could do it with _his_ slave, that is to say, anybody.
A gentleman could kill a free commoner, and pay for him--cash or garden-truck.
A noble could kill a noble without expense, as far as the law was concerned, but reprisals in kind were to be expected.
_Any_body could kill _some_body, except the commoner and the slave; these had no privileges.
If they killed, it was murder, and the law wouldn't stand murder.
It made short work of the experimenter--and of his family, too, if he murdered somebody who belonged up among the ornamental ranks.
If a commoner gave a noble even so much as a Damiens-scratch which didn't kill or even hurt, he got Damiens' dose for it just the same; they pulled him to rags and tatters with horses, and all the world came to see the show, and crack jokes, and have a
I had had enough of this grisly place by this time, and wanted to leave, but I couldn't, because I had something on my mind that my conscience kept prodding me about, and wouldn't let me forget.
If I had the remaking of man, he wouldn't have any conscience.
It is one of the most disagreeable things connected with a person; and although it certainly does a great deal of good, it cannot be said to pay, in the long run; it would be much better to have less good and more comfort.
Still, this is only my opinion, and I am only one man; others, with less experience, may think differently.
They have a right to their view.
I only stand to this: I have noticed my conscience for many years, and I know it is more trouble and bother to me than anything else I started with.
I suppose that in the beginning I prized it, because we prize anything that is ours; and yet how foolish it was to think so.
If we look at it in another way, we see how absurd it is: if I had an anvil in me would I prize it?
Of course not.
And yet when you come to think, there is no real difference between a conscience and an anvil--I mean for comfort.
I have noticed it a thousand times.
And you could dissolve an anvil with acids, when you couldn't stand it any longer; but there isn't any way that you can work off a conscience--at least so it will stay worked off; not that I know of, anyway.
There was something I wanted to do before leaving, but it was a disagreeable matter, and I hated to go at it.
Well, it bothered me all the morning.
I could have mentioned it to the old king, but what would be the use?
--he was but an extinct volcano; he had been active in his time, but his fire was out, this good while, he was only a stately ash-pile now; gentle enough, and kindly enough for my purpose, without doubt, but not usable.
He was nothing, this so-called king: the queen was the only power there.
And she was a Vesuvius.
As a favor, she might consent to warm a flock of sparrows for you, but then she might take that very opportunity to turn herself loose and bury a city.
However, I reflected that as often as any other way, when you are expecting the worst, you get something that is not so bad, after all.
So I braced up and placed my matter before her royal Highness.
I said I had been having a general jail-delivery at Camelot and among neighboring castles, and with her permission I would like to examine her collection, her bric-a-brac--that is to say, her prisoners.
She resisted; but I was expecting that.
But she finally consented.
I was expecting that, too, but not so soon.
That about ended my discomfort.
She called her guards and torches, and we went down into the dungeons.
These were down under the castle's foundations, and mainly were small cells hollowed out of the living rock.
Some of these cells had no light at all.
In one of them was a woman, in foul rags, who sat on the ground, and would not answer a question or speak a word, but only looked up at us once or twice, through a cobweb of tangled hair, as if to see what casual thing it might be that was disturbing with
This poor rack of bones was a woman of middle age, apparently; but only apparently; she had been there nine years, and was eighteen when she entered.
She was a commoner, and had been sent here on her bridal night by Sir Breuse Sance Pite, a neighboring lord whose vassal her father was, and to which said lord she had refused what has since been called le droit du seigneur, and, moreover, had opposed
The young husband had interfered at that point, believing the bride's life in danger, and had flung the noble out into the midst of the humble and trembling wedding guests, in the parlor, and left him there astonished at this strange treatment, and
The said lord being cramped for dungeon-room had asked the queen to accommodate his two criminals, and here in her bastile they had been ever since; hither, indeed, they had come before their crime was an hour old, and had never seen each other since.
Here they were, kenneled like toads in the same rock; they had passed nine pitch dark years within fifty feet of each other, yet neither knew whether the other was alive or not.
All the first years, their only question had been--asked with beseechings and tears that might have moved stones, in time, perhaps, but hearts are not stones: "Is he alive"?
"Is she alive"?
But they had never got an answer; and at last that question was not asked any more--or any other.
I wanted to see the man, after hearing all this.
He was thirty-four years old, and looked sixty.
He sat upon a squared block of stone, with his head bent down, his forearms resting on his knees, his long hair hanging like a fringe before his face, and he was muttering to himself.
He raised his chin and looked us slowly over, in a listless dull way, blinking with the distress of the torchlight, then dropped his head and fell to muttering again and took no further notice of us.
There were some pathetically suggestive dumb witnesses present.
On his wrists and ankles were cicatrices, old smooth scars, and fastened to the stone on which he sat was a chain with manacles and fetters attached; but this apparatus lay idle on the ground, and was thick with rust.
Chains cease to be needed after the spirit has gone out of a prisoner.
I could not rouse the man; so I said we would take him to her, and see--to the bride who was the fairest thing in the earth to him, once--roses, pearls, and dew made flesh, for him; a wonder-work, the master-work of nature: with eyes like no other eyes,
The sight of her would set his stagnant blood leaping; the sight of her-- But it was a disappointment.
They sat together on the ground and looked dimly wondering into each other's faces a while, with a sort of weak animal curiosity; then forgot each other's presence, and dropped their eyes, and you saw that they were away again and wandering in some far
I had them taken out and sent to their friends.
The queen did not like it much.
Not that she felt any personal interest in the matter, but she thought it disrespectful to Sir Breuse Sance Pite.
However, I assured her that if he found he couldn't stand it I would fix him so that he could.
I set forty-seven prisoners loose out of those awful rat-holes, and left only one in captivity.
He was a lord, and had killed another lord, a sort of kinsman of the queen.
That other lord had ambushed him to assassinate him, but this fellow had got the best of him and cut his throat.
However, it was not for that that I left him jailed, but for maliciously destroying the only public well in one of his wretched villages.
The queen was bound to hang him for killing her kinsman, but I would not allow it: it was no crime to kill an assassin.
But I said I was willing to let her hang him for destroying the well; so she concluded to put up with that, as it was better than nothing.
Dear me, for what trifling offenses the most of those forty-seven men and women were shut up there!
Indeed, some were there for no distinct offense at all, but only to gratify somebody's spite; and not always the queen's by any means, but a friend's.
The newest prisoner's crime was a mere remark which he had made.
He said he believed that men were about all alike, and one man as good as another, barring clothes.
He said he believed that if you were to strip the nation naked and send a stranger through the crowd, he couldn't tell the king from a quack doctor, nor a duke from a hotel clerk.
Apparently here was a man whose brains had not been reduced to an ineffectual mush by idiotic training.
I set him loose and sent him to the Factory.
Some of the cells carved in the living rock were just behind the face of the precipice, and in each of these an arrow-slit had been pierced outward to the daylight, and so the captive had a thin ray from the blessed sun for his comfort.
The case of one of these poor fellows was particularly hard.
From his dusky swallow's hole high up in that vast wall of native rock he could peer out through the arrow-slit and see his own home off yonder in the valley; and for twenty-two years he had watched it, with heartache and longing, through that crack.
He could see the lights shine there at night, and in the daytime he could see figures go in and come out--his wife and children, some of them, no doubt, though he could not make out at that distance.
In the course of years he noted festivities there, and tried to rejoice, and wondered if they were weddings or what they might be.
And he noted funerals; and they wrung his heart.
He could make out the coffin, but he could not determine its size, and so could not tell whether it was wife or child.
He could see the procession form, with priests and mourners, and move solemnly away, bearing the secret with them.
He had left behind him five children and a wife; and in nineteen years he had seen five funerals issue, and none of them humble enough in pomp to denote a servant.
So he had lost five of his treasures; there must still be one remaining--one now infinitely, unspeakably precious,--but _which_ one?
wife, or child?
That was the question that tortured him, by night and by day, asleep and awake.
Well, to have an interest, of some sort, and half a ray of light, when you are in a dungeon, is a great support to the body and preserver of the intellect.
This man was in pretty good condition yet.
By the time he had finished telling me his distressful tale, I was in the same state of mind that you would have been in yourself, if you have got average human curiosity; that is to say, I was as burning up as he was to find out which member of the family
So I took him over home myself; and an amazing kind of a surprise party it was, too --typhoons and cyclones of frantic joy, and whole Niagaras of happy tears; and by George!
we found the aforetime young matron graying toward the imminent verge of her half century, and the babies all men and women, and some of them married and experimenting familywise themselves--for not a soul of the tribe was dead!
Conceive of the ingenious devilishness of that queen: she had a special hatred for this prisoner, and she had _invented_ all those funerals herself, to scorch his heart with; and the sublimest stroke of genius of the whole thing was leaving the
But for me, he never would have got out.
Morgan le Fay hated him with her whole heart, and she never would have softened toward him.
And yet his crime was committed more in thoughtlessness than deliberate depravity.
He had said she had red hair.
Well, she had; but that was no way to speak of it.
When red-headed people are above a certain social grade their hair is auburn.
Consider it: among these forty-seven captives there were five whose names, offenses, and dates of incarceration were no longer known!
One woman and four men--all bent, and wrinkled, and mind-extinguished patriarchs.
They themselves had long ago forgotten these details; at any rate they had mere vague theories about them, nothing definite and nothing that they repeated twice in the same way.
The succession of priests whose office it had been to pray daily with the captives and remind them that God had put them there, for some wise purpose or other, and teach them that patience, humbleness, and submission to oppression was what He loved to see
These traditions went but little way, for they concerned the length of the incarceration only, and not the names of the offenses.
And even by the help of tradition the only thing that could be proven was that none of the five had seen daylight for thirty-five years: how much longer this privation has lasted was not guessable.
The king and the queen knew nothing about these poor creatures, except that they were heirlooms, assets inherited, along with the throne, from the former firm.
Nothing of their history had been transmitted with their persons, and so the inheriting owners had considered them of no value, and had felt no interest in them.
I said to the queen: "Then why in the world didn't you set them free"?
The question was a puzzler.
She didn't know _why_ she hadn't, the thing had never come up in her mind.
So here she was, forecasting the veritable history of future prisoners of the Castle d'If, without knowing it.
It seemed plain to me now, that with her training, those inherited prisoners were merely property--nothing more, nothing less.
Well, when we inherit property, it does not occur to us to throw it away, even when we do not value it.
When I brought my procession of human bats up into the open world and the glare of the afternoon sun--previously blindfolding them, in charity for eyes so long untortured by light--they were a spectacle to look at.
Skeletons, scarecrows, goblins, pathetic frights, every one; legitimatest possible children of Monarchy by the Grace of God and the Established Church.
I muttered absently: "I _wish_ I could photograph them"!
You have seen that kind of people who will never let on that they don't know the meaning of a new big word.
The more ignorant they are, the more pitifully certain they are to pretend you haven't shot over their heads.
The queen was just one of that sort, and was always making the stupidest blunders by reason of it.
She hesitated a moment; then her face brightened up with sudden comprehension, and she said she would do it for me.
I thought to myself: She?
why what can she know about photography?
But it was a poor time to be thinking.
When I looked around, she was moving on the procession with an axe!
Well, she certainly was a curious one, was Morgan le Fay.
I have seen a good many kinds of women in my time, but she laid over them all for variety.
And how sharply characteristic of her this episode was.
She had no more idea than a horse of how to photograph a procession; but being in doubt, it was just like her to try to do it with an axe.
CHAPTER XIX KNIGHT-ERRANTRY AS A TRADE Sandy and I were on the road again, next morning, bright and early.
It was so good to open up one's lungs and take in whole luscious barrels-ful of the blessed God's untainted, dew-fashioned, woodland-scented air once more, after suffocating body and mind for two days and nights in the moral and physical stenches of that
I mean, for me: of course the place was all right and agreeable enough for Sandy, for she had been used to high life all her days.
Poor girl, her jaws had had a wearisome rest now for a while, and I was expecting to get the consequences.
I was right; but she had stood by me most helpfully in the castle, and had mightily supported and reinforced me with gigantic foolishnesses which were worth more for the occasion than wisdoms double their size; so I thought she had earned a right to work
"Even so, fair my lord".
"Go ahead, then.
I won't interrupt this time, if I can help it.
Begin over again; start fair, and shake out all your reefs, and I will load my pipe and give good attention".
"Now turn we unto Sir Marhaus that rode with the damsel of thirty winter of age southward.
And so they came into a deep forest, and by fortune they were nighted, and rode along in a deep way, and at the last they came into a courtelage where abode the duke of South Marches, and there they asked harbour.
And on the morn the duke sent unto Sir Marhaus, and bad him make him ready.
And so Sir Marhaus arose and armed him, and there was a mass sung afore him, and he brake his fast, and so mounted on horseback in the court of the castle, there they should do the battle.
So there was the duke already on horseback, clean armed, and his six sons by him, and every each had a spear in his hand, and so they encountered, whereas the duke and his two sons brake their spears upon him, but Sir Marhaus held up his spear and touched
Then came the four sons by couples, and two of them brake their spears, and so did the other two.
And all this while Sir Marhaus touched them not.
Then Sir Marhaus ran to the duke, and smote him with his spear that horse and man fell to the earth.
And so he served his sons.
And then Sir Marhaus alight down, and bad the duke yield him or else he would slay him.
And then some of his sons recovered, and would have set upon Sir Marhaus.
Then Sir Marhaus said to the duke, Cease thy sons, or else I will do the uttermost to you all.
When the duke saw he might not escape the death, he cried to his sons, and charged them to yield them to Sir Marhaus.
And they kneeled all down and put the pommels of their swords to the knight, and so he received them.
And then they holp up their father, and so by their common assent promised unto Sir Marhaus never to be foes unto King Arthur, and thereupon at Whitsuntide after, to come he and his sons, and put them in the king's grace.
* [*Footnote: The story is borrowed, language and all, from the Morte d'Arthur.
--M.T.] "Even so standeth the history, fair Sir Boss.
Now ye shall wit that that very duke and his six sons are they whom but few days past you also did overcome and send to Arthur's court"!
"Why, Sandy, you can't mean it"!
"An I speak not sooth, let it be the worse for me".
"Well, well, well,--now who would ever have thought it?
One whole duke and six dukelets; why, Sandy, it was an elegant haul.
Knight-errantry is a most chuckle-headed trade, and it is tedious hard work, too, but I begin to see that there _is_ money in it, after all, if you have luck.
Not that I would ever engage in it as a business, for I wouldn't.
No sound and legitimate business can be established on a basis of speculation.
A successful whirl in the knight-errantry line--now what is it when you blow away the nonsense and come down to the cold facts?
It's just a corner in pork, that's all, and you can't make anything else out of it.
You're rich--yes,--suddenly rich--for about a day, maybe a week; then somebody corners the market on _you_, and down goes your bucket-shop; ain't that so, Sandy"?
"Whethersoever it be that my mind miscarrieth, bewraying simple language in such sort that the words do seem to come endlong and overthwart--" "There's no use in beating about the bush and trying to get around it that way, Sandy, it's _so_, just as I say.
I _know_ it's so.
And, moreover, when you come right down to the bedrock, knight-errantry is _worse_ than pork; for whatever happens, the pork's left, and so somebody's benefited anyway; but when the market breaks, in a knight-errantry whirl, and every knight in the pool
Just a rubbish-pile of battered corpses and a barrel or two of busted hardware.
Can you call _those_ assets?
Give me pork, every time.
Am I right"?
"Ah, peradventure my head being distraught by the manifold matters whereunto the confusions of these but late adventured haps and fortunings whereby not I alone nor you alone, but every each of us, meseemeth--" "No, it's not your head, Sandy.
Your head's all right, as far as it goes, but you don't know business; that's where the trouble is.
It unfits you to argue about business, and you're wrong to be always trying.
However, that aside, it was a good haul, anyway, and will breed a handsome crop of reputation in Arthur's court.
And speaking of the cowboys, what a curious country this is for women and men that never get old.
Now there's Morgan le Fay, as fresh and young as a Vassar pullet, to all appearances, and here is this old duke of the South Marches still slashing away with sword and lance at his time of life, after raising such a family as he has raised.
As I understand it, Sir Gawaine killed seven of his sons, and still he had six left for Sir Marhaus and me to take into camp.
And then there was that damsel of sixty winter of age still excursioning around in her frosty bloom--How old are you, Sandy"?
It was the first time I ever struck a still place in her.
The mill had shut down for repairs, or something.
CHAPTER XX THE OGRE'S CASTLE Between six and nine we made ten miles, which was plenty for a horse carrying triple--man, woman, and armor; then we stopped for a long nooning under some trees by a limpid brook.
Right so came by and by a knight riding; and as he drew near he made dolorous moan, and by the words of it I perceived that he was cursing and swearing; yet nevertheless was I glad of his coming, for that I saw he bore a bulletin-board whereon in letters
I was glad of his coming, for even by this token I knew him for knight of mine.
It was Sir Madok de la Montaine, a burly great fellow whose chief distinction was that he had come within an ace of sending Sir Launcelot down over his horse-tail once.
He was never long in a stranger's presence without finding some pretext or other to let out that great fact.
But there was another fact of nearly the same size, which he never pushed upon anybody unasked, and yet never withheld when asked: that was, that the reason he didn't quite succeed was, that he was interrupted and sent down over horse-tail himself.
This innocent vast lubber did not see any particular difference between the two facts.
I liked him, for he was earnest in his work, and very valuable.
And he was so fine to look at, with his broad mailed shoulders, and the grand leonine set of his plumed head, and his big shield with its quaint device of a gauntleted hand clutching a prophylactic tooth-brush, with motto: "Try Noyoudont".
This was a tooth-wash that I was introducing.
He was aweary, he said, and indeed he looked it; but he would not alight.
He said he was after the stove-polish man; and with this he broke out cursing and swearing anew.
The bulletin-boarder referred to was Sir Ossaise of Surluse, a brave knight, and of considerable celebrity on account of his having tried conclusions in a tournament once, with no less a Mogul than Sir Gaheris himself--although not successfully.
He was of a light and laughing disposition, and to him nothing in this world was serious.
It was for this reason that I had chosen him to work up a stove-polish sentiment.
There were no stoves yet, and so there could be nothing serious about stove-polish.
All that the agent needed to do was to deftly and by degrees prepare the public for the great change, and have them established in predilections toward neatness against the time when the stove should appear upon the stage.
Sir Madok was very bitter, and brake out anew with cursings.
He said he had cursed his soul to rags; and yet he would not get down from his horse, neither would he take any rest, or listen to any comfort, until he should have found Sir Ossaise and settled this account.
It appeared, by what I could piece together of the unprofane fragments of his statement, that he had chanced upon Sir Ossaise at dawn of the morning, and been told that if he would make a short cut across the fields and swamps and broken hills and glades,
With characteristic zeal Sir Madok had plunged away at once upon this quest, and after three hours of awful crosslot riding had overhauled his game.
And behold, it was the five patriarchs that had been released from the dungeons the evening before!
Poor old creatures, it was all of twenty years since any one of them had known what it was to be equipped with any remaining snag or remnant of a tooth.
"Blank-blank-blank him," said Sir Madok, "an I do not stove-polish him an I may find him, leave it to me; for never no knight that hight Ossaise or aught else may do me this disservice and bide on live, an I may find him, the which I have thereunto sworn a
And with these words and others, he lightly took his spear and gat him thence.
In the middle of the afternoon we came upon one of those very patriarchs ourselves, in the edge of a poor village.
He was basking in the love of relatives and friends whom he had not seen for fifty years; and about him and caressing him were also descendants of his own body whom he had never seen at all till now; but to him these were all strangers, his memory was
It seemed incredible that a man could outlast half a century shut up in a dark hole like a rat, but here were his old wife and some old comrades to testify to it.
They could remember him as he was in the freshness and strength of his young manhood, when he kissed his child and delivered it to its mother's hands and went away into that long oblivion.
The people at the castle could not tell within half a generation the length of time the man had been shut up there for his unrecorded and forgotten offense; but this old wife knew; and so did her old child, who stood there among her married sons and
It was a curious situation; yet it is not on that account that I have made room for it here, but on account of a thing which seemed to me still more curious.
To wit, that this dreadful matter brought from these downtrodden people no outburst of rage against these oppressors.
They had been heritors and subjects of cruelty and outrage so long that nothing could have startled them but a kindness.
Yes, here was a curious revelation, indeed, of the depth to which this people had been sunk in slavery.
Their entire being was reduced to a monotonous dead level of patience, resignation, dumb uncomplaining acceptance of whatever might befall them in this life.
Their very imagination was dead.
When you can say that of a man, he has struck bottom, I reckon; there is no lower deep for him.
I rather wished I had gone some other road.
This was not the sort of experience for a statesman to encounter who was planning out a peaceful revolution in his mind.
For it could not help bringing up the unget-aroundable fact that, all gentle cant and philosophizing to the contrary notwithstanding, no people in the world ever did achieve their freedom by goody-goody talk and moral suasion: it being immutable law that
If history teaches anything, it teaches that.
What this folk needed, then, was a Reign of Terror and a guillotine, and I was the wrong man for them.
Two days later, toward noon, Sandy began to show signs of excitement and feverish expectancy.
She said we were approaching the ogre's castle.
I was surprised into an uncomfortable shock.
The object of our quest had gradually dropped out of my mind; this sudden resurrection of it made it seem quite a real and startling thing for a moment, and roused up in me a smart interest.
Sandy's excitement increased every moment; and so did mine, for that sort of thing is catching.
My heart got to thumping.
You can't reason with your heart; it has its own laws, and thumps about things which the intellect scorns.
Presently, when Sandy slid from the horse, motioned me to stop, and went creeping stealthily, with her head bent nearly to her knees, toward a row of bushes that bordered a declivity, the thumpings grew stronger and quicker.
And they kept it up while she was gaining her ambush and getting her glimpse over the declivity; and also while I was creeping to her side on my knees.
Her eyes were burning now, as she pointed with her finger, and said in a panting whisper: "The castle!
The castle!
Lo, where it looms"!
What a welcome disappointment I experienced!
I said: "Castle?
It is nothing but a pigsty; a pigsty with a wattled fence around it".
She looked surprised and distressed.
The animation faded out of her face; and during many moments she was lost in thought and silent.
Then: "It was not enchanted aforetime," she said in a musing fashion, as if to herself.
"And how strange is this marvel, and how awful --that to the one perception it is enchanted and dight in a base and shameful aspect; yet to the perception of the other it is not enchanted, hath suffered no change, but stands firm and stately still, girt
And God shield us, how it pricks the heart to see again these gracious captives, and the sorrow deepened in their sweet faces!
We have tarried along, and are to blame".
I saw my cue.
The castle was enchanted to _me_, not to her.
It would be wasted time to try to argue her out of her delusion, it couldn't be done; I must just humor it.
So I said: "This is a common case--the enchanting of a thing to one eye and leaving it in its proper form to another.
You have heard of it before, Sandy, though you haven't happened to experience it.
But no harm is done.
In fact, it is lucky the way it is.
If these ladies were hogs to everybody and to themselves, it would be necessary to break the enchantment, and that might be impossible if one failed to find out the particular process of the enchantment.
And hazardous, too; for in attempting a disenchantment without the true key, you are liable to err, and turn your hogs into dogs, and the dogs into cats, the cats into rats, and so on, and end by reducing your materials to nothing finally, or to an
But here, by good luck, no one's eyes but mine are under the enchantment, and so it is of no consequence to dissolve it.
These ladies remain ladies to you, and to themselves, and to everybody else; and at the same time they will suffer in no way from my delusion, for when I know that an ostensible hog is a lady, that is enough for me, I know how to treat her".
"Thanks, oh, sweet my lord, thou talkest like an angel.
And I know that thou wilt deliver them, for that thou art minded to great deeds and art as strong a knight of your hands and as brave to will and to do, as any that is on live".
"I will not leave a princess in the sty, Sandy.
Are those three yonder that to my disordered eyes are starveling swine-herds--" "The ogres, Are _they_ changed also?
It is most wonderful.
Now am I fearful; for how canst thou strike with sure aim when five of their nine cubits of stature are to thee invisible?
Ah, go warily, fair sir; this is a mightier emprise than I wend".
"You be easy, Sandy.
All I need to know is, how _much_ of an ogre is invisible; then I know how to locate his vitals.
Don't you be afraid, I will make short work of these bunco-steerers.
Stay where you are".
I left Sandy kneeling there, corpse-faced but plucky and hopeful, and rode down to the pigsty, and struck up a trade with the swine-herds.
I won their gratitude by buying out all the hogs at the lump sum of sixteen pennies, which was rather above latest quotations.
I was just in time; for the Church, the lord of the manor, and the rest of the tax-gatherers would have been along next day and swept off pretty much all the stock, leaving the swine-herds very short of hogs and Sandy out of princesses.
But now the tax people could be paid in cash, and there would be a stake left besides.
One of the men had ten children; and he said that last year when a priest came and of his ten pigs took the fattest one for tithes, the wife burst out upon him, and offered him a child and said: "Thou beast without bowels of mercy, why leave me my child,
How curious.
The same thing had happened in the Wales of my day, under this same old Established Church, which was supposed by many to have changed its nature when it changed its disguise.
I sent the three men away, and then opened the sty gate and beckoned Sandy to come--which she did; and not leisurely, but with the rush of a prairie fire.
And when I saw her fling herself upon those hogs, with tears of joy running down her cheeks, and strain them to her heart, and kiss them, and caress them, and call them reverently by grand princely names, I was ashamed of her, ashamed of the human race.
We had to drive those hogs home--ten miles; and no ladies were ever more fickle-minded or contrary.
They would stay in no road, no path; they broke out through the brush on all sides, and flowed away in all directions, over rocks, and hills, and the roughest places they could find.
And they must not be struck, or roughly accosted; Sandy could not bear to see them treated in ways unbecoming their rank.
The troublesomest old sow of the lot had to be called my Lady, and your Highness, like the rest.
It is annoying and difficult to scour around after hogs, in armor.
There was one small countess, with an iron ring in her snout and hardly any hair on her back, that was the devil for perversity.
She gave me a race of an hour, over all sorts of country, and then we were right where we had started from, having made not a rod of real progress.
I seized her at last by the tail, and brought her along squealing.
When I overtook Sandy she was horrified, and said it was in the last degree indelicate to drag a countess by her train.
We got the hogs home just at dark--most of them.
The princess Nerovens de Morganore was missing, and two of her ladies in waiting: namely, Miss Angela Bohun, and the Demoiselle Elaine Courtemains, the former of these two being a young black sow with a white star in her forehead, and the latter a brown
Also among the missing were several mere baronesses--and I wanted them to stay missing; but no, all that sausage-meat had to be found; so servants were sent out with torches to scour the woods and hills to that end.
Of course, the whole drove was housed in the house, and, great guns!
--well, I never saw anything like it.
Nor ever heard anything like it.
And never smelt anything like it.
It was like an insurrection in a gasometer.
CHAPTER XXI THE PILGRIMS When I did get to bed at last I was unspeakably tired; the stretching out, and the relaxing of the long-tense muscles, how luxurious, how delicious!
but that was as far as I could get--sleep was out of the question for the present.
The ripping and tearing and squealing of the nobility up and down the halls and corridors was pandemonium come again, and kept me broad awake.
Being awake, my thoughts were busy, of course; and mainly they busied themselves with Sandy's curious delusion.
Here she was, as sane a person as the kingdom could produce; and yet, from my point of view she was acting like a crazy woman.
My land, the power of training!
of influence!
of education!
It can bring a body up to believe anything.
I had to put myself in Sandy's place to realize that she was not a lunatic.
Yes, and put her in mine, to demonstrate how easy it is to seem a lunatic to a person who has not been taught as you have been taught.
If I had told Sandy I had seen a wagon, uninfluenced by enchantment, spin along fifty miles an hour; had seen a man, unequipped with magic powers, get into a basket and soar out of sight among the clouds; and had listened, without any necromancer's help,
Everybody around her believed in enchantments; nobody had any doubts; to doubt that a castle could be turned into a sty, and its occupants into hogs, would have been the same as my doubting among Connecticut people the actuality of the telephone and its
Yes, Sandy was sane; that must be admitted.
If I also would be sane--to Sandy --I must keep my superstitions about unenchanted and unmiraculous locomotives, balloons, and telephones, to myself.
Also, I believed that the world was not flat, and hadn't pillars under it to support it, nor a canopy over it to turn off a universe of water that occupied all space above; but as I was the only person in the kingdom afflicted with such impious and
The next morning Sandy assembled the swine in the dining-room and gave them their breakfast, waiting upon them personally and manifesting in every way the deep reverence which the natives of her island, ancient and modern, have always felt for rank, let
I could have eaten with the hogs if I had had birth approaching my lofty official rank; but I hadn't, and so accepted the unavoidable slight and made no complaint.
Sandy and I had our breakfast at the second table.
The family were not at home.
I said: "How many are in the family, Sandy, and where do they keep themselves"?
"Family"?
"Yes".
"Which family, good my lord"?
"Why, this family; your own family".
"Sooth to say, I understand you not.
I have no family".
"No family?
Why, Sandy, isn't this your home"?
"Now how indeed might that be?
I have no home".
"Well, then, whose house is this"?
"Ah, wit you well I would tell you an I knew myself".
"Come--you don't even know these people?
Then who invited us here"?
"None invited us.
We but came; that is all".
"Why, woman, this is a most extraordinary performance.
The effrontery of it is beyond admiration.
We blandly march into a man's house, and cram it full of the only really valuable nobility the sun has yet discovered in the earth, and then it turns out that we don't even know the man's name.
How did you ever venture to take this extravagant liberty?
I supposed, of course, it was your home.
What will the man say"?
"What will he say?
Forsooth what can he say but give thanks"?
"Thanks for what"?
Her face was filled with a puzzled surprise: "Verily, thou troublest mine understanding with strange words.
Do ye dream that one of his estate is like to have the honor twice in his life to entertain company such as we have brought to grace his house withal"?
"Well, no--when you come to that.
No, it's an even bet that this is the first time he has had a treat like this".
"Then let him be thankful, and manifest the same by grateful speech and due humility; he were a dog, else, and the heir and ancestor of dogs".
To my mind, the situation was uncomfortable.
It might become more so.
It might be a good idea to muster the hogs and move on.
So I said: "The day is wasting, Sandy.
It is time to get the nobility together and be moving".
"Wherefore, fair sir and Boss"?
"We want to take them to their home, don't we"?
"La, but list to him!
They be of all the regions of the earth!
Each must hie to her own home; wend you we might do all these journeys in one so brief life as He hath appointed that created life, and thereto death likewise with help of Adam, who by sin done through persuasion of his helpmeet, she being wrought upon and
"My lord"?
"Well, you know we haven't got time for this sort of thing.
Don't you see, we could distribute these people around the earth in less time than it is going to take you to explain that we can't.
We mustn't talk now, we must act.
You want to be careful; you mustn't let your mill get the start of you that way, at a time like this.
To business now--and sharp's the word.
Who is to take the aristocracy home"?
"Even their friends.
These will come for them from the far parts of the earth".
This was lightning from a clear sky, for unexpectedness; and the relief of it was like pardon to a prisoner.
She would remain to deliver the goods, of course.
"Well, then, Sandy, as our enterprise is handsomely and successfully ended, I will go home and report; and if ever another one--" "I also am ready; I will go with thee".
This was recalling the pardon.
"How?
You will go with me?
Why should you"?
"Will I be traitor to my knight, dost think?
That were dishonor.
I may not part from thee until in knightly encounter in the field some overmatching champion shall fairly win and fairly wear me.
I were to blame an I thought that that might ever hap".
"Elected for the long term," I sighed to myself.
"I may as well make the best of it".
So then I spoke up and said: "All right; let us make a start".
While she was gone to cry her farewells over the pork, I gave that whole peerage away to the servants.
And I asked them to take a duster and dust around a little where the nobilities had mainly lodged and promenaded; but they considered that that would be hardly worth while, and would moreover be a rather grave departure from custom, and therefore likely to
A departure from custom--that settled it; it was a nation capable of committing any crime but that.
The servants said they would follow the fashion, a fashion grown sacred through immemorial observance; they would scatter fresh rushes in all the rooms and halls, and then the evidence of the aristocratic visitation would be no longer visible.
It was a kind of satire on Nature: it was the scientific method, the geologic method; it deposited the history of the family in a stratified record; and the antiquary could dig through it and tell by the remains of each period what changes of diet the
The first thing we struck that day was a procession of pilgrims.
It was not going our way, but we joined it, nevertheless; for it was hourly being borne in upon me now, that if I would govern this country wisely, I must be posted in the details of its life, and not at second hand, but by personal observation and
This company of pilgrims resembled Chaucer's in this: that it had in it a sample of about all the upper occupations and professions the country could show, and a corresponding variety of costume.
There were young men and old men, young women and old women, lively folk and grave folk.
They rode upon mules and horses, and there was not a side-saddle in the party; for this specialty was to remain unknown in England for nine hundred years yet.
It was a pleasant, friendly, sociable herd; pious, happy, merry and full of unconscious coarsenesses and innocent indecencies.
What they regarded as the merry tale went the continual round and caused no more embarrassment than it would have caused in the best English society twelve centuries later.
Practical jokes worthy of the English wits of the first quarter of the far-off nineteenth century were sprung here and there and yonder along the line, and compelled the delightedest applause; and sometimes when a bright remark was made at one end of the
Sandy knew the goal and purpose of this pilgrimage, and she posted me.
She said: "They journey to the Valley of Holiness, for to be blessed of the godly hermits and drink of the miraculous waters and be cleansed from sin".
"Where is this watering place"?
"It lieth a two-day journey hence, by the borders of the land that hight the Cuckoo Kingdom".
"Tell me about it.
Is it a celebrated place"?
"Oh, of a truth, yes.
There be none more so.
Of old time there lived there an abbot and his monks.
Belike were none in the world more holy than these; for they gave themselves to study of pious books, and spoke not the one to the other, or indeed to any, and ate decayed herbs and naught thereto, and slept hard, and prayed much, and washed never; also
Right so came they to be known of all the world by reason of these holy austerities, and visited by rich and poor, and reverenced".
"Proceed".
"But always there was lack of water there.
Whereas, upon a time, the holy abbot prayed, and for answer a great stream of clear water burst forth by miracle in a desert place.
Now were the fickle monks tempted of the Fiend, and they wrought with their abbot unceasingly by beggings and beseechings that he would construct a bath; and when he was become aweary and might not resist more, he said have ye your will, then, and granted
Now mark thou what 'tis to forsake the ways of purity the which He loveth, and wanton with such as be worldly and an offense.
These monks did enter into the bath and come thence washed as white as snow; and lo, in that moment His sign appeared, in miraculous rebuke!
for His insulted waters ceased to flow, and utterly vanished away".
"They fared mildly, Sandy, considering how that kind of crime is regarded in this country".
"Belike; but it was their first sin; and they had been of perfect life for long, and differing in naught from the angels.
Prayers, tears, torturings of the flesh, all was vain to beguile that water to flow again.
Even processions; even burnt-offerings; even votive candles to the Virgin, did fail every each of them; and all in the land did marvel".
"How odd to find that even this industry has its financial panics, and at times sees its assignats and greenbacks languish to zero, and everything come to a standstill.
Go on, Sandy".
"And so upon a time, after year and day, the good abbot made humble surrender and destroyed the bath.
And behold, His anger was in that moment appeased, and the waters gushed richly forth again, and even unto this day they have not ceased to flow in that generous measure".
"Then I take it nobody has washed since".
"He that would essay it could have his halter free; yes, and swiftly would he need it, too".
"The community has prospered since"?
"Even from that very day.
The fame of the miracle went abroad into all lands.
From every land came monks to join; they came even as the fishes come, in shoals; and the monastery added building to building, and yet others to these, and so spread wide its arms and took them in.
And nuns came, also; and more again, and yet more; and built over against the monastery on the yon side of the vale, and added building to building, until mighty was that nunnery.
And these were friendly unto those, and they joined their loving labors together, and together they built a fair great foundling asylum midway of the valley between".
"You spoke of some hermits, Sandy".
"These have gathered there from the ends of the earth.
A hermit thriveth best where there be multitudes of pilgrims.
Ye shall not find no hermit of no sort wanting.
If any shall mention a hermit of a kind he thinketh new and not to be found but in some far strange land, let him but scratch among the holes and caves and swamps that line that Valley of Holiness, and whatsoever be his breed, it skills not, he shall find
I closed up alongside of a burly fellow with a fat good-humored face, purposing to make myself agreeable and pick up some further crumbs of fact; but I had hardly more than scraped acquaintance with him when he began eagerly and awkwardly to lead up, in
I excused myself and dropped to the rear of the procession, sad at heart, willing to go hence from this troubled life, this vale of tears, this brief day of broken rest, of cloud and storm, of weary struggle and monotonous defeat; and yet shrinking from
Early in the afternoon we overtook another procession of pilgrims; but in this one was no merriment, no jokes, no laughter, no playful ways, nor any happy giddiness, whether of youth or age.
Yet both were here, both age and youth; gray old men and women, strong men and women of middle age, young husbands, young wives, little boys and girls, and three babies at the breast.
Even the children were smileless; there was not a face among all these half a hundred people but was cast down, and bore that set expression of hopelessness which is bred of long and hard trials and old acquaintance with despair.
They were slaves.
Chains led from their fettered feet and their manacled hands to a sole-leather belt about their waists; and all except the children were also linked together in a file six feet apart, by a single chain which led from collar to collar all down the line.
They were on foot, and had tramped three hundred miles in eighteen days, upon the cheapest odds and ends of food, and stingy rations of that.
They had slept in these chains every night, bundled together like swine.
They had upon their bodies some poor rags, but they could not be said to be clothed.
Their irons had chafed the skin from their ankles and made sores which were ulcerated and wormy.
Their naked feet were torn, and none walked without a limp.
Originally there had been a hundred of these unfortunates, but about half had been sold on the trip.
The trader in charge of them rode a horse and carried a whip with a short handle and a long heavy lash divided into several knotted tails at the end.
With this whip he cut the shoulders of any that tottered from weariness and pain, and straightened them up.
He did not speak; the whip conveyed his desire without that.
None of these poor creatures looked up as we rode along by; they showed no consciousness of our presence.
And they made no sound but one; that was the dull and awful clank of their chains from end to end of the long file, as forty-three burdened feet rose and fell in unison.
The file moved in a cloud of its own making.
All these faces were gray with a coating of dust.
One has seen the like of this coating upon furniture in unoccupied houses, and has written his idle thought in it with his finger.
I was reminded of this when I noticed the faces of some of those women, young mothers carrying babes that were near to death and freedom, how a something in their hearts was written in the dust upon their faces, plain to see, and lord, how plain to read!
for it was the track of tears.
One of these young mothers was but a girl, and it hurt me to the heart to read that writing, and reflect that it was come up out of the breast of such a child, a breast that ought not to know trouble yet, but only the gladness of the morning of life; and
It stung me as if I had been hit instead.
The master halted the file and jumped from his horse.
He stormed and swore at this girl, and said she had made annoyance enough with her laziness, and as this was the last chance he should have, he would settle the account now.
She dropped on her knees and put up her hands and began to beg, and cry, and implore, in a passion of terror, but the master gave no attention.
He snatched the child from her, and then made the men-slaves who were chained before and behind her throw her on the ground and hold her there and expose her body; and then he laid on with his lash like a madman till her back was flayed, she shrieking and
One of the men who was holding her turned away his face, and for this humanity he was reviled and flogged.
All our pilgrims looked on and commented--on the expert way in which the whip was handled.
They were too much hardened by lifelong everyday familiarity with slavery to notice that there was anything else in the exhibition that invited comment.
This was what slavery could do, in the way of ossifying what one may call the superior lobe of human feeling; for these pilgrims were kind-hearted people, and they would not have allowed that man to treat a horse like that.
I wanted to stop the whole thing and set the slaves free, but that would not do.
I must not interfere too much and get myself a name for riding over the country's laws and the citizen's rights roughshod.
If I lived and prospered I would be the death of slavery, that I was resolved upon; but I would try to fix it so that when I became its executioner it should be by command of the nation.
Just here was the wayside shop of a smith; and now arrived a landed proprietor who had bought this girl a few miles back, deliverable here where her irons could be taken off.
They were removed; then there was a squabble between the gentleman and the dealer as to which should pay the blacksmith.
The moment the girl was delivered from her irons, she flung herself, all tears and frantic sobbings, into the arms of the slave who had turned away his face when she was whipped.
He strained her to his breast, and smothered her face and the child's with kisses, and washed them with the rain of his tears.
I suspected.
I inquired.
Yes, I was right; it was husband and wife.
They had to be torn apart by force; the girl had to be dragged away, and she struggled and fought and shrieked like one gone mad till a turn of the road hid her from sight; and even after that, we could still make out the fading plaint of those receding
And the husband and father, with his wife and child gone, never to be seen by him again in life?
--well, the look of him one might not bear at all, and so I turned away; but I knew I should never get his picture out of my mind again, and there it is to this day, to wring my heartstrings whenever I think of it.
We put up at the inn in a village just at nightfall, and when I rose next morning and looked abroad, I was ware where a knight came riding in the golden glory of the new day, and recognized him for knight of mine--Sir Ozana le Cure Hardy.
He was in the gentlemen's furnishing line, and his missionarying specialty was plug hats.
He was clothed all in steel, in the beautifulest armor of the time--up to where his helmet ought to have been; but he hadn't any helmet, he wore a shiny stove-pipe hat, and was ridiculous a spectacle as one might want to see.
It was another of my surreptitious schemes for extinguishing knighthood by making it grotesque and absurd.
Sir Ozana's saddle was hung about with leather hat boxes, and every time he overcame a wandering knight he swore him into my service and fitted him with a plug and made him wear it.
I dressed and ran down to welcome Sir Ozana and get his news.
"How is trade"?
I asked.
"Ye will note that I have but these four left; yet were they sixteen whenas I got me from Camelot".
"Why, you have certainly done nobly, Sir Ozana.
Where have you been foraging of late"?
"I am but now come from the Valley of Holiness, please you sir".
"I am pointed for that place myself.
Is there anything stirring in the monkery, more than common"?
"By the mass ye may not question it!
...
.
Give him good feed, boy, and stint it not, an thou valuest thy crown; so get ye lightly to the stable and do even as I bid...
.
Sir, it is parlous news I bring, and--be these pilgrims?
Then ye may not do better, good folk, than gather and hear the tale I have to tell, sith it concerneth you, forasmuch as ye go to find that ye will not find, and seek that ye will seek in vain, my life being hostage for my word, and my word and message
This shout burst from twenty pilgrim mouths at once.
"Ye say well, good people.
I was verging to it, even when ye spake".
"Has somebody been washing again"?
"Nay, it is suspected, but none believe it.
It is thought to be some other sin, but none wit what".
"How are they feeling about the calamity"?
"None may describe it in words.
The fount is these nine days dry.
The prayers that did begin then, and the lamentations in sackcloth and ashes, and the holy processions, none of these have ceased nor night nor day; and so the monks and the nuns and the foundlings be all exhausted, and do hang up prayers writ upon
And at last they sent for thee, Sir Boss, to try magic and enchantment; and if you could not come, then was the messenger to fetch Merlin, and he is there these three days now, and saith he will fetch that water though he burst the globe and wreck its
As soon as it was over I showed to Sir Ozana these words which I had written on the inside of his hat: "Chemical Department, Laboratory extension, Section G. Pxxp.
Send two of first size, two of No.
3, and six of No.
4, together with the proper complementary details--and two of my trained assistants".
And I said: "Now get you to Camelot as fast as you can fly, brave knight, and show the writing to Clarence, and tell him to have these required matters in the Valley of Holiness with all possible dispatch".
"I will well, Sir Boss," and he was off.
CHAPTER XXII THE HOLY FOUNTAIN The pilgrims were human beings.
Otherwise they would have acted differently.
They had come a long and difficult journey, and now when the journey was nearly finished, and they learned that the main thing they had come for had ceased to exist, they didn't do as horses or cats or angle-worms would probably have done--turn back and
There is no accounting for human beings.
We made good time; and a couple of hours before sunset we stood upon the high confines of the Valley of Holiness, and our eyes swept it from end to end and noted its features.
That is, its large features.
These were the three masses of buildings.
They were distant and isolated temporalities shrunken to toy constructions in the lonely waste of what seemed a desert--and was.
Such a scene is always mournful, it is so impressively still, and looks so steeped in death.
But there was a sound here which interrupted the stillness only to add to its mournfulness; this was the faint far sound of tolling bells which floated fitfully to us on the passing breeze, and so faintly, so softly, that we hardly knew whether we heard it
We reached the monastery before dark, and there the males were given lodging, but the women were sent over to the nunnery.
The bells were close at hand now, and their solemn booming smote upon the ear like a message of doom.
A superstitious despair possessed the heart of every monk and published itself in his ghastly face.
Everywhere, these black-robed, soft-sandaled, tallow-visaged specters appeared, flitted about and disappeared, noiseless as the creatures of a troubled dream, and as uncanny.
The old abbot's joy to see me was pathetic.
Even to tears; but he did the shedding himself.
He said: "Delay not, son, but get to thy saving work.
An we bring not the water back again, and soon, we are ruined, and the good work of two hundred years must end.
And see thou do it with enchantments that be holy, for the Church will not endure that work in her cause be done by devil's magic".
"When I work, Father, be sure there will be no devil's work connected with it.
I shall use no arts that come of the devil, and no elements not created by the hand of God.
But is Merlin working strictly on pious lines"?
"Ah, he said he would, my son, he said he would, and took oath to make his promise good".
"Well, in that case, let him proceed".
"But surely you will not sit idle by, but help"?
"It will not answer to mix methods, Father; neither would it be professional courtesy.
Two of a trade must not underbid each other.
We might as well cut rates and be done with it; it would arrive at that in the end.
Merlin has the contract; no other magician can touch it till he throws it up".
"But I will take it from him; it is a terrible emergency and the act is thereby justified.
And if it were not so, who will give law to the Church?
The Church giveth law to all; and what she wills to do, that she may do, hurt whom it may.
I will take it from him; you shall begin upon the moment".
"It may not be, Father.
No doubt, as you say, where power is supreme, one can do as one likes and suffer no injury; but we poor magicians are not so situated.
Merlin is a very good magician in a small way, and has quite a neat provincial reputation.
He is struggling along, doing the best he can, and it would not be etiquette for me to take his job until he himself abandons it".
The abbot's face lighted.
"Ah, that is simple.
There are ways to persuade him to abandon it".
"No-no, Father, it skills not, as these people say.
If he were persuaded against his will, he would load that well with a malicious enchantment which would balk me until I found out its secret.
It might take a month.
I could set up a little enchantment of mine which I call the telephone, and he could not find out its secret in a hundred years.
Yes, you perceive, he might block me for a month.
Would you like to risk a month in a dry time like this"?
"A month!
The mere thought of it maketh me to shudder.
Have it thy way, my son.
But my heart is heavy with this disappointment.
Leave me, and let me wear my spirit with weariness and waiting, even as I have done these ten long days, counterfeiting thus the thing that is called rest, the prone body making outward sign of repose where inwardly is none".
Of course, it would have been best, all round, for Merlin to waive etiquette and quit and call it half a day, since he would never be able to start that water, for he was a true magician of the time; which is to say, the big miracles, the ones that gave
But I did not want Merlin to retire from the job until I was ready to take hold of it effectively myself; and I could not do that until I got my things from Camelot, and that would take two or three days.
My presence gave the monks hope, and cheered them up a good deal; insomuch that they ate a square meal that night for the first time in ten days.
As soon as their stomachs had been properly reinforced with food, their spirits began to rise fast; when the mead began to go round they rose faster.
By the time everybody was half-seas over, the holy community was in good shape to make a night of it; so we stayed by the board and put it through on that line.
Matters got to be very jolly.
Good old questionable stories were told that made the tears run down and cavernous mouths stand wide and the round bellies shake with laughter; and questionable songs were bellowed out in a mighty chorus that drowned the boom of the tolling bells.
At last I ventured a story myself; and vast was the success of it.
Not right off, of course, for the native of those islands does not, as a rule, dissolve upon the early applications of a humorous thing; but the fifth time I told it, they began to crack in places; the eight time I told it, they began to crumble; at the
This language is figurative.
Those islanders--well, they are slow pay at first, in the matter of return for your investment of effort, but in the end they make the pay of all other nations poor and small by contrast.
I was at the well next day betimes.
Merlin was there, enchanting away like a beaver, but not raising the moisture.
He was not in a pleasant humor; and every time I hinted that perhaps this contract was a shade too hefty for a novice he unlimbered his tongue and cursed like a bishop--French bishop of the Regency days, I mean.
Matters were about as I expected to find them.
The "fountain" was an ordinary well, it had been dug in the ordinary way, and stoned up in the ordinary way.
There was no miracle about it.
Even the lie that had created its reputation was not miraculous; I could have told it myself, with one hand tied behind me.
The well was in a dark chamber which stood in the center of a cut-stone chapel, whose walls were hung with pious pictures of a workmanship that would have made a chromo feel good; pictures historically commemorative of curative miracles which had been
That is, nobody but angels; they are always on deck when there is a miracle to the fore--so as to get put in the picture, perhaps.
Angels are as fond of that as a fire company; look at the old masters.
The well-chamber was dimly lighted by lamps; the water was drawn with a windlass and chain by monks, and poured into troughs which delivered it into stone reservoirs outside in the chapel--when there was water to draw, I mean--and none but monks could
I entered it, for I had temporary authority to do so, by courtesy of my professional brother and subordinate.
But he hadn't entered it himself.
He did everything by incantations; he never worked his intellect.
If he had stepped in there and used his eyes, instead of his disordered mind, he could have cured the well by natural means, and then turned it into a miracle in the customary way; but no, he was an old numskull, a magician who believed in his own magic;
I had an idea that the well had sprung a leak; that some of the wall stones near the bottom had fallen and exposed fissures that allowed the water to escape.
I measured the chain--98 feet.
Then I called in a couple of monks, locked the door, took a candle, and made them lower me in the bucket.
When the chain was all paid out, the candle confirmed my suspicion; a considerable section of the wall was gone, exposing a good big fissure.
I almost regretted that my theory about the well's trouble was correct, because I had another one that had a showy point or two about it for a miracle.
I remembered that in America, many centuries later, when an oil well ceased to flow, they used to blast it out with a dynamite torpedo.
If I should find this well dry and no explanation of it, I could astonish these people most nobly by having a person of no especial value drop a dynamite bomb into it.
It was my idea to appoint Merlin.
However, it was plain that there was no occasion for the bomb.
One cannot have everything the way he would like it.
A man has no business to be depressed by a disappointment, anyway; he ought to make up his mind to get even.
That is what I did.
I said to myself, I am in no hurry, I can wait; that bomb will come good yet.
And it did, too.
When I was above ground again, I turned out the monks, and let down a fish-line; the well was a hundred and fifty feet deep, and there was forty-one feet of water in it.
I called in a monk and asked: "How deep is the well"?
"That, sir, I wit not, having never been told".
"How does the water usually stand in it"?
"Near to the top, these two centuries, as the testimony goeth, brought down to us through our predecessors".
It was true--as to recent times at least--for there was witness to it, and better witness than a monk; only about twenty or thirty feet of the chain showed wear and use, the rest of it was unworn and rusty.
What had happened when the well gave out that other time?
Without doubt some practical person had come along and mended the leak, and then had come up and told the abbot he had discovered by divination that if the sinful bath were destroyed the well would flow again.
The leak had befallen again now, and these children would have prayed, and processioned, and tolled their bells for heavenly succor till they all dried up and blew away, and no innocent of them all would ever have thought to drop a fish-line into the well
Old habit of mind is one of the toughest things to get away from in the world.
It transmits itself like physical form and feature; and for a man, in those days, to have had an idea that his ancestors hadn't had, would have brought him under suspicion of being illegitimate.
I said to the monk: "It is a difficult miracle to restore water in a dry well, but we will try, if my brother Merlin fails.
Brother Merlin is a very passable artist, but only in the parlor-magic line, and he may not succeed; in fact, is not likely to succeed.
But that should be nothing to his discredit; the man that can do _this_ kind of miracle knows enough to keep hotel".
"Hotel?
I mind not to have heard--" "Of hotel?
It's what you call hostel.
The man that can do this miracle can keep hostel.
I can do this miracle; I shall do this miracle; yet I do not try to conceal from you that it is a miracle to tax the occult powers to the last strain".
"None knoweth that truth better than the brotherhood, indeed; for it is of record that aforetime it was parlous difficult and took a year.
Natheless, God send you good success, and to that end will we pray".
As a matter of business it was a good idea to get the notion around that the thing was difficult.
Many a small thing has been made large by the right kind of advertising.
That monk was filled up with the difficulty of this enterprise; he would fill up the others.
In two days the solicitude would be booming.
On my way home at noon, I met Sandy.
She had been sampling the hermits.
I said: "I would like to do that myself.
This is Wednesday.
Is there a matinee"?
"A which, please you, sir"?
"Matinee.
Do they keep open afternoons"?
"Who"?
"The hermits, of course".
"Keep open"?
"Yes, keep open.
Isn't that plain enough?
Do they knock off at noon"?
"Knock off"?
"Knock off?
--yes, knock off.
What is the matter with knock off?
I never saw such a dunderhead; can't you understand anything at all?
In plain terms, do they shut up shop, draw the game, bank the fires--" "Shut up shop, draw--" "There, never mind, let it go; you make me tired.
You can't seem to understand the simplest thing".
"I would I might please thee, sir, and it is to me dole and sorrow that I fail, albeit sith I am but a simple damsel and taught of none, being from the cradle unbaptized in those deep waters of learning that do anoint with a sovereignty him that partaketh
I couldn't make it all out--that is, the details--but I got the general idea; and enough of it, too, to be ashamed.
It was not fair to spring those nineteenth century technicalities upon the untutored infant of the sixth and then rail at her because she couldn't get their drift; and when she was making the honest best drive at it she could, too, and no fault of hers
Then we meandered pleasantly away toward the hermit holes in sociable converse together, and better friends than ever.
I was gradually coming to have a mysterious and shuddery reverence for this girl; nowadays whenever she pulled out from the station and got her train fairly started on one of those horizonless transcontinental sentences of hers, it was borne in upon me
I was so impressed with this, that sometimes when she began to empty one of these sentences on me I unconsciously took the very attitude of reverence, and stood uncovered; and if words had been water, I had been drowned, sure.
She had exactly the German way; whatever was in her mind to be delivered, whether a mere remark, or a sermon, or a cyclopedia, or the history of a war, she would get it into a single sentence or die.
Whenever the literary German dives into a sentence, that is the last you are going to see of him till he emerges on the other side of his Atlantic with his verb in his mouth.
We drifted from hermit to hermit all the afternoon.
It was a most strange menagerie.
The chief emulation among them seemed to be, to see which could manage to be the uncleanest and most prosperous with vermin.
Their manner and attitudes were the last expression of complacent self-righteousness.
It was one anchorite's pride to lie naked in the mud and let the insects bite him and blister him unmolested; it was another's to lean against a rock, all day long, conspicuous to the admiration of the throng of pilgrims and pray; it was another's to go
Groups of gazing pilgrims stood around all and every of these strange objects, lost in reverent wonder, and envious of the fleckless sanctity which these pious austerities had won for them from an exacting heaven.
By and by we went to see one of the supremely great ones.
He was a mighty celebrity; his fame had penetrated all Christendom; the noble and the renowned journeyed from the remotest lands on the globe to pay him reverence.
His stand was in the center of the widest part of the valley; and it took all that space to hold his crowds.
His stand was a pillar sixty feet high, with a broad platform on the top of it.
He was now doing what he had been doing every day for twenty years up there--bowing his body ceaselessly and rapidly almost to his feet.
It was his way of praying.
I timed him with a stop watch, and he made 1,244 revolutions in 24 minutes and 46 seconds.
It seemed a pity to have all this power going to waste.
It was one of the most useful motions in mechanics, the pedal movement; so I made a note in my memorandum book, purposing some day to apply a system of elastic cords to him and run a sewing machine with it.
I afterward carried out that scheme, and got five years' good service out of him; in which time he turned out upward of eighteen thousand first-rate tow-linen shirts, which was ten a day.
I worked him Sundays and all; he was going, Sundays, the same as week days, and it was no use to waste the power.
These shirts cost me nothing but just the mere trifle for the materials--I furnished those myself, it would not have been right to make him do that--and they sold like smoke to pilgrims at a dollar and a half apiece, which was the price of fifty cows or a
They were regarded as a perfect protection against sin, and advertised as such by my knights everywhere, with the paint-pot and stencil-plate; insomuch that there was not a cliff or a bowlder or a dead wall in England but you could read on it at a mile
Patent applied for".
There was more money in the business than one knew what to do with.
As it extended, I brought out a line of goods suitable for kings, and a nobby thing for duchesses and that sort, with ruffles down the forehatch and the running-gear clewed up with a featherstitch to leeward and then hauled aft with a back-stay and triced
Yes, it was a daisy.
But about that time I noticed that the motive power had taken to standing on one leg, and I found that there was something the matter with the other one; so I stocked the business and unloaded, taking Sir Bors de Ganis into camp financially along with
But he had earned it.
I can say that for him.
When I saw him that first time--however, his personal condition will not quite bear description here.
You can read it in the Lives of the Saints.
* [*All the details concerning the hermits, in this chapter, are from Lecky--but greatly modified.
This book not being a history but only a tale, the majority of the historian's frank details were too strong for reproduction in it.
--_Editor_] CHAPTER XXIII RESTORATION OF THE FOUNTAIN Saturday noon I went to the well and looked on a while.
Merlin was still burning smoke-powders, and pawing the air, and muttering gibberish as hard as ever, but looking pretty down-hearted, for of course he had not started even a perspiration in that well yet.
Finally I said: "How does the thing promise by this time, partner"?
"Behold, I am even now busied with trial of the powerfulest enchantment known to the princes of the occult arts in the lands of the East; an it fail me, naught can avail.
Peace, until I finish".
He raised a smoke this time that darkened all the region, and must have made matters uncomfortable for the hermits, for the wind was their way, and it rolled down over their dens in a dense and billowy fog.
He poured out volumes of speech to match, and contorted his body and sawed the air with his hands in a most extraordinary way.
At the end of twenty minutes he dropped down panting, and about exhausted.
Now arrived the abbot and several hundred monks and nuns, and behind them a multitude of pilgrims and a couple of acres of foundlings, all drawn by the prodigious smoke, and all in a grand state of excitement.
The abbot inquired anxiously for results.
Merlin said: "If any labor of mortal might break the spell that binds these waters, this which I have but just essayed had done it.
It has failed; whereby I do now know that that which I had feared is a truth established; the sign of this failure is, that the most potent spirit known to the magicians of the East, and whose name none may utter and live, has laid his spell upon this
The mortal does not breathe, nor ever will, who can penetrate the secret of that spell, and without that secret none can break it.
The water will flow no more forever, good Father.
I have done what man could.
Suffer me to go".
Of course this threw the abbot into a good deal of a consternation.
He turned to me with the signs of it in his face, and said: "Ye have heard him.
Is it true"?
"Part of it is".
"Not all, then, not all!
What part is true"?
"That that spirit with the Russian name has put his spell upon the well".
"God's wounds, then are we ruined"!
"Possibly".
"But not certainly?
Ye mean, not certainly"?
"That is it".
"Wherefore, ye also mean that when he saith none can break the spell--" "Yes, when he says that, he says what isn't necessarily true.
There are conditions under which an effort to break it may have some chance--that is, some small, some trifling chance--of success".
"The conditions--" "Oh, they are nothing difficult.
Only these: I want the well and the surroundings for the space of half a mile, entirely to myself from sunset to-day until I remove the ban--and nobody allowed to cross the ground but by my authority".
"Are these all"?
"Yes".
"And you have no fear to try"?
"Oh, none.
One may fail, of course; and one may also succeed.
One can try, and I am ready to chance it.
I have my conditions"?
"These and all others ye may name.
I will issue commandment to that effect".
"Wait," said Merlin, with an evil smile.
"Ye wit that he that would break this spell must know that spirit's name"?
"Yes, I know his name".
"And wit you also that to know it skills not of itself, but ye must likewise pronounce it?
Ha-ha!
Knew ye that"?
"Yes, I knew that, too".
"You had that knowledge!
Art a fool?
Are ye minded to utter that name and die"?
"Utter it?
Why certainly.
I would utter it if it was Welsh".
"Ye are even a dead man, then; and I go to tell Arthur".
"That's all right.
Take your gripsack and get along.
The thing for _you_ to do is to go home and work the weather, John W. Merlin".
It was a home shot, and it made him wince; for he was the worst weather-failure in the kingdom.
Whenever he ordered up the danger-signals along the coast there was a week's dead calm, sure, and every time he prophesied fair weather it rained brickbats.
But I kept him in the weather bureau right along, to undermine his reputation.
However, that shot raised his bile, and instead of starting home to report my death, he said he would remain and enjoy it.
My two experts arrived in the evening, and pretty well fagged, for they had traveled double tides.
They had pack-mules along, and had brought everything I needed--tools, pump, lead pipe, Greek fire, sheaves of big rockets, roman candles, colored fire sprays, electric apparatus, and a lot of sundries--everything necessary for the stateliest kind of a
They got their supper and a nap, and about midnight we sallied out through a solitude so wholly vacant and complete that it quite overpassed the required conditions.
We took possession of the well and its surroundings.
My boys were experts in all sorts of things, from the stoning up of a well to the constructing of a mathematical instrument.
An hour before sunrise we had that leak mended in ship-shape fashion, and the water began to rise.
Then we stowed our fireworks in the chapel, locked up the place, and went home to bed.
Before the noon mass was over, we were at the well again; for there was a deal to do yet, and I was determined to spring the miracle before midnight, for business reasons: for whereas a miracle worked for the Church on a week-day is worth a good deal, it
In nine hours the water had risen to its customary level--that is to say, it was within twenty-three feet of the top.
We put in a little iron pump, one of the first turned out by my works near the capital; we bored into a stone reservoir which stood against the outer wall of the well-chamber and inserted a section of lead pipe that was long enough to reach to the door of
We knocked the head out of an empty hogshead and hoisted this hogshead to the flat roof of the chapel, where we clamped it down fast, poured in gunpowder till it lay loosely an inch deep on the bottom, then we stood up rockets in the hogshead as thick as
We grounded the wire of a pocket electrical battery in that powder, we placed a whole magazine of Greek fire on each corner of the roof--blue on one corner, green on another, red on another, and purple on the last--and grounded a wire in each.
About two hundred yards off, in the flat, we built a pen of scantlings, about four feet high, and laid planks on it, and so made a platform.
We covered it with swell tapestries borrowed for the occasion, and topped it off with the abbot's own throne.
When you are going to do a miracle for an ignorant race, you want to get in every detail that will count; you want to make all the properties impressive to the public eye; you want to make matters comfortable for your head guest; then you can turn yourself
I know the value of these things, for I know human nature.
You can't throw too much style into a miracle.
It costs trouble, and work, and sometimes money; but it pays in the end.
Well, we brought the wires to the ground at the chapel, and then brought them under the ground to the platform, and hid the batteries there.
We put a rope fence a hundred feet square around the platform to keep off the common multitude, and that finished the work.
My idea was, doors open at 10:30, performance to begin at 11:25 sharp.
I wished I could charge admission, but of course that wouldn't answer.
I instructed my boys to be in the chapel as early as 10, before anybody was around, and be ready to man the pumps at the proper time, and make the fur fly.
Then we went home to supper.
The news of the disaster to the well had traveled far by this time; and now for two or three days a steady avalanche of people had been pouring into the valley.
The lower end of the valley was become one huge camp; we should have a good house, no question about that.
Criers went the rounds early in the evening and announced the coming attempt, which put every pulse up to fever heat.
They gave notice that the abbot and his official suite would move in state and occupy the platform at 10:30, up to which time all the region which was under my ban must be clear; the bells would then cease from tolling, and this sign should be permission
I was at the platform and all ready to do the honors when the abbot's solemn procession hove in sight--which it did not do till it was nearly to the rope fence, because it was a starless black night and no torches permitted.
With it came Merlin, and took a front seat on the platform; he was as good as his word for once.
One could not see the multitudes banked together beyond the ban, but they were there, just the same.
The moment the bells stopped, those banked masses broke and poured over the line like a vast black wave, and for as much as a half hour it continued to flow, and then it solidified itself, and you could have walked upon a pavement of human heads to--well,
We had a solemn stage-wait, now, for about twenty minutes--a thing I had counted on for effect; it is always good to let your audience have a chance to work up its expectancy.
At length, out of the silence a noble Latin chant--men's voices--broke and swelled up and rolled away into the night, a majestic tide of melody.
I had put that up, too, and it was one of the best effects I ever invented.
When it was finished I stood up on the platform and extended my hands abroad, for two minutes, with my face uplifted--that always produces a dead hush--and then slowly pronounced this ghastly word with a kind of awfulness which caused hundreds to tremble,
Just as I was moaning out the closing hunks of that word, I touched off one of my electric connections and all that murky world of people stood revealed in a hideous blue glare!
It was immense --that effect!
Lots of people shrieked, women curled up and quit in every direction, foundlings collapsed by platoons.
The abbot and the monks crossed themselves nimbly and their lips fluttered with agitated prayers.
Merlin held his grip, but he was astonished clear down to his corns; he had never seen anything to begin with that, before.
Now was the time to pile in the effects.
I lifted my hands and groaned out this word--as it were in agony: "Nihilistendynamittheaterkaestchenssprengungsattentaetsversuchungen"!
--and turned on the red fire!
You should have heard that Atlantic of people moan and howl when that crimson hell joined the blue!
After sixty seconds I shouted: "Transvaaltruppentropentransporttrampelthiertreibertrauungsthraenen- tragoedie"!
--and lit up the green fire!
After waiting only forty seconds this time, I spread my arms abroad and thundered out the devastating syllables of this word of words: "Mekkamuselmannenmassenmenchenmoerdermohrenmuttermarmormonumentenmacher"!
--and whirled on the purple glare!
There they were, all going at once, red, blue, green, purple!
--four furious volcanoes pouring vast clouds of radiant smoke aloft, and spreading a blinding rainbowed noonday to the furthest confines of that valley.
In the distance one could see that fellow on the pillar standing rigid against the background of sky, his seesaw stopped for the first time in twenty years.
I knew the boys were at the pump now and ready.
So I said to the abbot: "The time is come, Father.
I am about to pronounce the dread name and command the spell to dissolve.
You want to brace up, and take hold of something".
Then I shouted to the people: "Behold, in another minute the spell will be broken, or no mortal can break it.
If it break, all will know it, for you will see the sacred water gush from the chapel door"!
I stood a few moments, to let the hearers have a chance to spread my announcement to those who couldn't hear, and so convey it to the furthest ranks, then I made a grand exhibition of extra posturing and gesturing, and shouted: "Lo, I command the fell
By his own dread name I command it--BGWJJILLIGKKK"!
Then I touched off the hogshead of rockets, and a vast fountain of dazzling lances of fire vomited itself toward the zenith with a hissing rush, and burst in mid-sky into a storm of flashing jewels!
One mighty groan of terror started up from the massed people --then suddenly broke into a wild hosannah of joy--for there, fair and plain in the uncanny glare, they saw the freed water leaping forth!
The old abbot could not speak a word, for tears and the chokings in his throat; without utterance of any sort, he folded me in his arms and mashed me.
It was more eloquent than speech.
And harder to get over, too, in a country where there were really no doctors that were worth a damaged nickel.
You should have seen those acres of people throw themselves down in that water and kiss it; kiss it, and pet it, and fondle it, and talk to it as if it were alive, and welcome it back with the dear names they gave their darlings, just as if it had been a
Yes, it was pretty to see, and made me think more of them than I had done before.
I sent Merlin home on a shutter.
He had caved in and gone down like a landslide when I pronounced that fearful name, and had never come to since.
He never had heard that name before,--neither had I--but to him it was the right one.
Any jumble would have been the right one.
He admitted, afterward, that that spirit's own mother could not have pronounced that name better than I did.
He never could understand how I survived it, and I didn't tell him.
It is only young magicians that give away a secret like that.
Merlin spent three months working enchantments to try to find out the deep trick of how to pronounce that name and outlive it.
But he didn't arrive.
When I started to the chapel, the populace uncovered and fell back reverently to make a wide way for me, as if I had been some kind of a superior being--and I was.
I was aware of that.
I took along a night shift of monks, and taught them the mystery of the pump, and set them to work, for it was plain that a good part of the people out there were going to sit up with the water all night, consequently it was but right that they should have
To those monks that pump was a good deal of a miracle itself, and they were full of wonder over it; and of admiration, too, of the exceeding effectiveness of its performance.
It was a great night, an immense night.
There was reputation in it.
I could hardly get to sleep for glorying over it.
CHAPTER XXIV A RIVAL MAGICIAN My influence in the Valley of Holiness was something prodigious now.
It seemed worth while to try to turn it to some valuable account.
The thought came to me the next morning, and was suggested by my seeing one of my knights who was in the soap line come riding in.
According to history, the monks of this place two centuries before had been worldly minded enough to want to wash.
It might be that there was a leaven of this unrighteousness still remaining.
So I sounded a Brother: "Wouldn't you like a bath"?
He shuddered at the thought--the thought of the peril of it to the well--but he said with feeling: "One needs not to ask that of a poor body who has not known that blessed refreshment sith that he was a boy.
Would God I might wash me!
but it may not be, fair sir, tempt me not; it is forbidden".
And then he sighed in such a sorrowful way that I was resolved he should have at least one layer of his real estate removed, if it sized up my whole influence and bankrupted the pile.
So I went to the abbot and asked for a permit for this Brother.
He blenched at the idea--I don't mean that you could see him blench, for of course you couldn't see it without you scraped him, and I didn't care enough about it to scrape him, but I knew the blench was there, just the same, and within a book-cover's
He said: "Ah, son, ask aught else thou wilt, and it is thine, and freely granted out of a grateful heart--but this, oh, this!
Would you drive away the blessed water again"?
"No, Father, I will not drive it away.
I have mysterious knowledge which teaches me that there was an error that other time when it was thought the institution of the bath banished the fountain".
A large interest began to show up in the old man's face.
"My knowledge informs me that the bath was innocent of that misfortune, which was caused by quite another sort of sin".
"These are brave words--but--but right welcome, if they be true".
"They are true, indeed.
Let me build the bath again, Father.
Let me build it again, and the fountain shall flow forever".
"You promise this?
--you promise it?
Say the word--say you promise it"!
"I do promise it".
"Then will I have the first bath myself!
Go--get ye to your work.
Tarry not, tarry not, but go".
I and my boys were at work, straight off.
The ruins of the old bath were there yet in the basement of the monastery, not a stone missing.
They had been left just so, all these lifetimes, and avoided with a pious fear, as things accursed.
In two days we had it all done and the water in--a spacious pool of clear pure water that a body could swim in.
It was running water, too.
It came in, and went out, through the ancient pipes.
The old abbot kept his word, and was the first to try it.
He went down black and shaky, leaving the whole black community above troubled and worried and full of bodings; but he came back white and joyful, and the game was made!
another triumph scored.
It was a good campaign that we made in that Valley of Holiness, and I was very well satisfied, and ready to move on now, but I struck a disappointment.
I caught a heavy cold, and it started up an old lurking rheumatism of mine.
Of course the rheumatism hunted up my weakest place and located itself there.
This was the place where the abbot put his arms about me and mashed me, what time he was moved to testify his gratitude to me with an embrace.
When at last I got out, I was a shadow.
But everybody was full of attentions and kindnesses, and these brought cheer back into my life, and were the right medicine to help a convalescent swiftly up toward health and strength again; so I gained fast.
Sandy was worn out with nursing; so I made up my mind to turn out and go a cruise alone, leaving her at the nunnery to rest up.
My idea was to disguise myself as a freeman of peasant degree and wander through the country a week or two on foot.
This would give me a chance to eat and lodge with the lowliest and poorest class of free citizens on equal terms.
There was no other way to inform myself perfectly of their everyday life and the operation of the laws upon it.
If I went among them as a gentleman, there would be restraints and conventionalities which would shut me out from their private joys and troubles, and I should get no further than the outside shell.
One morning I was out on a long walk to get up muscle for my trip, and had climbed the ridge which bordered the northern extremity of the valley, when I came upon an artificial opening in the face of a low precipice, and recognized it by its location as a
I knew he had lately been offered a situation in the Great Sahara, where lions and sandflies made the hermit-life peculiarly attractive and difficult, and had gone to Africa to take possession, so I thought I would look in and see how the atmosphere of
My surprise was great: the place was newly swept and scoured.
Then there was another surprise.
Back in the gloom of the cavern I heard the clink of a little bell, and then this exclamation: "Hello Central!
Is this you, Camelot?
--Behold, thou mayst glad thy heart an thou hast faith to believe the wonderful when that it cometh in unexpected guise and maketh itself manifest in impossible places--here standeth in the flesh his mightiness The Boss, and with thine own ears shall ye
Now what a radical reversal of things this was; what a jumbling together of extravagant incongruities; what a fantastic conjunction of opposites and irreconcilables--the home of the bogus miracle become the home of a real one, the den of a mediaeval hermit
The telephone clerk stepped into the light, and I recognized one of my young fellows.
I said: "How long has this office been established here, Ulfius"?
"But since midnight, fair Sir Boss, an it please you.
We saw many lights in the valley, and so judged it well to make a station, for that where so many lights be needs must they indicate a town of goodly size".
"Quite right.
It isn't a town in the customary sense, but it's a good stand, anyway.
Do you know where you are"?
"Of that I have had no time to make inquiry; for whenas my comradeship moved hence upon their labors, leaving me in charge, I got me to needed rest, purposing to inquire when I waked, and report the place's name to Camelot for record".
"Well, this is the Valley of Holiness".
It didn't take; I mean, he didn't start at the name, as I had supposed he would.
He merely said: "I will so report it".
"Why, the surrounding regions are filled with the noise of late wonders that have happened here!
You didn't hear of them"?
"Ah, ye will remember we move by night, and avoid speech with all.
We learn naught but that we get by the telephone from Camelot".
"Why _they_ know all about this thing.
Haven't they told you anything about the great miracle of the restoration of a holy fountain"?
"Oh, _that_?
Indeed yes.
But the name of _this_ valley doth woundily differ from the name of _that_ one; indeed to differ wider were not pos--" "What was that name, then"?
"The Valley of Hellishness".
"_That_ explains it.
Confound a telephone, anyway.
It is the very demon for conveying similarities of sound that are miracles of divergence from similarity of sense.
But no matter, you know the name of the place now.
Call up Camelot".
He did it, and had Clarence sent for.
It was good to hear my boy's voice again.
It was like being home.
After some affectionate interchanges, and some account of my late illness, I said: "What is new"?
"The king and queen and many of the court do start even in this hour, to go to your valley to pay pious homage to the waters ye have restored, and cleanse themselves of sin, and see the place where the infernal spirit spouted true hell-flames to the clouds
"Does the king know the way to this place"?
"The king?
--no, nor to any other in his realms, mayhap; but the lads that holp you with your miracle will be his guide and lead the way, and appoint the places for rests at noons and sleeps at night".
"This will bring them here--when"?
"Mid-afternoon, or later, the third day".
"Anything else in the way of news"?
"The king hath begun the raising of the standing army ye suggested to him; one regiment is complete and officered".
"The mischief!
I wanted a main hand in that myself.
There is only one body of men in the kingdom that are fitted to officer a regular army".
"Yes--and now ye will marvel to know there's not so much as one West Pointer in that regiment".
"What are you talking about?
Are you in earnest"?
"It is truly as I have said".
"Why, this makes me uneasy.
Who were chosen, and what was the method?
Competitive examination"?
"Indeed, I know naught of the method.
I but know this--these officers be all of noble family, and are born--what is it you call it?
--chuckleheads".
"There's something wrong, Clarence".
"Comfort yourself, then; for two candidates for a lieutenancy do travel hence with the king--young nobles both--and if you but wait where you are you will hear them questioned".
"That is news to the purpose.
I will get one West Pointer in, anyway.
Mount a man and send him to that school with a message; let him kill horses, if necessary, but he must be there before sunset to-night and say--" "There is no need.
I have laid a ground wire to the school.
Prithee let me connect you with it".
It sounded good!
In this atmosphere of telephones and lightning communication with distant regions, I was breathing the breath of life again after long suffocation.
I realized, then, what a creepy, dull, inanimate horror this land had been to me all these years, and how I had been in such a stifled condition of mind as to have grown used to it almost beyond the power to notice it.
I gave my order to the superintendent of the Academy personally.
I also asked him to bring me some paper and a fountain pen and a box or so of safety matches.
I was getting tired of doing without these conveniences.
I could have them now, as I wasn't going to wear armor any more at present, and therefore could get at my pockets.
When I got back to the monastery, I found a thing of interest going on.
The abbot and his monks were assembled in the great hall, observing with childish wonder and faith the performances of a new magician, a fresh arrival.
His dress was the extreme of the fantastic; as showy and foolish as the sort of thing an Indian medicine-man wears.
He was mowing, and mumbling, and gesticulating, and drawing mystical figures in the air and on the floor,--the regular thing, you know.
He was a celebrity from Asia--so he said, and that was enough.
That sort of evidence was as good as gold, and passed current everywhere.
How easy and cheap it was to be a great magician on this fellow's terms.
His specialty was to tell you what any individual on the face of the globe was doing at the moment; and what he had done at any time in the past, and what he would do at any time in the future.
He asked if any would like to know what the Emperor of the East was doing now?
The sparkling eyes and the delighted rubbing of hands made eloquent answer--this reverend crowd _would_ like to know what that monarch was at, just as this moment.
The fraud went through some more mummery, and then made grave announcement: "The high and mighty Emperor of the East doth at this moment put money in the palm of a holy begging friar--one, two, three pieces, and they be all of silver".
A buzz of admiring exclamations broke out, all around: "It is marvelous"!
"Wonderful"!
"What study, what labor, to have acquired a so amazing power as this"!
Would they like to know what the Supreme Lord of Inde was doing?
Yes.
He told them what the Supreme Lord of Inde was doing.
Then he told them what the Sultan of Egypt was at; also what the King of the Remote Seas was about.
And so on and so on; and with each new marvel the astonishment at his accuracy rose higher and higher.
They thought he must surely strike an uncertain place some time; but no, he never had to hesitate, he always knew, and always with unerring precision.
I saw that if this thing went on I should lose my supremacy, this fellow would capture my following, I should be left out in the cold.
I must put a cog in his wheel, and do it right away, too.
I said: "If I might ask, I should very greatly like to know what a certain person is doing".
"Speak, and freely.
I will tell you".
"It will be difficult--perhaps impossible".
"My art knoweth not that word.
The more difficult it is, the more certainly will I reveal it to you".
You see, I was working up the interest.
It was getting pretty high, too; you could see that by the craning necks all around, and the half-suspended breathing.
So now I climaxed it: "If you make no mistake--if you tell me truly what I want to know--I will give you two hundred silver pennies".
"The fortune is mine!
I will tell you what you would know".
"Then tell me what I am doing with my right hand".
"Ah-h"!
There was a general gasp of surprise.
It had not occurred to anybody in the crowd--that simple trick of inquiring about somebody who wasn't ten thousand miles away.
The magician was hit hard; it was an emergency that had never happened in his experience before, and it corked him; he didn't know how to meet it.
He looked stunned, confused; he couldn't say a word.
"Come," I said, "what are you waiting for?
Is it possible you can answer up, right off, and tell what anybody on the other side of the earth is doing, and yet can't tell what a person is doing who isn't three yards from you?
Persons behind me know what I am doing with my right hand--they will indorse you if you tell correctly".
He was still dumb.
"Very well, I'll tell you why you don't speak up and tell; it is because you don't know.
_You_ a magician!
Good friends, this tramp is a mere fraud and liar".
This distressed the monks and terrified them.
They were not used to hearing these awful beings called names, and they did not know what might be the consequence.
There was a dead silence now; superstitious bodings were in every mind.
The magician began to pull his wits together, and when he presently smiled an easy, nonchalant smile, it spread a mighty relief around; for it indicated that his mood was not destructive.
He said: "It hath struck me speechless, the frivolity of this person's speech.
Let all know, if perchance there be any who know it not, that enchanters of my degree deign not to concern themselves with the doings of any but kings, princes, emperors, them that be born in the purple and them only.
Had ye asked me what Arthur the great king is doing, it were another matter, and I had told ye; but the doings of a subject interest me not".
"Oh, I misunderstood you.
I thought you said 'anybody,' and so I supposed 'anybody' included--well, anybody; that is, everybody".
"It doth--anybody that is of lofty birth; and the better if he be royal".
"That, it meseemeth, might well be," said the abbot, who saw his opportunity to smooth things and avert disaster, "for it were not likely that so wonderful a gift as this would be conferred for the revelation of the concerns of lesser beings than such as
Our Arthur the king--" "Would you know of him"?
broke in the enchanter.
"Most gladly, yea, and gratefully".
Everybody was full of awe and interest again right away, the incorrigible idiots.
They watched the incantations absorbingly, and looked at me with a "There, now, what can you say to that"?
air, when the announcement came: "The king is weary with the chase, and lieth in his palace these two hours sleeping a dreamless sleep".
"God's benison upon him"!
said the abbot, and crossed himself; "may that sleep be to the refreshment of his body and his soul".
"And so it might be, if he were sleeping," I said, "but the king is not sleeping, the king rides".
Here was trouble again--a conflict of authority.
Nobody knew which of us to believe; I still had some reputation left.
The magician's scorn was stirred, and he said: "Lo, I have seen many wonderful soothsayers and prophets and magicians in my life days, but none before that could sit idle and see to the heart of things with never an incantation to help".
"You have lived in the woods, and lost much by it.
I use incantations myself, as this good brotherhood are aware--but only on occasions of moment".
When it comes to sarcasming, I reckon I know how to keep my end up.
That jab made this fellow squirm.
The abbot inquired after the queen and the court, and got this information: "They be all on sleep, being overcome by fatigue, like as to the king".
I said: "That is merely another lie.
Half of them are about their amusements, the queen and the other half are not sleeping, they ride.
Now perhaps you can spread yourself a little, and tell us where the king and queen and all that are this moment riding with them are going"?
"They sleep now, as I said; but on the morrow they will ride, for they go a journey toward the sea".
"And where will they be the day after to-morrow at vespers"?
"Far to the north of Camelot, and half their journey will be done".
"That is another lie, by the space of a hundred and fifty miles.
Their journey will not be merely half done, it will be all done, and they will be _here_, in this valley".
_That_ was a noble shot!
It set the abbot and the monks in a whirl of excitement, and it rocked the enchanter to his base.
I followed the thing right up: "If the king does not arrive, I will have myself ridden on a rail: if he does I will ride you on a rail instead".
Next day I went up to the telephone office and found that the king had passed through two towns that were on the line.
I spotted his progress on the succeeding day in the same way.
I kept these matters to myself.
The third day's reports showed that if he kept up his gait he would arrive by four in the afternoon.
There was still no sign anywhere of interest in his coming; there seemed to be no preparations making to receive him in state; a strange thing, truly.
Only one thing could explain this: that other magician had been cutting under me, sure.
This was true.
I asked a friend of mine, a monk, about it, and he said, yes, the magician had tried some further enchantments and found out that the court had concluded to make no journey at all, but stay at home.
Think of that!
Observe how much a reputation was worth in such a country.
These people had seen me do the very showiest bit of magic in history, and the only one within their memory that had a positive value, and yet here they were, ready to take up with an adventurer who could offer no evidence of his powers but his mere
However, it was not good politics to let the king come without any fuss and feathers at all, so I went down and drummed up a procession of pilgrims and smoked out a batch of hermits and started them out at two o'clock to meet him.
And that was the sort of state he arrived in.
The abbot was helpless with rage and humiliation when I brought him out on a balcony and showed him the head of the state marching in and never a monk on hand to offer him welcome, and no stir of life or clang of joy-bell to glad his spirit.
He took one look and then flew to rouse out his forces.
The next minute the bells were dinning furiously, and the various buildings were vomiting monks and nuns, who went swarming in a rush toward the coming procession; and with them went that magician --and he was on a rail, too, by the abbot's order; and his
Yes, a man can keep his trademark current in such a country, but he can't sit around and do it; he has got to be on deck and attending to business right along.
CHAPTER XXV A COMPETITIVE EXAMINATION When the king traveled for change of air, or made a progress, or visited a distant noble whom he wished to bankrupt with the cost of his keep, part of the administration moved with him.
It was a fashion of the time.
The Commission charged with the examination of candidates for posts in the army came with the king to the Valley, whereas they could have transacted their business just as well at home.
And although this expedition was strictly a holiday excursion for the king, he kept some of his business functions going just the same.
He touched for the evil, as usual; he held court in the gate at sunrise and tried cases, for he was himself Chief Justice of the King's Bench.
He shone very well in this latter office.
He was a wise and humane judge, and he clearly did his honest best and fairest,--according to his lights.
That is a large reservation.
His lights--I mean his rearing--often colored his decisions.
Whenever there was a dispute between a noble or gentleman and a person of lower degree, the king's leanings and sympathies were for the former class always, whether he suspected it or not.
It was impossible that this should be otherwise.
The blunting effects of slavery upon the slaveholder's moral perceptions are known and conceded, the world over; and a privileged class, an aristocracy, is but a band of slaveholders under another name.
This has a harsh sound, and yet should not be offensive to any--even to the noble himself--unless the fact itself be an offense: for the statement simply formulates a fact.
The repulsive feature of slavery is the _thing_, not its name.
One needs but to hear an aristocrat speak of the classes that are below him to recognize--and in but indifferently modified measure --the very air and tone of the actual slaveholder; and behind these are the slaveholder's spirit, the slaveholder's blunted
They are the result of the same cause in both cases: the possessor's old and inbred custom of regarding himself as a superior being.
The king's judgments wrought frequent injustices, but it was merely the fault of his training, his natural and unalterable sympathies.
He was as unfitted for a judgeship as would be the average mother for the position of milk-distributor to starving children in famine-time; her own children would fare a shade better than the rest.
One very curious case came before the king.
A young girl, an orphan, who had a considerable estate, married a fine young fellow who had nothing.
The girl's property was within a seigniory held by the Church.
The bishop of the diocese, an arrogant scion of the great nobility, claimed the girl's estate on the ground that she had married privately, and thus had cheated the Church out of one of its rights as lord of the seigniory--the one heretofore referred to as
The penalty of refusal or avoidance was confiscation.
The girl's defense was, that the lordship of the seigniory was vested in the bishop, and the particular right here involved was not transferable, but must be exercised by the lord himself or stand vacated; and that an older law, of the Church itself,
It was a very odd case, indeed.
It reminded me of something I had read in my youth about the ingenious way in which the aldermen of London raised the money that built the Mansion House.
A person who had not taken the Sacrament according to the Anglican rite could not stand as a candidate for sheriff of London.
Thus Dissenters were ineligible; they could not run if asked, they could not serve if elected.
The aldermen, who without any question were Yankees in disguise, hit upon this neat device: they passed a by-law imposing a fine of L400 upon any one who should refuse to be a candidate for sheriff, and a fine of L600 upon any person who, after being
Then they went to work and elected a lot of Dissenters, one after another, and kept it up until they had collected L15,000 in fines; and there stands the stately Mansion House to this day, to keep the blushing citizen in mind of a long past and lamented
The girl's case seemed strong to me; the bishop's case was just as strong.
I did not see how the king was going to get out of this hole.
But he got out.
I append his decision: "Truly I find small difficulty here, the matter being even a child's affair for simpleness.
An the young bride had conveyed notice, as in duty bound, to her feudal lord and proper master and protector the bishop, she had suffered no loss, for the said bishop could have got a dispensation making him, for temporary conveniency, eligible to the
Whereas, failing in her first duty, she hath by that failure failed in all; for whoso, clinging to a rope, severeth it above his hands, must fall; it being no defense to claim that the rest of the rope is sound, neither any deliverance from his peril, as
Pardy, the woman's case is rotten at the source.
It is the decree of the court that she forfeit to the said lord bishop all her goods, even to the last farthing that she doth possess, and be thereto mulcted in the costs.
Next"!
Here was a tragic end to a beautiful honeymoon not yet three months old.
Poor young creatures!
They had lived these three months lapped to the lips in worldly comforts.
These clothes and trinkets they were wearing were as fine and dainty as the shrewdest stretch of the sumptuary laws allowed to people of their degree; and in these pretty clothes, she crying on his shoulder, and he trying to comfort her with hopeful words
Well, the king was out of the hole; and on terms satisfactory to the Church and the rest of the aristocracy, no doubt.
Men write many fine and plausible arguments in support of monarchy, but the fact remains that where every man in a State has a vote, brutal laws are impossible.
Arthur's people were of course poor material for a republic, because they had been debased so long by monarchy; and yet even they would have been intelligent enough to make short work of that law which the king had just been administering if it had been
There is a phrase which has grown so common in the world's mouth that it has come to seem to have sense and meaning--the sense and meaning implied when it is used; that is the phrase which refers to this or that or the other nation as possibly being
The master minds of all nations, in all ages, have sprung in affluent multitude from the mass of the nation, and from the mass of the nation only--not from its privileged classes; and so, no matter what the nation's intellectual grade was; whether high or
Which is to assert an always self-proven fact: that even the best governed and most free and most enlightened monarchy is still behind the best condition attainable by its people; and that the same is true of kindred governments of lower grades, all the
King Arthur had hurried up the army business altogether beyond my calculations.
I had not supposed he would move in the matter while I was away; and so I had not mapped out a scheme for determining the merits of officers; I had only remarked that it would be wise to submit every candidate to a sharp and searching examination; and
That ought to have been attended to before I left; for the king was so taken with the idea of a standing army that he couldn't wait but must get about it at once, and get up as good a scheme of examination as he could invent out of his own head.
I was impatient to see what this was; and to show, too, how much more admirable was the one which I should display to the Examining Board.
I intimated this, gently, to the king, and it fired his curiosity.
When the Board was assembled, I followed him in; and behind us came the candidates.
One of these candidates was a bright young West Pointer of mine, and with him were a couple of my West Point professors.
When I saw the Board, I did not know whether to cry or to laugh.
The head of it was the officer known to later centuries as Norroy King-at-Arms!
The two other members were chiefs of bureaus in his department; and all three were priests, of course; all officials who had to know how to read and write were priests.
My candidate was called first, out of courtesy to me, and the head of the Board opened on him with official solemnity: "Name"?
"Mal-ease".
"Son of"?
"Webster".
"Webster--Webster.
H'm--I--my memory faileth to recall the name.
Condition"?
"Weaver".
"Weaver!
--God keep us"!
The king was staggered, from his summit to his foundations; one clerk fainted, and the others came near it.
The chairman pulled himself together, and said indignantly: "It is sufficient.
Get you hence".
But I appealed to the king.
I begged that my candidate might be examined.
The king was willing, but the Board, who were all well-born folk, implored the king to spare them the indignity of examining the weaver's son.
I knew they didn't know enough to examine him anyway, so I joined my prayers to theirs and the king turned the duty over to my professors.
I had had a blackboard prepared, and it was put up now, and the circus began.
It was beautiful to hear the lad lay out the science of war, and wallow in details of battle and siege, of supply, transportation, mining and countermining, grand tactics, big strategy and little strategy, signal service, infantry, cavalry, artillery, and
I judged that the cake was ours, and by a large majority.
Education is a great thing.
This was the same youth who had come to West Point so ignorant that when I asked him, "If a general officer should have a horse shot under him on the field of battle, what ought he to do"?
answered up naively and said: "Get up and brush himself".
One of the young nobles was called up now.
I thought I would question him a little myself.
I said: "Can your lordship read"?
His face flushed indignantly, and he fired this at me: "Takest me for a clerk?
I trow I am not of a blood that--" "Answer the question"!
He crowded his wrath down and made out to answer "No".
"Can you write"?
He wanted to resent this, too, but I said: "You will confine yourself to the questions, and make no comments.
You are not here to air your blood or your graces, and nothing of the sort will be permitted.
Can you write"?
"No".
"Do you know the multiplication table"?
"I wit not what ye refer to".
"How much is 9 times 6"?
"It is a mystery that is hidden from me by reason that the emergency requiring the fathoming of it hath not in my life-days occurred, and so, not having no need to know this thing, I abide barren of the knowledge".
"If A trade a barrel of onions to B, worth 2 pence the bushel, in exchange for a sheep worth 4 pence and a dog worth a penny, and C kill the dog before delivery, because bitten by the same, who mistook him for D, what sum is still due to A from B, and
If A, is the penny sufficient, or may he claim consequential damages in the form of additional money to represent the possible profit which might have inured from the dog, and classifiable as earned increment, that is to say, usufruct"?
"Verily, in the all-wise and unknowable providence of God, who moveth in mysterious ways his wonders to perform, have I never heard the fellow to this question for confusion of the mind and congestion of the ducts of thought.
Wherefore I beseech you let the dog and the onions and these people of the strange and godless names work out their several salvations from their piteous and wonderful difficulties without help of mine, for indeed their trouble is sufficient as it is,
"What do you know of the laws of attraction and gravitation"?
"If there be such, mayhap his grace the king did promulgate them whilst that I lay sick about the beginning of the year and thereby failed to hear his proclamation".
"What do you know of the science of optics"?
"I know of governors of places, and seneschals of castles, and sheriffs of counties, and many like small offices and titles of honor, but him you call the Science of Optics I have not heard of before; peradventure it is a new dignity".
"Yes, in this country".
Try to conceive of this mollusk gravely applying for an official position, of any kind under the sun!
Why, he had all the earmarks of a typewriter copyist, if you leave out the disposition to contribute uninvited emendations of your grammar and punctuation.
It was unaccountable that he didn't attempt a little help of that sort out of his majestic supply of incapacity for the job.
But that didn't prove that he hadn't material in him for the disposition, it only proved that he wasn't a typewriter copyist yet.
After nagging him a little more, I let the professors loose on him and they turned him inside out, on the line of scientific war, and found him empty, of course.
He knew somewhat about the warfare of the time--bushwhacking around for ogres, and bull-fights in the tournament ring, and such things--but otherwise he was empty and useless.
Then we took the other young noble in hand, and he was the first one's twin, for ignorance and incapacity.
I delivered them into the hands of the chairman of the Board with the comfortable consciousness that their cake was dough.
They were examined in the previous order of precedence.
"Name, so please you"?
"Pertipole, son of Sir Pertipole, Baron of Barley Mash".
"Grandfather"?
"Also Sir Pertipole, Baron of Barley Mash".
"Great-grandfather"?
"The same name and title".
"Great-great-grandfather"?
"We had none, worshipful sir, the line failing before it had reached so far back".
"It mattereth not.
It is a good four generations, and fulfilleth the requirements of the rule".
"Fulfills what rule"?
I asked.
"The rule requiring four generations of nobility or else the candidate is not eligible".
"A man not eligible for a lieutenancy in the army unless he can prove four generations of noble descent"?
"Even so; neither lieutenant nor any other officer may be commissioned without that qualification".
"Oh, come, this is an astonishing thing.
What good is such a qualification as that"?
"What good?
It is a hardy question, fair sir and Boss, since it doth go far to impugn the wisdom of even our holy Mother Church herself".
"As how"?
"For that she hath established the self-same rule regarding saints.
By her law none may be canonized until he hath lain dead four generations".
"I see, I see--it is the same thing.
It is wonderful.
In the one case a man lies dead-alive four generations--mummified in ignorance and sloth--and that qualifies him to command live people, and take their weal and woe into his impotent hands; and in the other case, a man lies bedded with death and worms four
Does the king's grace approve of this strange law"?
The king said: "Why, truly I see naught about it that is strange.
All places of honor and of profit do belong, by natural right, to them that be of noble blood, and so these dignities in the army are their property and would be so without this or any rule.
The rule is but to mark a limit.
Its purpose is to keep out too recent blood, which would bring into contempt these offices, and men of lofty lineage would turn their backs and scorn to take them.
I were to blame an I permitted this calamity.
_You_ can permit it an you are minded so to do, for you have the delegated authority, but that the king should do it were a most strange madness and not comprehensible to any".
"I yield.
Proceed, sir Chief of the Herald's College".
The chairman resumed as follows: "By what illustrious achievement for the honor of the Throne and State did the founder of your great line lift himself to the sacred dignity of the British nobility"?
"He built a brewery".
"Sire, the Board finds this candidate perfect in all the requirements and qualifications for military command, and doth hold his case open for decision after due examination of his competitor".
The competitor came forward and proved exactly four generations of nobility himself.
So there was a tie in military qualifications that far.
He stood aside a moment, and Sir Pertipole was questioned further: "Of what condition was the wife of the founder of your line"?
"She came of the highest landed gentry, yet she was not noble; she was gracious and pure and charitable, of a blameless life and character, insomuch that in these regards was she peer of the best lady in the land".
"That will do.
Stand down".
He called up the competing lordling again, and asked: "What was the rank and condition of the great-grandmother who conferred British nobility upon your great house"?
"She was a king's leman and did climb to that splendid eminence by her own unholpen merit from the sewer where she was born".
"Ah, this, indeed, is true nobility, this is the right and perfect intermixture.
The lieutenancy is yours, fair lord.
Hold it not in contempt; it is the humble step which will lead to grandeurs more worthy of the splendor of an origin like to thine".
I was down in the bottomless pit of humiliation.
I had promised myself an easy and zenith-scouring triumph, and this was the outcome!
I was almost ashamed to look my poor disappointed cadet in the face.
I told him to go home and be patient, this wasn't the end.
I had a private audience with the king, and made a proposition.
I said it was quite right to officer that regiment with nobilities, and he couldn't have done a wiser thing.
It would also be a good idea to add five hundred officers to it; in fact, add as many officers as there were nobles and relatives of nobles in the country, even if there should finally be five times as many officers as privates in it; and thus make it the
This would make that regiment the heart's desire of all the nobility, and they would all be satisfied and happy.
Then we would make up the rest of the standing army out of commonplace materials, and officer it with nobodies, as was proper--nobodies selected on a basis of mere efficiency--and we would make this regiment toe the line, allow it no aristocratic freedom
The king was charmed with the idea.
When I noticed that, it gave me a valuable notion.
I thought I saw my way out of an old and stubborn difficulty at last.
You see, the royalties of the Pendragon stock were a long-lived race and very fruitful.
Whenever a child was born to any of these --and it was pretty often--there was wild joy in the nation's mouth, and piteous sorrow in the nation's heart.
The joy was questionable, but the grief was honest.
Because the event meant another call for a Royal Grant.
Long was the list of these royalties, and they were a heavy and steadily increasing burden upon the treasury and a menace to the crown.
Yet Arthur could not believe this latter fact, and he would not listen to any of my various projects for substituting something in the place of the royal grants.
If I could have persuaded him to now and then provide a support for one of these outlying scions from his own pocket, I could have made a grand to-do over it, and it would have had a good effect with the nation; but no, he wouldn't hear of such a thing.
He had something like a religious passion for royal grant; he seemed to look upon it as a sort of sacred swag, and one could not irritate him in any way so quickly and so surely as by an attack upon that venerable institution.
If I ventured to cautiously hint that there was not another respectable family in England that would humble itself to hold out the hat--however, that is as far as I ever got; he always cut me short there, and peremptorily, too.
But I believed I saw my chance at last.
I would form this crack regiment out of officers alone--not a single private.
Half of it should consist of nobles, who should fill all the places up to Major-General, and serve gratis and pay their own expenses; and they would be glad to do this when they should learn that the rest of the regiment would consist exclusively of
These princes of the blood should range in rank from Lieutenant-General up to Field Marshal, and be gorgeously salaried and equipped and fed by the state.
Moreover--and this was the master stroke --it should be decreed that these princely grandees should be always addressed by a stunningly gaudy and awe-compelling title (which I would presently invent), and they and they only in all England should be so
Finally, all princes of the blood should have free choice; join that regiment, get that great title, and renounce the royal grant, or stay out and receive a grant.
Neatest touch of all: unborn but imminent princes of the blood could be _born_ into the regiment, and start fair, with good wages and a permanent situation, upon due notice from the parents.
All the boys would join, I was sure of that; so, all existing grants would be relinquished; that the newly born would always join was equally certain.
Within sixty days that quaint and bizarre anomaly, the Royal Grant, would cease to be a living fact, and take its place among the curiosities of the past.
CHAPTER XXVI THE FIRST NEWSPAPER When I told the king I was going out disguised as a petty freeman to scour the country and familiarize myself with the humbler life of the people, he was all afire with the novelty of the thing in a minute, and was bound to
He wanted to glide out the back way and start at once; but I showed him that that wouldn't answer.
You see, he was billed for the king's-evil--to touch for it, I mean--and it wouldn't be right to disappoint the house and it wouldn't make a delay worth considering, anyway, it was only a one-night stand.
And I thought he ought to tell the queen he was going away.
He clouded up at that and looked sad.
I was sorry I had spoken, especially when he said mournfully: "Thou forgettest that Launcelot is here; and where Launcelot is, she noteth not the going forth of the king, nor what day he returneth".
Of course, I changed the Subject.
Yes, Guenever was beautiful, it is true, but take her all around she was pretty slack.
I never meddled in these matters, they weren't my affair, but I did hate to see the way things were going on, and I don't mind saying that much.
Many's the time she had asked me, "Sir Boss, hast seen Sir Launcelot about"?
but if ever she went fretting around for the king I didn't happen to be around at the time.
There was a very good lay-out for the king's-evil business--very tidy and creditable.
The king sat under a canopy of state; about him were clustered a large body of the clergy in full canonicals.
Conspicuous, both for location and personal outfit, stood Marinel, a hermit of the quack-doctor species, to introduce the sick.
All abroad over the spacious floor, and clear down to the doors, in a thick jumble, lay or sat the scrofulous, under a strong light.
It was as good as a tableau; in fact, it had all the look of being gotten up for that, though it wasn't.
There were eight hundred sick people present.
The work was slow; it lacked the interest of novelty for me, because I had seen the ceremonies before; the thing soon became tedious, but the proprieties required me to stick it out.
The doctor was there for the reason that in all such crowds there were many people who only imagined something was the matter with them, and many who were consciously sound but wanted the immortal honor of fleshly contact with a king, and yet others who
Up to this time this coin had been a wee little gold piece worth about a third of a dollar.
When you consider how much that amount of money would buy, in that age and country, and how usual it was to be scrofulous, when not dead, you would understand that the annual king's-evil appropriation was just the River and Harbor bill of that government
So I had privately concluded to touch the treasury itself for the king's-evil.
I covered six-sevenths of the appropriation into the treasury a week before starting from Camelot on my adventures, and ordered that the other seventh be inflated into five-cent nickels and delivered into the hands of the head clerk of the King's Evil
It might strain the nickel some, but I judged it could stand it.
As a rule, I do not approve of watering stock, but I considered it square enough in this case, for it was just a gift, anyway.
Of course, you can water a gift as much as you want to; and I generally do.
The old gold and silver coins of the country were of ancient and unknown origin, as a rule, but some of them were Roman; they were ill-shapen, and seldom rounder than a moon that is a week past the full; they were hammered, not minted, and they were so
I judged that a sharp, bright new nickel, with a first-rate likeness of the king on one side of it and Guenever on the other, and a blooming pious motto, would take the tuck out of scrofula as handy as a nobler coin and please the scrofulous fancy more;
This batch was the first it was tried on, and it worked to a charm.
The saving in expense was a notable economy.
You will see that by these figures: We touched a trifle over 700 of the 800 patients; at former rates, this would have cost the government about $240; at the new rate we pulled through for about $35, thus saving upward of $200 at one swoop.
To appreciate the full magnitude of this stroke, consider these other figures: the annual expenses of a national government amount to the equivalent of a contribution of three days' average wages of every individual of the population, counting every
If you take a nation of 60,000,000, where average wages are $2 per day, three days' wages taken from each individual will provide $360,000,000 and pay the government's expenses.
In my day, in my own country, this money was collected from imposts, and the citizen imagined that the foreign importer paid it, and it made him comfortable to think so; whereas, in fact, it was paid by the American people, and was so equally and exactly
Nothing could be equaler than that, I reckon.
Well, Scotland and Ireland were tributary to Arthur, and the united populations of the British Islands amounted to something less than 1,000,000.
A mechanic's average wage was 3 cents a day, when he paid his own keep.
By this rule the national government's expenses were $90,000 a year, or about $250 a day.
Thus, by the substitution of nickels for gold on a king's-evil day, I not only injured no one, dissatisfied no one, but pleased all concerned and saved four-fifths of that day's national expense into the bargain--a saving which would have been the
In making this substitution I had drawn upon the wisdom of a very remote source--the wisdom of my boyhood--for the true statesman does not despise any wisdom, howsoever lowly may be its origin: in my boyhood I had always saved my pennies and contributed
The buttons would answer the ignorant savage as well as the coin, the coin would answer me better than the buttons; all hands were happy and nobody hurt.
Marinel took the patients as they came.
He examined the candidate; if he couldn't qualify he was warned off; if he could he was passed along to the king.
A priest pronounced the words, "They shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover".
Then the king stroked the ulcers, while the reading continued; finally, the patient graduated and got his nickel--the king hanging it around his neck himself--and was dismissed.
Would you think that that would cure?
It certainly did.
Any mummery will cure if the patient's faith is strong in it.
Up by Astolat there was a chapel where the Virgin had once appeared to a girl who used to herd geese around there--the girl said so herself--and they built the chapel upon that spot and hung a picture in it representing the occurrence--a picture which you
Of course, when I was told these things I did not believe them; but when I went there and saw them I had to succumb.
I saw the cures effected myself; and they were real cures and not questionable.
I saw cripples whom I had seen around Camelot for years on crutches, arrive and pray before that picture, and put down their crutches and walk off without a limp.
There were piles of crutches there which had been left by such people as a testimony.
In other places people operated on a patient's mind, without saying a word to him, and cured him.
In others, experts assembled patients in a room and prayed over them, and appealed to their faith, and those patients went away cured.
Wherever you find a king who can't cure the king's-evil you can be sure that the most valuable superstition that supports his throne--the subject's belief in the divine appointment of his sovereign--has passed away.
In my youth the monarchs of England had ceased to touch for the evil, but there was no occasion for this diffidence: they could have cured it forty-nine times in fifty.
Well, when the priest had been droning for three hours, and the good king polishing the evidences, and the sick were still pressing forward as plenty as ever, I got to feeling intolerably bored.
I was sitting by an open window not far from the canopy of state.
For the five hundredth time a patient stood forward to have his repulsivenesses stroked; again those words were being droned out: "they shall lay their hands on the sick"--when outside there rang clear as a clarion a note that enchanted my soul and tumbled
_--latest irruption--only two cents --all about the big miracle in the Valley of Holiness"!
One greater than kings had arrived--the newsboy.
But I was the only person in all that throng who knew the meaning of this mighty birth, and what this imperial magician was come into the world to do.
I dropped a nickel out of the window and got my paper; the Adam-newsboy of the world went around the corner to get my change; is around the corner yet.
It was delicious to see a newspaper again, yet I was conscious of a secret shock when my eye fell upon the first batch of display head-lines.
I had lived in a clammy atmosphere of reverence, respect, deference, so long that they sent a quivery little cold wave through me: HIGH TIMES IN THE VALLEY OF HOLINESS!
---- THE WATER-WORKS CORKED!
---- BRER MERLIN WORKS HIS ARTS, BUT GETS LEFT?
---- But the Boss scores on his first Innings!
---- The Miraculous Well Uncorked amid awful outbursts of INFERNAL FIRE AND SMOKE ATHUNDER!
---- THE BUZZARD-ROOST ASTONISHED!
---- UNPARALLELED REJOIBINGS!
--and so on, and so on.
Yes, it was too loud.
Once I could have enjoyed it and seen nothing out of the way about it, but now its note was discordant.
It was good Arkansas journalism, but this was not Arkansas.
Moreover, the next to the last line was calculated to give offense to the hermits, and perhaps lose us their advertising.
Indeed, there was too lightsome a tone of flippancy all through the paper.
It was plain I had undergone a considerable change without noticing it.
I found myself unpleasantly affected by pert little irreverencies which would have seemed but proper and airy graces of speech at an earlier period of my life.
There was an abundance of the following breed of items, and they discomforted me: LOCAL SMOKE AND CINDERS.
Sir Launcelot met up with old King Agrivance of Ireland unexpectedly last weok over on the moor south of Sir Balmoral le Merveilleuse's hog dasture.
The widow has been notified.
Expedition No.
3 will start adout the first of mext month on a search f8r Sir Sagramour le Desirous.
It is in com- and of the renowned Knight of the Red Lawns, assissted by Sir Persant of Inde, who is compete9t.
intelligent, courte- ous, and in every way a brick, and fur- tHer assisted by Sir Palamides the Sara- cen, who is no huckleberry hinself.
This is no pic-nic, these boys mean busine&s.
The readers of the Hosannah will re- gret to learn that the hadndsome and popular Sir Charolais of Gaul, who dur- ing his four weeks' stay at the Bull and Halibut, this city, has won every heart by his polished manners and elegant cPnversation, will pUll
Give us another call, Charley!
The bdsiness end of the funeral of the late Sir Dalliance the duke's son of Cornwall, killed in an encounter with the Giant of the Knotted Bludgeon last Tuesday on the borders of the Plain of Enchantment was in the hands of the ever affable and efficient
Give him a trial.
The cordial thanks of the Hosannah office are due, from editor down to devil, to the ever courteous and thought- ful Lord High Stew d of the Palace's Third Assistant V t for several sau- ceTs of ice crEam a quality calculated to make the ey of the
When this administration wants to chalk up a desirable name for early promotion, the Hosannah would like a chance to sudgest.
The Demoiselle Irene Dewlap, of South Astolat, is visiting her uncle, the popular host of the Cattlemen's Board- ing Ho&se, Liver Lane, this city.
Young Barker the bellows-mender is hoMe again, and looks much improved by his vacation round-up among the out- lying smithies.
See his ad.
Of course it was good enough journalism for a beginning; I knew that quite well, and yet it was somehow disappointing.
The "Court Circular" pleased me better; indeed, its simple and dignified respectfulness was a distinct refreshment to me after all those disgraceful familiarities.
But even it could have been improved.
Do what one may, there is no getting an air of variety into a court circular, I acknowledge that.
There is a profound monotonousness about its facts that baffles and defeats one's sincerest efforts to make them sparkle and enthuse.
The best way to manage--in fact, the only sensible way--is to disguise repetitiousness of fact under variety of form: skin your fact each time and lay on a new cuticle of words.
It deceives the eye; you think it is a new fact; it gives you the idea that the court is carrying on like everything; this excites you, and you drain the whole column, with a good appetite, and perhaps never notice that it's a barrel of soup made out of a
Clarence's way was good, it was simple, it was dignified, it was direct and business-like; all I say is, it was not the best way: COURT CIRCULAR.
On Monday, the king rode in the park.
" Tuesday, " " " " Wendesday " " " " Thursday " " " " Friday, " " " " Saturday " " " " Sunday, " " " However, take the paper by and large, I was vastly pleased with it.
Little crudities of a mechanical sort were observable here and there, but there were not enough of them to amount to anything, and it was good enough Arkansas proof-reading, anyhow, and better than was needed in Arthur's day and realm.
As a rule, the grammar was leaky and the construction more or less lame; but I did not much mind these things.
They are common defects of my own, and one mustn't criticise other people on grounds where he can't stand perpendicular himself.
I was hungry enough for literature to want to take down the whole paper at this one meal, but I got only a few bites, and then had to postpone, because the monks around me besieged me so with eager questions: What is this curious thing?
What is it for?
Is it a handkerchief?
--saddle blanket?
--part of a shirt?
What is it made of?
How thin it is, and how dainty and frail; and how it rattles.
Will it wear, do you think, and won't the rain injure it?
Is it writing that appears on it, or is it only ornamentation?
They suspected it was writing, because those among them who knew how to read Latin and had a smattering of Greek, recognized some of the letters, but they could make nothing out of the result as a whole.
I put my information in the simplest form I could: "It is a public journal; I will explain what that is, another time.
It is not cloth, it is made of paper; some time I will explain what paper is.
The lines on it are reading matter; and not written by hand, but printed; by and by I will explain what printing is.
A thousand of these sheets have been made, all exactly like this, in every minute detail--they can't be told apart".
Then they all broke out with exclamations of surprise and admiration: "A thousand!
Verily a mighty work--a year's work for many men".
"No--merely a day's work for a man and a boy".
They crossed themselves, and whiffed out a protective prayer or two.
"Ah-h--a miracle, a wonder!
Dark work of enchantment".
I let it go at that.
Then I read in a low voice, to as many as could crowd their shaven heads within hearing distance, part of the account of the miracle of the restoration of the well, and was accompanied by astonished and reverent ejaculations all through: "Ah-h-h"!
"How true"!
"Amazing, amazing"!
"These be the very haps as they happened, in marvelous exactness"!
And might they take this strange thing in their hands, and feel of it and examine it?
--they would be very careful.
Yes.
So they took it, handling it as cautiously and devoutly as if it had been some holy thing come from some supernatural region; and gently felt of its texture, caressed its pleasant smooth surface with lingering touch, and scanned the mysterious characters
These grouped bent heads, these charmed faces, these speaking eyes --how beautiful to me!
For was not this my darling, and was not all this mute wonder and interest and homage a most eloquent tribute and unforced compliment to it?
I knew, then, how a mother feels when women, whether strangers or friends, take her new baby, and close themselves about it with one eager impulse, and bend their heads over it in a tranced adoration that makes all the rest of the universe vanish out of
I knew how she feels, and that there is no other satisfied ambition, whether of king, conqueror, or poet, that ever reaches half-way to that serene far summit or yields half so divine a contentment.
During all the rest of the seance my paper traveled from group to group all up and down and about that huge hall, and my happy eye was upon it always, and I sat motionless, steeped in satisfaction, drunk with enjoyment.
Yes, this was heaven; I was tasting it once, if I might never taste it more.
CHAPTER XXVII THE YANKEE AND THE KING TRAVEL INCOGNITO About bedtime I took the king to my private quarters to cut his hair and help him get the hang of the lowly raiment he was to wear.
The high classes wore their hair banged across the forehead but hanging to the shoulders the rest of the way around, whereas the lowest ranks of commoners were banged fore and aft both; the slaves were bangless, and allowed their hair free growth.
So I inverted a bowl over his head and cut away all the locks that hung below it.
I also trimmed his whiskers and mustache until they were only about a half-inch long; and tried to do it inartistically, and succeeded.
It was a villainous disfigurement.
When he got his lubberly sandals on, and his long robe of coarse brown linen cloth, which hung straight from his neck to his ankle-bones, he was no longer the comeliest man in his kingdom, but one of the unhandsomest and most commonplace and unattractive.
We were dressed and barbered alike, and could pass for small farmers, or farm bailiffs, or shepherds, or carters; yes, or for village artisans, if we chose, our costume being in effect universal among the poor, because of its strength and cheapness.
I don't mean that it was really cheap to a very poor person, but I do mean that it was the cheapest material there was for male attire--manufactured material, you understand.
We slipped away an hour before dawn, and by broad sun-up had made eight or ten miles, and were in the midst of a sparsely settled country.
I had a pretty heavy knapsack; it was laden with provisions--provisions for the king to taper down on, till he could take to the coarse fare of the country without damage.
I found a comfortable seat for the king by the roadside, and then gave him a morsel or two to stay his stomach with.
Then I said I would find some water for him, and strolled away.
Part of my project was to get out of sight and sit down and rest a little myself.
It had always been my custom to stand when in his presence; even at the council board, except upon those rare occasions when the sitting was a very long one, extending over hours; then I had a trifling little backless thing which was like a reversed
I didn't want to break him in suddenly, but do it by degrees.
We should have to sit together now when in company, or people would notice; but it would not be good politics for me to be playing equality with him when there was no necessity for it.
I found the water some three hundred yards away, and had been resting about twenty minutes, when I heard voices.
That is all right, I thought--peasants going to work; nobody else likely to be stirring this early.
But the next moment these comers jingled into sight around a turn of the road--smartly clad people of quality, with luggage-mules and servants in their train!
I was off like a shot, through the bushes, by the shortest cut.
For a while it did seem that these people would pass the king before I could get to him; but desperation gives you wings, you know, and I canted my body forward, inflated my breast, and held my breath and flew.
I arrived.
And in plenty good enough time, too.
"Pardon, my king, but it's no time for ceremony--jump!
Jump to your feet--some quality are coming"!
"Is that a marvel?
Let them come".
"But my liege!
You must not be seen sitting.
Rise!
--and stand in humble posture while they pass.
You are a peasant, you know".
"True--I had forgot it, so lost was I in planning of a huge war with Gaul"--he was up by this time, but a farm could have got up quicker, if there was any kind of a boom in real estate--"and right-so a thought came randoming overthwart this majestic dream
Duck your head!
--more!
--still more!
--droop it"!
He did his honest best, but lord, it was no great things.
He looked as humble as the leaning tower at Pisa.
It is the most you could say of it.
Indeed, it was such a thundering poor success that it raised wondering scowls all along the line, and a gorgeous flunkey at the tail end of it raised his whip; but I jumped in time and was under it when it fell; and under cover of the volley of coarse
He mastered himself for the moment, but it was a sore tax; he wanted to eat up the procession.
I said: "It would end our adventures at the very start; and we, being without weapons, could do nothing with that armed gang.
If we are going to succeed in our emprise, we must not only look the peasant but act the peasant".
"It is wisdom; none can gainsay it.
Let us go on, Sir Boss.
I will take note and learn, and do the best I may".
He kept his word.
He did the best he could, but I've seen better.
If you have ever seen an active, heedless, enterprising child going diligently out of one mischief and into another all day long, and an anxious mother at its heels all the while, and just saving it by a hair from drowning itself or breaking its neck with
If I could have foreseen what the thing was going to be like, I should have said, No, if anybody wants to make his living exhibiting a king as a peasant, let him take the layout; I can do better with a menagerie, and last longer.
And yet, during the first three days I never allowed him to enter a hut or other dwelling.
If he could pass muster anywhere during his early novitiate it would be in small inns and on the road; so to these places we confined ourselves.
Yes, he certainly did the best he could, but what of that?
He didn't improve a bit that I could see.
He was always frightening me, always breaking out with fresh astonishers, in new and unexpected places.
Toward evening on the second day, what does he do but blandly fetch out a dirk from inside his robe!
"Great guns, my liege, where did you get that"?
"From a smuggler at the inn, yester eve".
"What in the world possessed you to buy it"?
"We have escaped divers dangers by wit--thy wit--but I have bethought me that it were but prudence if I bore a weapon, too.
Thine might fail thee in some pinch".
"But people of our condition are not allowed to carry arms.
What would a lord say--yes, or any other person of whatever condition --if he caught an upstart peasant with a dagger on his person"?
It was a lucky thing for us that nobody came along just then.
I persuaded him to throw the dirk away; and it was as easy as persuading a child to give up some bright fresh new way of killing itself.
We walked along, silent and thinking.
Finally the king said: "When ye know that I meditate a thing inconvenient, or that hath a peril in it, why do you not warn me to cease from that project"?
It was a startling question, and a puzzler.
I didn't quite know how to take hold of it, or what to say, and so, of course, I ended by saying the natural thing: "But, sire, how can I know what your thoughts are"?
The king stopped dead in his tracks, and stared at me.
"I believed thou wert greater than Merlin; and truly in magic thou art.
But prophecy is greater than magic.
Merlin is a prophet".
I saw I had made a blunder.
I must get back my lost ground.
After a deep reflection and careful planning, I said: "Sire, I have been misunderstood.
I will explain.
There are two kinds of prophecy.
One is the gift to foretell things that are but a little way off, the other is the gift to foretell things that are whole ages and centuries away.
Which is the mightier gift, do you think"?
"Oh, the last, most surely"!
"True.
Does Merlin possess it"?
"Partly, yes.
He foretold mysteries about my birth and future kingship that were twenty years away".
"Has he ever gone beyond that"?
"He would not claim more, I think".
"It is probably his limit.
All prophets have their limit.
The limit of some of the great prophets has been a hundred years".
"These are few, I ween".
"There have been two still greater ones, whose limit was four hundred and six hundred years, and one whose limit compassed even seven hundred and twenty".
"Gramercy, it is marvelous"!
"But what are these in comparison with me?
They are nothing".
"What?
Canst thou truly look beyond even so vast a stretch of time as--" "Seven hundred years?
My liege, as clear as the vision of an eagle does my prophetic eye penetrate and lay bare the future of this world for nearly thirteen centuries and a half"!
My land, you should have seen the king's eyes spread slowly open, and lift the earth's entire atmosphere as much as an inch!
That settled Brer Merlin.
One never had any occasion to prove his facts, with these people; all he had to do was to state them.
It never occurred to anybody to doubt the statement.
"Now, then," I continued, "I _could_ work both kinds of prophecy --the long and the short--if I chose to take the trouble to keep in practice; but I seldom exercise any but the long kind, because the other is beneath my dignity.
It is properer to Merlin's sort --stump-tail prophets, as we call them in the profession.
Of course, I whet up now and then and flirt out a minor prophecy, but not often--hardly ever, in fact.
You will remember that there was great talk, when you reached the Valley of Holiness, about my having prophesied your coming and the very hour of your arrival, two or three days beforehand".
"Indeed, yes, I mind it now".
"Well, I could have done it as much as forty times easier, and piled on a thousand times more detail into the bargain, if it had been five hundred years away instead of two or three days".
"How amazing that it should be so"!
"Yes, a genuine expert can always foretell a thing that is five hundred years away easier than he can a thing that's only five hundred seconds off".
"And yet in reason it should clearly be the other way; it should be five hundred times as easy to foretell the last as the first, for, indeed, it is so close by that one uninspired might almost see it.
In truth, the law of prophecy doth contradict the likelihoods, most strangely making the difficult easy, and the easy difficult".
It was a wise head.
A peasant's cap was no safe disguise for it; you could know it for a king's under a diving-bell, if you could hear it work its intellect.
I had a new trade now, and plenty of business in it.
The king was as hungry to find out everything that was going to happen during the next thirteen centuries as if he were expecting to live in them.
From that time out, I prophesied myself bald-headed trying to supply the demand.
I have done some indiscreet things in my day, but this thing of playing myself for a prophet was the worst.
Still, it had its ameliorations.
A prophet doesn't have to have any brains.
They are good to have, of course, for the ordinary exigencies of life, but they are no use in professional work.
It is the restfulest vocation there is.
When the spirit of prophecy comes upon you, you merely take your intellect and lay it off in a cool place for a rest, and unship your jaw and leave it alone; it will work itself: the result is prophecy.
Every day a knight-errant or so came along, and the sight of them fired the king's martial spirit every time.
He would have forgotten himself, sure, and said something to them in a style a suspicious shade or so above his ostensible degree, and so I always got him well out of the road in time.
Then he would stand and look with all his eyes; and a proud light would flash from them, and his nostrils would inflate like a war-horse's, and I knew he was longing for a brush with them.
But about noon of the third day I had stopped in the road to take a precaution which had been suggested by the whip-stroke that had fallen to my share two days before; a precaution which I had afterward decided to leave untaken, I was so loath to institute
I was so pale I couldn't think for a moment; then I got softly and carefully up and unstrapped my knapsack.
I had that dynamite bomb in it, done up in wool in a box.
It was a good thing to have along; the time would come when I could do a valuable miracle with it, maybe, but it was a nervous thing to have about me, and I didn't like to ask the king to carry it.
Yet I must either throw it away or think up some safe way to get along with its society.
I got it out and slipped it into my scrip, and just then here came a couple of knights.
The king stood, stately as a statue, gazing toward them--had forgotten himself again, of course--and before I could get a word of warning out, it was time for him to skip, and well that he did it, too.
He supposed they would turn aside.
Turn aside to avoid trampling peasant dirt under foot?
When had he ever turned aside himself--or ever had the chance to do it, if a peasant saw him or any other noble knight in time to judiciously save him the trouble?
The knights paid no attention to the king at all; it was his place to look out himself, and if he hadn't skipped he would have been placidly ridden down, and laughed at besides.
The king was in a flaming fury, and launched out his challenge and epithets with a most royal vigor.
The knights were some little distance by now.
They halted, greatly surprised, and turned in their saddles and looked back, as if wondering if it might be worth while to bother with such scum as we.
Then they wheeled and started for us.
Not a moment must be lost.
I started for _them_.
I passed them at a rattling gait, and as I went by I flung out a hair-lifting soul-scorching thirteen-jointed insult which made the king's effort poor and cheap by comparison.
I got it out of the nineteenth century where they know how.
They had such headway that they were nearly to the king before they could check up; then, frantic with rage, they stood up their horses on their hind hoofs and whirled them around, and the next moment here they came, breast to breast.
I was seventy yards off, then, and scrambling up a great bowlder at the roadside.
When they were within thirty yards of me they let their long lances droop to a level, depressed their mailed heads, and so, with their horse-hair plumes streaming straight out behind, most gallant to see, this lightning express came tearing for me!
When they were within fifteen yards, I sent that bomb with a sure aim, and it struck the ground just under the horses' noses.
Yes, it was a neat thing, very neat and pretty to see.
It resembled a steamboat explosion on the Mississippi; and during the next fifteen minutes we stood under a steady drizzle of microscopic fragments of knights and hardware and horse-flesh.
I say we, for the king joined the audience, of course, as soon as he had got his breath again.
There was a hole there which would afford steady work for all the people in that region for some years to come --in trying to explain it, I mean; as for filling it up, that service would be comparatively prompt, and would fall to the lot of a select
But I explained it to the king myself.
I said it was done with a dynamite bomb.
This information did him no damage, because it left him as intelligent as he was before.
However, it was a noble miracle, in his eyes, and was another settler for Merlin.
I thought it well enough to explain that this was a miracle of so rare a sort that it couldn't be done except when the atmospheric conditions were just right.
Otherwise he would be encoring it every time we had a good subject, and that would be inconvenient, because I hadn't any more bombs along.
CHAPTER XXVIII DRILLING THE KING On the morning of the fourth day, when it was just sunrise, and we had been tramping an hour in the chill dawn, I came to a resolution: the king _must_ be drilled; things could not go on so, he must be taken in hand and
So I called a halt and said: "Sire, as between clothes and countenance, you are all right, there is no discrepancy; but as between your clothes and your bearing, you are all wrong, there is a most noticeable discrepancy.
Your soldierly stride, your lordly port--these will not do.
You stand too straight, your looks are too high, too confident.
The cares of a kingdom do not stoop the shoulders, they do not droop the chin, they do not depress the high level of the eye-glance, they do not put doubt and fear in the heart and hang out the signs of them in slouching body and unsure step.
It is the sordid cares of the lowly born that do these things.
You must learn the trick; you must imitate the trademarks of poverty, misery, oppression, insult, and the other several and common inhumanities that sap the manliness out of a man and make him a loyal and proper and approved subject and a satisfaction to
Pray try to walk like this".
The king took careful note, and then tried an imitation.
"Pretty fair--pretty fair.
Chin a little lower, please--there, very good.
Eyes too high; pray don't look at the horizon, look at the ground, ten steps in front of you.
Ah--that is better, that is very good.
Wait, please; you betray too much vigor, too much decision; you want more of a shamble.
Look at me, please--this is what I mean...
.
Now you are getting it; that is the idea--at least, it sort of approaches it...
.
Yes, that is pretty fair.
_But!
_ There is a great big something wanting, I don't quite know what it is.
Please walk thirty yards, so that I can get a perspective on the thing...
.
Now, then--your head's right, speed's right, shoulders right, eyes right, chin right, gait, carriage, general style right--everything's right!
And yet the fact remains, the aggregate's wrong.
The account don't balance.
Do it again, please...
.
_Now_ I think I begin to see what it is.
Yes, I've struck it.
You see, the genuine spiritlessness is wanting; that's what's the trouble.
It's all _amateur_--mechanical details all right, almost to a hair; everything about the delusion perfect, except that it don't delude".
"What, then, must one do, to prevail"?
"Let me think...
I can't seem to quite get at it.
In fact, there isn't anything that can right the matter but practice.
This is a good place for it: roots and stony ground to break up your stately gait, a region not liable to interruption, only one field and one hut in sight, and they so far away that nobody could see us from there.
It will be well to move a little off the road and put in the whole day drilling you, sire".
After the drill had gone on a little while, I said: "Now, sire, imagine that we are at the door of the hut yonder, and the family are before us.
Proceed, please--accost the head of the house".
The king unconsciously straightened up like a monument, and said, with frozen austerity: "Varlet, bring a seat; and serve to me what cheer ye have".
"Ah, your grace, that is not well done".
"In what lacketh it"?
"These people do not call _each other_ varlets".
"Nay, is that true"?
"Yes; only those above them call them so".
"Then must I try again.
I will call him villein".
"No-no; for he may be a freeman".
"Ah--so.
Then peradventure I should call him goodman".
"That would answer, your grace, but it would be still better if you said friend, or brother".
"Brother!
--to dirt like that"?
"Ah, but _we_ are pretending to be dirt like that, too".
"It is even true.
I will say it.
Brother, bring a seat, and thereto what cheer ye have, withal.
Now 'tis right".
"Not quite, not wholly right.
You have asked for one, not _us_ --for one, not both; food for one, a seat for one".
The king looked puzzled--he wasn't a very heavy weight, intellectually.
His head was an hour-glass; it could stow an idea, but it had to do it a grain at a time, not the whole idea at once.
"Would _you_ have a seat also--and sit"?
"If I did not sit, the man would perceive that we were only pretending to be equals--and playing the deception pretty poorly, too".
"It is well and truly said!
How wonderful is truth, come it in whatsoever unexpected form it may!
Yes, he must bring out seats and food for both, and in serving us present not ewer and napkin with more show of respect to the one than to the other".
"And there is even yet a detail that needs correcting.
He must bring nothing outside; we will go in--in among the dirt, and possibly other repulsive things,--and take the food with the household, and after the fashion of the house, and all on equal terms, except the man be of the serf class; and finally, there
Please walk again, my liege.
There--it is better--it is the best yet; but not perfect.
The shoulders have known no ignobler burden than iron mail, and they will not stoop".
"Give me, then, the bag.
I will learn the spirit that goeth with burdens that have not honor.
It is the spirit that stoopeth the shoulders, I ween, and not the weight; for armor is heavy, yet it is a proud burden, and a man standeth straight in it...
.
Nay, but me no buts, offer me no objections.
I will have the thing.
Strap it upon my back".
He was complete now with that knapsack on, and looked as little like a king as any man I had ever seen.
But it was an obstinate pair of shoulders; they could not seem to learn the trick of stooping with any sort of deceptive naturalness.
The drill went on, I prompting and correcting: "Now, make believe you are in debt, and eaten up by relentless creditors; you are out of work--which is horse-shoeing, let us say--and can get none; and your wife is sick, your children are crying because they
I drilled him as representing in turn all sorts of people out of luck and suffering dire privations and misfortunes.
But lord, it was only just words, words--they meant nothing in the world to him, I might just as well have whistled.
Words realize nothing, vivify nothing to you, unless you have suffered in your own person the thing which the words try to describe.
There are wise people who talk ever so knowingly and complacently about "the working classes," and satisfy themselves that a day's hard intellectual work is very much harder than a day's hard manual toil, and is righteously entitled to much bigger pay.
Why, they really think that, you know, because they know all about the one, but haven't tried the other.
But I know all about both; and so far as I am concerned, there isn't money enough in the universe to hire me to swing a pickaxe thirty days, but I will do the hardest kind of intellectual work for just as near nothing as you can cipher it down--and I will
Intellectual "work" is misnamed; it is a pleasure, a dissipation, and is its own highest reward.
The poorest paid architect, engineer, general, author, sculptor, painter, lecturer, advocate, legislator, actor, preacher, singer is constructively in heaven when he is at work; and as for the musician with the fiddle-bow in his hand who sits in the midst
The law of work does seem utterly unfair--but there it is, and nothing can change it: the higher the pay in enjoyment the worker gets out of it, the higher shall be his pay in cash, also.
And it's also the very law of those transparent swindles, transmissible nobility and kingship.
CHAPTER XXIX THE SMALLPOX HUT When we arrived at that hut at mid-afternoon, we saw no signs of life about it.
The field near by had been denuded of its crop some time before, and had a skinned look, so exhaustively had it been harvested and gleaned.
Fences, sheds, everything had a ruined look, and were eloquent of poverty.
No animal was around anywhere, no living thing in sight.
The stillness was awful, it was like the stillness of death.
The cabin was a one-story one, whose thatch was black with age, and ragged from lack of repair.
The door stood a trifle ajar.
We approached it stealthily--on tiptoe and at half-breath--for that is the way one's feeling makes him do, at such a time.
The king knocked.
We waited.
No answer.
Knocked again.
No answer.
I pushed the door softly open and looked in.
I made out some dim forms, and a woman started up from the ground and stared at me, as one does who is wakened from sleep.
Presently she found her voice: "Have mercy"!
she pleaded.
"All is taken, nothing is left".
"I have not come to take anything, poor woman".
"You are not a priest"?
"No".
"Nor come not from the lord of the manor"?
"No, I am a stranger".
"Oh, then, for the fear of God, who visits with misery and death such as be harmless, tarry not here, but fly!
This place is under his curse--and his Church's".
"Let me come in and help you--you are sick and in trouble".
I was better used to the dim light now.
I could see her hollow eyes fixed upon me.
I could see how emaciated she was.
"I tell you the place is under the Church's ban.
Save yourself --and go, before some straggler see thee here, and report it".
"Give yourself no trouble about me; I don't care anything for the Church's curse.
Let me help you".
"Now all good spirits--if there be any such--bless thee for that word.
Would God I had a sup of water!
--but hold, hold, forget I said it, and fly; for there is that here that even he that feareth not the Church must fear: this disease whereof we die.
Leave us, thou brave, good stranger, and take with thee such whole and sincere blessing as them that be accursed can give".
But before this I had picked up a wooden bowl and was rushing past the king on my way to the brook.
It was ten yards away.
When I got back and entered, the king was within, and was opening the shutter that closed the window-hole, to let in air and light.
The place was full of a foul stench.
I put the bowl to the woman's lips, and as she gripped it with her eager talons the shutter came open and a strong light flooded her face.
Smallpox!
I sprang to the king, and said in his ear: "Out of the door on the instant, sire!
the woman is dying of that disease that wasted the skirts of Camelot two years ago".
He did not budge.
"Of a truth I shall remain--and likewise help".
I whispered again: "King, it must not be.
You must go".
"Ye mean well, and ye speak not unwisely.
But it were shame that a king should know fear, and shame that belted knight should withhold his hand where be such as need succor.
Peace, I will not go.
It is you who must go.
The Church's ban is not upon me, but it forbiddeth you to be here, and she will deal with you with a heavy hand an word come to her of your trespass".
It was a desperate place for him to be in, and might cost him his life, but it was no use to argue with him.
If he considered his knightly honor at stake here, that was the end of argument; he would stay, and nothing could prevent it; I was aware of that.
And so I dropped the subject.
The woman spoke: "Fair sir, of your kindness will ye climb the ladder there, and bring me news of what ye find?
Be not afraid to report, for times can come when even a mother's heart is past breaking --being already broke".
"Abide," said the king, "and give the woman to eat.
I will go".
And he put down the knapsack.
I turned to start, but the king had already started.
He halted, and looked down upon a man who lay in a dim light, and had not noticed us thus far, or spoken.
"Is it your husband"?
the king asked.
"Yes".
"Is he asleep"?
"God be thanked for that one charity, yes--these three hours.
Where shall I pay to the full, my gratitude!
for my heart is bursting with it for that sleep he sleepeth now".
I said: "We will be careful.
We will not wake him".
"Ah, no, that ye will not, for he is dead".
"Dead"?
"Yes, what triumph it is to know it!
None can harm him, none insult him more.
He is in heaven now, and happy; or if not there, he bides in hell and is content; for in that place he will find neither abbot nor yet bishop.
We were boy and girl together; we were man and wife these five and twenty years, and never separated till this day.
Think how long that is to love and suffer together.
This morning was he out of his mind, and in his fancy we were boy and girl again and wandering in the happy fields; and so in that innocent glad converse wandered he far and farther, still lightly gossiping, and entered into those other fields we know not
And so there was no parting, for in his fancy I went with him; he knew not but I went with him, my hand in his--my young soft hand, not this withered claw.
Ah, yes, to go, and know it not; to separate and know it not; how could one go peace--fuller than that?
It was his reward for a cruel life patiently borne".
There was a slight noise from the direction of the dim corner where the ladder was.
It was the king descending.
I could see that he was bearing something in one arm, and assisting himself with the other.
He came forward into the light; upon his breast lay a slender girl of fifteen.
She was but half conscious; she was dying of smallpox.
Here was heroism at its last and loftiest possibility, its utmost summit; this was challenging death in the open field unarmed, with all the odds against the challenger, no reward set upon the contest, and no admiring world in silks and cloth of gold to
He was great now; sublimely great.
The rude statues of his ancestors in his palace should have an addition--I would see to that; and it would not be a mailed king killing a giant or a dragon, like the rest, it would be a king in commoner's garb bearing death in his arms that a peasant
He laid the girl down by her mother, who poured out endearments and caresses from an overflowing heart, and one could detect a flickering faint light of response in the child's eyes, but that was all.
The mother hung over her, kissing her, petting her, and imploring her to speak, but the lips only moved and no sound came.
I snatched my liquor flask from my knapsack, but the woman forbade me, and said: "No--she does not suffer; it is better so.
It might bring her back to life.
None that be so good and kind as ye are would do her that cruel hurt.
For look you--what is left to live for?
Her brothers are gone, her father is gone, her mother goeth, the Church's curse is upon her, and none may shelter or befriend her even though she lay perishing in the road.
She is desolate.
I have not asked you, good heart, if her sister be still on live, here overhead; I had no need; ye had gone back, else, and not left the poor thing forsaken--" "She lieth at peace," interrupted the king, in a subdued voice.
"I would not change it.
How rich is this day in happiness!
Ah, my Annis, thou shalt join thy sister soon--thou'rt on thy way, and these be merciful friends that will not hinder".
And so she fell to murmuring and cooing over the girl again, and softly stroking her face and hair, and kissing her and calling her by endearing names; but there was scarcely sign of response now in the glazing eyes.
I saw tears well from the king's eyes, and trickle down his face.
The woman noticed them, too, and said: "Ah, I know that sign: thou'st a wife at home, poor soul, and you and she have gone hungry to bed, many's the time, that the little ones might have your crust; you know what poverty is, and the daily insults of your
The king winced under this accidental home-shot, but kept still; he was learning his part; and he was playing it well, too, for a pretty dull beginner.
I struck up a diversion.
I offered the woman food and liquor, but she refused both.
She would allow nothing to come between her and the release of death.
Then I slipped away and brought the dead child from aloft, and laid it by her.
This broke her down again, and there was another scene that was full of heartbreak.
By and by I made another diversion, and beguiled her to sketch her story.
"Ye know it well yourselves, having suffered it--for truly none of our condition in Britain escape it.
It is the old, weary tale.
We fought and struggled and succeeded; meaning by success, that we lived and did not die; more than that is not to be claimed.
No troubles came that we could not outlive, till this year brought them; then came they all at once, as one might say, and overwhelmed us.
Years ago the lord of the manor planted certain fruit trees on our farm; in the best part of it, too--a grievous wrong and shame--" "But it was his right," interrupted the king.
"None denieth that, indeed; an the law mean anything, what is the lord's is his, and what is mine is his also.
Our farm was ours by lease, therefore 'twas likewise his, to do with it as he would.
Some little time ago, three of those trees were found hewn down.
Our three grown sons ran frightened to report the crime.
Well, in his lordship's dungeon there they lie, who saith there shall they lie and rot till they confess.
They have naught to confess, being innocent, wherefore there will they remain until they die.
Ye know that right well, I ween.
Think how this left us; a man, a woman and two children, to gather a crop that was planted by so much greater force, yes, and protect it night and day from pigeons and prowling animals that be sacred and must not be hurt by any of our sort.
When my lord's crop was nearly ready for the harvest, so also was ours; when his bell rang to call us to his fields to harvest his crop for nothing, he would not allow that I and my two girls should count for our three captive sons, but for only two of
All this time our own crop was perishing through neglect; and so both the priest and his lordship fined us because their shares of it were suffering through damage.
In the end the fines ate up our crop--and they took it all; they took it all and made us harvest it for them, without pay or food, and we starving.
Then the worst came when I, being out of my mind with hunger and loss of my boys, and grief to see my husband and my little maids in rags and misery and despair, uttered a deep blasphemy--oh!
a thousand of them!
--against the Church and the Church's ways.
It was ten days ago.
I had fallen sick with this disease, and it was to the priest I said the words, for he was come to chide me for lack of due humility under the chastening hand of God.
He carried my trespass to his betters; I was stubborn; wherefore, presently upon my head and upon all heads that were dear to me, fell the curse of Rome.
"Since that day we are avoided, shunned with horror.
None has come near this hut to know whether we live or not.
The rest of us were taken down.
Then I roused me and got up, as wife and mother will.
It was little they could have eaten in any case; it was less than little they had to eat.
But there was water, and I gave them that.
How they craved it!
and how they blessed it!
But the end came yesterday; my strength broke down.
Yesterday was the last time I ever saw my husband and this youngest child alive.
I have lain here all these hours--these ages, ye may say--listening, listening for any sound up there that--" She gave a sharp quick glance at her eldest daughter, then cried out, "Oh, my darling"!
and feebly gathered the stiffening form to her sheltering arms.
She had recognized the death-rattle.
CHAPTER XXX THE TRAGEDY OF THE MANOR-HOUSE At midnight all was over, and we sat in the presence of four corpses.
We covered them with such rags as we could find, and started away, fastening the door behind us.
Their home must be these people's grave, for they could not have Christian burial, or be admitted to consecrated ground.
They were as dogs, wild beasts, lepers, and no soul that valued its hope of eternal life would throw it away by meddling in any sort with these rebuked and smitten outcasts.
We had not moved four steps when I caught a sound as of footsteps upon gravel.
My heart flew to my throat.
We must not be seen coming from that house.
I plucked at the king's robe and we drew back and took shelter behind the corner of the cabin.
"Now we are safe," I said, "but it was a close call--so to speak.
If the night had been lighter he might have seen us, no doubt, he seemed to be so near".
"Mayhap it is but a beast and not a man at all".
"True.
But man or beast, it will be wise to stay here a minute and let it get by and out of the way".
"Hark!
It cometh hither".
True again.
The step was coming toward us--straight toward the hut.
It must be a beast, then, and we might as well have saved our trepidation.
I was going to step out, but the king laid his hand upon my arm.
There was a moment of silence, then we heard a soft knock on the cabin door.
It made me shiver.
Presently the knock was repeated, and then we heard these words in a guarded voice: "Mother!
Father!
Open--we have got free, and we bring news to pale your cheeks but glad your hearts; and we may not tarry, but must fly!
And--but they answer not.
Mother!
father!
--" I drew the king toward the other end of the hut and whispered: "Come--now we can get to the road".
The king hesitated, was going to demur; but just then we heard the door give way, and knew that those desolate men were in the presence of their dead.
"Come, my liege!
in a moment they will strike a light, and then will follow that which it would break your heart to hear".
He did not hesitate this time.
The moment we were in the road I ran; and after a moment he threw dignity aside and followed.
I did not want to think of what was happening in the hut--I couldn't bear it; I wanted to drive it out of my mind; so I struck into the first subject that lay under that one in my mind: "I have had the disease those people died of, and so have nothing to
It is not likely that their lord hath set them free".
"Oh, no, I make no doubt they escaped".
"That is my trouble; I have a fear that this is so, and your suspicion doth confirm it, you having the same fear".
"I should not call it by that name though.
I do suspect that they escaped, but if they did, I am not sorry, certainly".
"I am not sorry, I _think_--but--" "What is it?
What is there for one to be troubled about"?
"_If_ they did escape, then are we bound in duty to lay hands upon them and deliver them again to their lord; for it is not seemly that one of his quality should suffer a so insolent and high-handed outrage from persons of their base degree".
There it was again.
He could see only one side of it.
He was born so, educated so, his veins were full of ancestral blood that was rotten with this sort of unconscious brutality, brought down by inheritance from a long procession of hearts that had each done its share toward poisoning the stream.
To imprison these men without proof, and starve their kindred, was no harm, for they were merely peasants and subject to the will and pleasure of their lord, no matter what fearful form it might take; but for these men to break out of unjust captivity was
I worked more than half an hour before I got him to change the subject--and even then an outside matter did it for me.
This was a something which caught our eyes as we struck the summit of a small hill--a red glow, a good way off.
"That's a fire," said I. Fires interested me considerably, because I was getting a good deal of an insurance business started, and was also training some horses and building some steam fire-engines, with an eye to a paid fire department by and by.
The priests opposed both my fire and life insurance, on the ground that it was an insolent attempt to hinder the decrees of God; and if you pointed out that they did not hinder the decrees in the least, but only modified the hard consequences of them if
So they managed to damage those industries more or less, but I got even on my accident business.
As a rule, a knight is a lummux, and some times even a labrick, and hence open to pretty poor arguments when they come glibly from a superstition-monger, but even _he_ could see the practical side of a thing once in a while; and so of late you couldn't
We stood there awhile, in the thick darkness and stillness, looking toward the red blur in the distance, and trying to make out the meaning of a far-away murmur that rose and fell fitfully on the night.
Sometimes it swelled up and for a moment seemed less remote; but when we were hopefully expecting it to betray its cause and nature, it dulled and sank again, carrying its mystery with it.
We started down the hill in its direction, and the winding road plunged us at once into almost solid darkness--darkness that was packed and crammed in between two tall forest walls.
We groped along down for half a mile, perhaps, that murmur growing more and more distinct all the time.
The coming storm threatening more and more, with now and then a little shiver of wind, a faint show of lightning, and dull grumblings of distant thunder.
I was in the lead.
I ran against something--a soft heavy something which gave, slightly, to the impulse of my weight; at the same moment the lightning glared out, and within a foot of my face was the writhing face of a man who was hanging from the limb of a tree!
That is, it seemed to be writhing, but it was not.
It was a grewsome sight.
Straightway there was an ear-splitting explosion of thunder, and the bottom of heaven fell out; the rain poured down in a deluge.
No matter, we must try to cut this man down, on the chance that there might be life in him yet, mustn't we?
The lightning came quick and sharp now, and the place was alternately noonday and midnight.
One moment the man would be hanging before me in an intense light, and the next he was blotted out again in the darkness.
I told the king we must cut him down.
The king at once objected.
"If he hanged himself, he was willing to lose him property to his lord; so let him be.
If others hanged him, belike they had the right--let him hang".
"But--" "But me no buts, but even leave him as he is.
And for yet another reason.
When the lightning cometh again--there, look abroad".
Two others hanging, within fifty yards of us!
"It is not weather meet for doing useless courtesies unto dead folk.
They are past thanking you.
Come--it is unprofitable to tarry here".
There was reason in what he said, so we moved on.
Within the next mile we counted six more hanging forms by the blaze of the lightning, and altogether it was a grisly excursion.
That murmur was a murmur no longer, it was a roar; a roar of men's voices.
A man came flying by now, dimly through the darkness, and other men chasing him.
They disappeared.
Presently another case of the kind occurred, and then another and another.
Then a sudden turn of the road brought us in sight of that fire--it was a large manor-house, and little or nothing was left of it--and everywhere men were flying and other men raging after them in pursuit.
I warned the king that this was not a safe place for strangers.
We would better get away from the light, until matters should improve.
We stepped back a little, and hid in the edge of the wood.
From this hiding-place we saw both men and women hunted by the mob.
The fearful work went on until nearly dawn.
Then, the fire being out and the storm spent, the voices and flying footsteps presently ceased, and darkness and stillness reigned again.
We ventured out, and hurried cautiously away; and although we were worn out and sleepy, we kept on until we had put this place some miles behind us.
Then we asked hospitality at the hut of a charcoal burner, and got what was to be had.
A woman was up and about, but the man was still asleep, on a straw shake-down, on the clay floor.
The woman seemed uneasy until I explained that we were travelers and had lost our way and been wandering in the woods all night.
She became talkative, then, and asked if we had heard of the terrible goings-on at the manor-house of Abblasoure.
Yes, we had heard of them, but what we wanted now was rest and sleep.
The king broke in: "Sell us the house and take yourselves away, for we be perilous company, being late come from people that died of the Spotted Death".
It was good of him, but unnecessary.
One of the commonest decorations of the nation was the waffle-iron face.
I had early noticed that the woman and her husband were both so decorated.
She made us entirely welcome, and had no fears; and plainly she was immensely impressed by the king's proposition; for, of course, it was a good deal of an event in her life to run across a person of the king's humble appearance who was ready to buy a
It gave her a large respect for us, and she strained the lean possibilities of her hovel to the utmost to make us comfortable.
We slept till far into the afternoon, and then got up hungry enough to make cotter fare quite palatable to the king, the more particularly as it was scant in quantity.
And also in variety; it consisted solely of onions, salt, and the national black bread made out of horse-feed.
The woman told us about the affair of the evening before.
At ten or eleven at night, when everybody was in bed, the manor-house burst into flames.
The country-side swarmed to the rescue, and the family were saved, with one exception, the master.
He did not appear.
Everybody was frantic over this loss, and two brave yeomen sacrificed their lives in ransacking the burning house seeking that valuable personage.
But after a while he was found--what was left of him--which was his corpse.
It was in a copse three hundred yards away, bound, gagged, stabbed in a dozen places.
Who had done this?
Suspicion fell upon a humble family in the neighborhood who had been lately treated with peculiar harshness by the baron; and from these people the suspicion easily extended itself to their relatives and familiars.
A suspicion was enough; my lord's liveried retainers proclaimed an instant crusade against these people, and were promptly joined by the community in general.
The woman's husband had been active with the mob, and had not returned home until nearly dawn.
He was gone now to find out what the general result had been.
While we were still talking he came back from his quest.
His report was revolting enough.
Eighteen persons hanged or butchered, and two yeomen and thirteen prisoners lost in the fire.
"And how many prisoners were there altogether in the vaults"?
"Thirteen".
"Then every one of them was lost"?
"Yes, all".
"But the people arrived in time to save the family; how is it they could save none of the prisoners"?
The man looked puzzled, and said: "Would one unlock the vaults at such a time?
Marry, some would have escaped".
"Then you mean that nobody _did_ unlock them"?
"None went near them, either to lock or unlock.
It standeth to reason that the bolts were fast; wherefore it was only needful to establish a watch, so that if any broke the bonds he might not escape, but be taken.
None were taken".
"Natheless, three did escape," said the king, "and ye will do well to publish it and set justice upon their track, for these murthered the baron and fired the house".
I was just expecting he would come out with that.
For a moment the man and his wife showed an eager interest in this news and an impatience to go out and spread it; then a sudden something else betrayed itself in their faces, and they began to ask questions.
I answered the questions myself, and narrowly watched the effects produced.
I was soon satisfied that the knowledge of who these three prisoners were had somehow changed the atmosphere; that our hosts' continued eagerness to go and spread the news was now only pretended and not real.
The king did not notice the change, and I was glad of that.
I worked the conversation around toward other details of the night's proceedings, and noted that these people were relieved to have it take that direction.
The painful thing observable about all this business was the alacrity with which this oppressed community had turned their cruel hands against their own class in the interest of the common oppressor.
This man and woman seemed to feel that in a quarrel between a person of their own class and his lord, it was the natural and proper and rightful thing for that poor devil's whole caste to side with the master and fight his battle for him, without ever
This man had been out helping to hang his neighbors, and had done his work with zeal, and yet was aware that there was nothing against them but a mere suspicion, with nothing back of it describable as evidence, still neither he nor his wife seemed to see
This was depressing--to a man with the dream of a republic in his head.
It reminded me of a time thirteen centuries away, when the "poor whites" of our South who were always despised and frequently insulted by the slave-lords around them, and who owed their base condition simply to the presence of slavery in their midst, were
And there was only one redeeming feature connected with that pitiful piece of history; and that was, that secretly the "poor white" did detest the slave-lord, and did feel his own shame.
That feeling was not brought to the surface, but the fact that it was there and could have been brought out, under favoring circumstances, was something--in fact, it was enough; for it showed that a man is at bottom a man, after all, even if it doesn't
Well, as it turned out, this charcoal burner was just the twin of the Southern "poor white" of the far future.
The king presently showed impatience, and said: "An ye prattle here all the day, justice will miscarry.
Think ye the criminals will abide in their father's house?
They are fleeing, they are not waiting.
You should look to it that a party of horse be set upon their track".
The woman paled slightly, but quite perceptibly, and the man looked flustered and irresolute.
I said: "Come, friend, I will walk a little way with you, and explain which direction I think they would try to take.
If they were merely resisters of the gabelle or some kindred absurdity I would try to protect them from capture; but when men murder a person of high degree and likewise burn his house, that is another matter".
The last remark was for the king--to quiet him.
On the road the man pulled his resolution together, and began the march with a steady gait, but there was no eagerness in it.
By and by I said: "What relation were these men to you--cousins"?
He turned as white as his layer of charcoal would let him, and stopped, trembling.
"Ah, my God, how know ye that"?
"I didn't know it; it was a chance guess".
"Poor lads, they are lost.
And good lads they were, too".
"Were you actually going yonder to tell on them"?
He didn't quite know how to take that; but he said, hesitatingly: "Ye-s".
"Then I think you are a damned scoundrel"!
It made him as glad as if I had called him an angel.
"Say the good words again, brother!
for surely ye mean that ye would not betray me an I failed of my duty".
"Duty?
There is no duty in the matter, except the duty to keep still and let those men get away.
They've done a righteous deed".
He looked pleased; pleased, and touched with apprehension at the same time.
He looked up and down the road to see that no one was coming, and then said in a cautious voice: "From what land come you, brother, that you speak such perilous words, and seem not to be afraid"?
"They are not perilous words when spoken to one of my own caste, I take it.
You would not tell anybody I said them"?
"I?
I would be drawn asunder by wild horses first".
"Well, then, let me say my say.
I have no fears of your repeating it.
I think devil's work has been done last night upon those innocent poor people.
That old baron got only what he deserved.
If I had my way, all his kind should have the same luck".
Fear and depression vanished from the man's manner, and gratefulness and a brave animation took their place: "Even though you be a spy, and your words a trap for my undoing, yet are they such refreshment that to hear them again and others like to them, I
And I will say my say now, and ye may report it if ye be so minded.
I helped to hang my neighbors for that it were peril to my own life to show lack of zeal in the master's cause; the others helped for none other reason.
All rejoice to-day that he is dead, but all do go about seemingly sorrowing, and shedding the hypocrite's tear, for in that lies safety.
I have said the words, I have said the words!
the only ones that have ever tasted good in my mouth, and the reward of that taste is sufficient.
Lead on, an ye will, be it even to the scaffold, for I am ready".
There it was, you see.
A man is a man, at bottom.
Whole ages of abuse and oppression cannot crush the manhood clear out of him.
Whoever thinks it a mistake is himself mistaken.
Yes, there is plenty good enough material for a republic in the most degraded people that ever existed--even the Russians; plenty of manhood in them--even in the Germans--if one could but force it out of its timid and suspicious privacy, to overthrow and
We should see certain things yet, let us hope and believe.
First, a modified monarchy, till Arthur's days were done, then the destruction of the throne, nobility abolished, every member of it bound out to some useful trade, universal suffrage instituted, and the whole government placed in the hands of the men and
Yes, there was no occasion to give up my dream yet a while.
CHAPTER XXXI MARCO We strolled along in a sufficiently indolent fashion now, and talked.
We must dispose of about the amount of time it ought to take to go to the little hamlet of Abblasoure and put justice on the track of those murderers and get back home again.
And meantime I had an auxiliary interest which had never paled yet, never lost its novelty for me since I had been in Arthur's kingdom: the behavior--born of nice and exact subdivisions of caste--of chance passers-by toward each other.
Toward the shaven monk who trudged along with his cowl tilted back and the sweat washing down his fat jowls, the coal-burner was deeply reverent; to the gentleman he was abject; with the small farmer and the free mechanic he was cordial and gossipy; and
Well, there are times when one would like to hang the whole human race and finish the farce.
Presently we struck an incident.
A small mob of half-naked boys and girls came tearing out of the woods, scared and shrieking.
The eldest among them were not more than twelve or fourteen years old.
They implored help, but they were so beside themselves that we couldn't make out what the matter was.
However, we plunged into the wood, they skurrying in the lead, and the trouble was quickly revealed: they had hanged a little fellow with a bark rope, and he was kicking and struggling, in the process of choking to death.
We rescued him, and fetched him around.
It was some more human nature; the admiring little folk imitating their elders; they were playing mob, and had achieved a success which promised to be a good deal more serious than they had bargained for.
It was not a dull excursion for me.
I managed to put in the time very well.
I made various acquaintanceships, and in my quality of stranger was able to ask as many questions as I wanted to.
A thing which naturally interested me, as a statesman, was the matter of wages.
I picked up what I could under that head during the afternoon.
A man who hasn't had much experience, and doesn't think, is apt to measure a nation's prosperity or lack of prosperity by the mere size of the prevailing wages; if the wages be high, the nation is prosperous; if low, it isn't.
Which is an error.
It isn't what sum you get, it's how much you can buy with it, that's the important thing; and it's that that tells whether your wages are high in fact or only high in name.
I could remember how it was in the time of our great civil war in the nineteenth century.
In the North a carpenter got three dollars a day, gold valuation; in the South he got fifty--payable in Confederate shinplasters worth a dollar a bushel.
In the North a suit of overalls cost three dollars--a day's wages; in the South it cost seventy-five --which was two days' wages.
Other things were in proportion.
Consequently, wages were twice as high in the North as they were in the South, because the one wage had that much more purchasing power than the other had.
Yes, I made various acquaintances in the hamlet and a thing that gratified me a good deal was to find our new coins in circulation --lots of milrays, lots of mills, lots of cents, a good many nickels, and some silver; all this among the artisans and
I dropped in there while Marco, the son of Marco, was haggling with a shopkeeper over a quarter of a pound of salt, and asked for change for a twenty-dollar gold piece.
They furnished it--that is, after they had chewed the piece, and rung it on the counter, and tried acid on it, and asked me where I got it, and who I was, and where I was from, and where I was going to, and when I expected to get there, and perhaps a
Yes, they changed my twenty, but I judged it strained the bank a little, which was a thing to be expected, for it was the same as walking into a paltry village store in the nineteenth century and requiring the boss of it to change a two thousand-dollar
He could do it, maybe; but at the same time he would wonder how a small farmer happened to be carrying so much money around in his pocket; which was probably this goldsmith's thought, too; for he followed me to the door and stood there gazing after me with
Our new money was not only handsomely circulating, but its language was already glibly in use; that is to say, people had dropped the names of the former moneys, and spoke of things as being worth so many dollars or cents or mills or milrays now.
It was very gratifying.
We were progressing, that was sure.
I got to know several master mechanics, but about the most interesting fellow among them was the blacksmith, Dowley.
He was a live man and a brisk talker, and had two journeymen and three apprentices, and was doing a raging business.
In fact, he was getting rich, hand over fist, and was vastly respected.
Marco was very proud of having such a man for a friend.
He had taken me there ostensibly to let me see the big establishment which bought so much of his charcoal, but really to let me see what easy and almost familiar terms he was on with this great man.
Dowley and I fraternized at once; I had had just such picked men, splendid fellows, under me in the Colt Arms Factory.
I was bound to see more of him, so I invited him to come out to Marco's Sunday, and dine with us.
Marco was appalled, and held his breath; and when the grandee accepted, he was so grateful that he almost forgot to be astonished at the condescension.
Marco's joy was exuberant--but only for a moment; then he grew thoughtful, then sad; and when he heard me tell Dowley I should have Dickon, the boss mason, and Smug, the boss wheelwright, out there, too, the coal-dust on his face turned to chalk, and he
But I knew what was the matter with him; it was the expense.
He saw ruin before him; he judged that his financial days were numbered.
However, on our way to invite the others, I said: "You must allow me to have these friends come; and you must also allow me to pay the costs".
His face cleared, and he said with spirit: "But not all of it, not all of it.
Ye cannot well bear a burden like to this alone".
I stopped him, and said: "Now let's understand each other on the spot, old friend.
I am only a farm bailiff, it is true; but I am not poor, nevertheless.
I have been very fortunate this year--you would be astonished to know how I have thriven.
I tell you the honest truth when I say I could squander away as many as a dozen feasts like this and never care _that_ for the expense"!
and I snapped my fingers.
I could see myself rise a foot at a time in Marco's estimation, and when I fetched out those last words I was become a very tower for style and altitude.
"So you see, you must let me have my way.
You can't contribute a cent to this orgy, that's _settled_".
"It's grand and good of you--" "No, it isn't.
You've opened your house to Jones and me in the most generous way; Jones was remarking upon it to-day, just before you came back from the village; for although he wouldn't be likely to say such a thing to you--because Jones isn't a talker, and is diffident
"But it _is_ something; the best a man has, freely given, is always something, and is as good as a prince can do, and ranks right along beside it--for even a prince can but do his best.
And so we'll shop around and get up this layout now, and don't you worry about the expense.
I'm one of the worst spendthrifts that ever was born.
Why, do you know, sometimes in a single week I spend --but never mind about that--you'd never believe it anyway".
And so we went gadding along, dropping in here and there, pricing things, and gossiping with the shopkeepers about the riot, and now and then running across pathetic reminders of it, in the persons of shunned and tearful and houseless remnants of families
The raiment of Marco and his wife was of coarse tow-linen and linsey-woolsey respectively, and resembled township maps, it being made up pretty exclusively of patches which had been added, township by township, in the course of five or six years, until
Now I wanted to fit these people out with new suits, on account of that swell company, and I didn't know just how to get at it --with delicacy, until at last it struck me that as I had already been liberal in inventing wordy gratitude for the king, it
He was very anxious to testify his appreciation in some way, but he is so diffident he couldn't venture it himself, and so he begged me to buy some little things and give them to you and Dame Phyllis and let him pay for them without your ever knowing they
Well, his idea was, a new outfit of clothes for you both--" "Oh, it is wastefulness!
It may not be, brother, it may not be.
Consider the vastness of the sum--" "Hang the vastness of the sum!
Try to keep quiet for a moment, and see how it would seem; a body can't get in a word edgeways, you talk so much.
You ought to cure that, Marco; it isn't good form, you know, and it will grow on you if you don't check it.
Yes, we'll step in here now and price this man's stuff--and don't forget to remember to not let on to Jones that you know he had anything to do with it.
You can't think how curiously sensitive and proud he is.
He's a farmer--pretty fairly well-to-do farmer --and I'm his bailiff; _but_--the imagination of that man!
Why, sometimes when he forgets himself and gets to blowing off, you'd think he was one of the swells of the earth; and you might listen to him a hundred years and never take him for a farmer--especially if he talked agriculture.
He _thinks_ he's a Sheol of a farmer; thinks he's old Grayback from Wayback; but between you and me privately he don't know as much about farming as he does about running a kingdom--still, whatever he talks about, you want to drop your underjaw and listen,
That will please Jones".
It tickled Marco to the marrow to hear about such an odd character; but it also prepared him for accidents; and in my experience when you travel with a king who is letting on to be something else and can't remember it more than about half the time, you
This was the best store we had come across yet; it had everything in it, in small quantities, from anvils and drygoods all the way down to fish and pinchbeck jewelry.
I concluded I would bunch my whole invoice right here, and not go pricing around any more.
So I got rid of Marco, by sending him off to invite the mason and the wheelwright, which left the field free to me.
For I never care to do a thing in a quiet way; it's got to be theatrical or I don't take any interest in it.
I showed up money enough, in a careless way, to corral the shopkeeper's respect, and then I wrote down a list of the things I wanted, and handed it to him to see if he could read it.
He could, and was proud to show that he could.
He said he had been educated by a priest, and could both read and write.
He ran it through, and remarked with satisfaction that it was a pretty heavy bill.
Well, and so it was, for a little concern like that.
I was not only providing a swell dinner, but some odds and ends of extras.
I ordered that the things be carted out and delivered at the dwelling of Marco, the son of Marco, by Saturday evening, and send me the bill at dinner-time Sunday.
He said I could depend upon his promptness and exactitude, it was the rule of the house.
He also observed that he would throw in a couple of miller-guns for the Marcos gratis--that everybody was using them now.
He had a mighty opinion of that clever device.
I said: "And please fill them up to the middle mark, too; and add that to the bill".
He would, with pleasure.
He filled them, and I took them with me.
I couldn't venture to tell him that the miller-gun was a little invention of my own, and that I had officially ordered that every shopkeeper in the kingdom keep them on hand and sell them at government price--which was the merest trifle, and the shopkeeper
We furnished them for nothing.
The king had hardly missed us when we got back at nightfall.
He had early dropped again into his dream of a grand invasion of Gaul with the whole strength of his kingdom at his back, and the afternoon had slipped away without his ever coming to himself again.
CHAPTER XXXII DOWLEY'S HUMILIATION Well, when that cargo arrived toward sunset, Saturday afternoon, I had my hands full to keep the Marcos from fainting.
They were sure Jones and I were ruined past help, and they blamed themselves as accessories to this bankruptcy.
You see, in addition to the dinner-materials, which called for a sufficiently round sum, I had bought a lot of extras for the future comfort of the family: for instance, a big lot of wheat, a delicacy as rare to the tables of their class as was ice-cream
I instructed the Marcos to keep quiet about this sumptuousness, so as to give me a chance to surprise the guests and show off a little.
Concerning the new clothes, the simple couple were like children; they were up and down, all night, to see if it wasn't nearly daylight, so that they could put them on, and they were into them at last as much as an hour before dawn was due.
Then their pleasure--not to say delirium--was so fresh and novel and inspiring that the sight of it paid me well for the interruptions which my sleep had suffered.
The king had slept just as usual--like the dead.
The Marcos could not thank him for their clothes, that being forbidden; but they tried every way they could think of to make him see how grateful they were.
Which all went for nothing: he didn't notice any change.
It turned out to be one of those rich and rare fall days which is just a June day toned down to a degree where it is heaven to be out of doors.
Toward noon the guests arrived, and we assembled under a great tree and were soon as sociable as old acquaintances.
Even the king's reserve melted a little, though it was some little trouble to him to adjust himself to the name of Jones along at first.
I had asked him to try to not forget that he was a farmer; but I had also considered it prudent to ask him to let the thing stand at that, and not elaborate it any.
Because he was just the kind of person you could depend on to spoil a little thing like that if you didn't warn him, his tongue was so handy, and his spirit so willing, and his information so uncertain.
Dowley was in fine feather, and I early got him started, and then adroitly worked him around onto his own history for a text and himself for a hero, and then it was good to sit there and hear him hum.
Self-made man, you know.
They know how to talk.
They do deserve more credit than any other breed of men, yes, that is true; and they are among the very first to find it out, too.
He told how he had begun life an orphan lad without money and without friends able to help him; how he had lived as the slaves of the meanest master lived; how his day's work was from sixteen to eighteen hours long, and yielded him only enough black bread
That was his first great rise, his first gorgeous stroke of fortune; and you saw that he couldn't yet speak of it without a sort of eloquent wonder and delight that such a gilded promotion should have fallen to the lot of a common human being.
He got no new clothing during his apprenticeship, but on his graduation day his master tricked him out in spang-new tow-linens and made him feel unspeakably rich and fine.
"I remember me of that day"!
the wheelwright sang out, with enthusiasm.
"And I likewise"!
cried the mason.
"I would not believe they were thine own; in faith I could not".
"Nor other"!
shouted Dowley, with sparkling eyes.
"I was like to lose my character, the neighbors wending I had mayhap been stealing.
It was a great day, a great day; one forgetteth not days like that".
Yes, and his master was a fine man, and prosperous, and always had a great feast of meat twice in the year, and with it white bread, true wheaten bread; in fact, lived like a lord, so to speak.
And in time Dowley succeeded to the business and married the daughter.
"And now consider what is come to pass," said he, impressively.
"Two times in every month there is fresh meat upon my table".
He made a pause here, to let that fact sink home, then added --"and eight times salt meat".
"It is even true," said the wheelwright, with bated breath.
"I know it of mine own knowledge," said the mason, in the same reverent fashion.
"On my table appeareth white bread every Sunday in the year," added the master smith, with solemnity.
"I leave it to your own consciences, friends, if this is not also true"?
"By my head, yes," cried the mason.
"I can testify it--and I do," said the wheelwright.
"And as to furniture, ye shall say yourselves what mine equipment is".
He waved his hand in fine gesture of granting frank and unhampered freedom of speech, and added: "Speak as ye are moved; speak as ye would speak; an I were not here".
"Ye have five stools, and of the sweetest workmanship at that, albeit your family is but three," said the wheelwright, with deep respect.
"And six wooden goblets, and six platters of wood and two of pewter to eat and drink from withal," said the mason, impressively.
"And I say it as knowing God is my judge, and we tarry not here alway, but must answer at the last day for the things said in the body, be they false or be they sooth".
"Now ye know what manner of man I am, brother Jones," said the smith, with a fine and friendly condescension, "and doubtless ye would look to find me a man jealous of his due of respect and but sparing of outgo to strangers till their rating and quality be
And in token of it, here is my hand; and I say with my own mouth we are equals--equals"--and he smiled around on the company with the satisfaction of a god who is doing the handsome and gracious thing and is quite well aware of it.
The king took the hand with a poorly disguised reluctance, and let go of it as willingly as a lady lets go of a fish; all of which had a good effect, for it was mistaken for an embarrassment natural to one who was being called upon by greatness.
The dame brought out the table now, and set it under the tree.
It caused a visible stir of surprise, it being brand new and a sumptuous article of deal.
But the surprise rose higher still when the dame, with a body oozing easy indifference at every pore, but eyes that gave it all away by absolutely flaming with vanity, slowly unfolded an actual simon-pure tablecloth and spread it.
That was a notch above even the blacksmith's domestic grandeurs, and it hit him hard; you could see it.
But Marco was in Paradise; you could see that, too.
Then the dame brought two fine new stools--whew!
that was a sensation; it was visible in the eyes of every guest.
Then she brought two more--as calmly as she could.
Sensation again--with awed murmurs.
Again she brought two --walking on air, she was so proud.
The guests were petrified, and the mason muttered: "There is that about earthly pomps which doth ever move to reverence".
As the dame turned away, Marco couldn't help slapping on the climax while the thing was hot; so he said with what was meant for a languid composure but was a poor imitation of it: "These suffice; leave the rest".
So there were more yet!
It was a fine effect.
I couldn't have played the hand better myself.
From this out, the madam piled up the surprises with a rush that fired the general astonishment up to a hundred and fifty in the shade, and at the same time paralyzed expression of it down to gasped "Oh's" and "Ah's," and mute upliftings of hands and eyes.
She fetched crockery--new, and plenty of it; new wooden goblets and other table furniture; and beer, fish, chicken, a goose, eggs, roast beef, roast mutton, a ham, a small roast pig, and a wealth of genuine white wheaten bread.
Take it by and large, that spread laid everything far and away in the shade that ever that crowd had seen before.
And while they sat there just simply stupefied with wonder and awe, I sort of waved my hand as if by accident, and the storekeeper's son emerged from space and said he had come to collect.
"That's all right," I said, indifferently.
"What is the amount?
give us the items".
Then he read off this bill, while those three amazed men listened, and serene waves of satisfaction rolled over my soul and alternate waves of terror and admiration surged over Marco's: 2 pounds salt .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
200 8 dozen pints beer, in the wood .
.
.
.
.
800 3 bushels wheat .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2,700 2 pounds fish .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
100 3 hens .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
400 1 goose .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
400 3 dozen eggs .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
150 1 roast of beef .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
450 1 roast of mutton .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
400 1 ham .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
800 1 sucking pig .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
500 2 crockery dinner sets .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
6,000 2 men's suits and underwear .
.
.
.
.
.
.
2,800 1 stuff and 1 linsey-woolsey gown and underwear .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1,600 8 wooden goblets .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
800 Various table furniture .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
10,000 1 deal table .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
3,000 8 stools .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
4,000 2 miller guns, loaded .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
3,000 He ceased.
There was a pale and awful silence.
Not a limb stirred.
Not a nostril betrayed the passage of breath.
"Is that all"?
I asked, in a voice of the most perfect calmness.
"All, fair sir, save that certain matters of light moment are placed together under a head hight sundries.
If it would like you, I will sepa--" "It is of no consequence," I said, accompanying the words with a gesture of the most utter indifference; "give me the grand total, please".
The clerk leaned against the tree to stay himself, and said: "Thirty-nine thousand one hundred and fifty milrays"!
The wheelwright fell off his stool, the others grabbed the table to save themselves, and there was a deep and general ejaculation of: "God be with us in the day of disaster"!
The clerk hastened to say: "My father chargeth me to say he cannot honorably require you to pay it all at this time, and therefore only prayeth you--" I paid no more heed than if it were the idle breeze, but, with an air of indifference amounting almost to
Ah, you should have seen them stare!
The clerk was astonished and charmed.
He asked me to retain one of the dollars as security, until he could go to town and --I interrupted: "What, and fetch back nine cents?
Nonsense!
Take the whole.
Keep the change".
There was an amazed murmur to this effect: "Verily this being is _made_ of money!
He throweth it away even as if it were dirt".
The blacksmith was a crushed man.
The clerk took his money and reeled away drunk with fortune.
I said to Marco and his wife: "Good folk, here is a little trifle for you"--handing the miller-guns as if it were a matter of no consequence, though each of them contained fifteen cents in solid cash; and while the poor creatures went to pieces with
Come, fall to".
Ah, well, it was immense; yes, it was a daisy.
I don't know that I ever put a situation together better, or got happier spectacular effects out of the materials available.
The blacksmith--well, he was simply mashed.
Land!
I wouldn't have felt what that man was feeling, for anything in the world.
Here he had been blowing and bragging about his grand meat-feast twice a year, and his fresh meat twice a month, and his salt meat twice a week, and his white bread every Sunday the year round--all for a family of three; the entire cost for the year not
2.
6 (sixty-nine cents, two mills and six milrays), and all of a sudden here comes along a man who slashes out nearly four dollars on a single blow-out; and not only that, but acts as if it made him tired to handle such small sums.
Yes, Dowley was a good deal wilted, and shrunk-up and collapsed; he had the aspect of a bladder-balloon that's been stepped on by a cow.
CHAPTER XXXIII SIXTH CENTURY POLITICAL ECONOMY However, I made a dead set at him, and before the first third of the dinner was reached, I had him happy again.
It was easy to do--in a country of ranks and castes.
You see, in a country where they have ranks and castes, a man isn't ever a man, he is only part of a man, he can't ever get his full growth.
You prove your superiority over him in station, or rank, or fortune, and that's the end of it--he knuckles down.
You can't insult him after that.
No, I don't mean quite that; of course you _can_ insult him, I only mean it's difficult; and so, unless you've got a lot of useless time on your hands it doesn't pay to try.
I had the smith's reverence now, because I was apparently immensely prosperous and rich; I could have had his adoration if I had had some little gimcrack title of nobility.
And not only his, but any commoner's in the land, though he were the mightiest production of all the ages, in intellect, worth, and character, and I bankrupt in all three.
This was to remain so, as long as England should exist in the earth.
With the spirit of prophecy upon me, I could look into the future and see her erect statues and monuments to her unspeakable Georges and other royal and noble clothes-horses, and leave unhonored the creators of this world--after God--Gutenburg, Watt,
The king got his cargo aboard, and then, the talk not turning upon battle, conquest, or iron-clad duel, he dulled down to drowsiness and went off to take a nap.
Mrs. Marco cleared the table, placed the beer keg handy, and went away to eat her dinner of leavings in humble privacy, and the rest of us soon drifted into matters near and dear to the hearts of our sort--business and wages, of course.
At a first glance, things appeared to be exceeding prosperous in this little tributary kingdom--whose lord was King Bagdemagus--as compared with the state of things in my own region.
They had the "protection" system in full force here, whereas we were working along down toward free-trade, by easy stages, and were now about half way.
Before long, Dowley and I were doing all the talking, the others hungrily listening.
Dowley warmed to his work, snuffed an advantage in the air, and began to put questions which he considered pretty awkward ones for me, and they did have something of that look: "In your country, brother, what is the wage of a master bailiff, master hind,
"Twenty-five milrays a day; that is to say, a quarter of a cent".
The smith's face beamed with joy.
He said: "With us they are allowed the double of it!
And what may a mechanic get--carpenter, dauber, mason, painter, blacksmith, wheelwright, and the like"?
"On the average, fifty milrays; half a cent a day".
"Ho-ho!
With us they are allowed a hundred!
With us any good mechanic is allowed a cent a day!
I count out the tailor, but not the others--they are all allowed a cent a day, and in driving times they get more--yes, up to a hundred and ten and even fifteen milrays a day.
I've paid a hundred and fifteen myself, within the week.
'Rah for protection--to Sheol with free-trade"!
And his face shone upon the company like a sunburst.
But I didn't scare at all.
I rigged up my pile-driver, and allowed myself fifteen minutes to drive him into the earth--drive him _all_ in --drive him in till not even the curve of his skull should show above ground.
Here is the way I started in on him.
I asked: "What do you pay a pound for salt"?
"A hundred milrays".
"We pay forty.
What do you pay for beef and mutton--when you buy it"?
That was a neat hit; it made the color come.
"It varieth somewhat, but not much; one may say seventy-five milrays the pound".
"_We_ pay thirty-three.
What do you pay for eggs"?
"Fifty milrays the dozen".
"We pay twenty.
What do you pay for beer"?
"It costeth us eight and one-half milrays the pint".
"We get it for four; twenty-five bottles for a cent.
What do you pay for wheat"?
"At the rate of nine hundred milrays the bushel".
"We pay four hundred.
What do you pay for a man's tow-linen suit"?
"Thirteen cents".
"We pay six.
What do you pay for a stuff gown for the wife of the laborer or the mechanic"?
"We pay eight cents, four mills".
"Well, observe the difference: you pay eight cents and four mills, we pay only four cents".
I prepared now to sock it to him.
I said: "Look here, dear friend, _what's become of your high wages you were bragging so about a few minutes ago?
_"--and I looked around on the company with placid satisfaction, for I had slipped up on him gradually and tied him hand and foot, you see, without his ever noticing that he was being tied at all.
"What's become of those noble high wages of yours?
--I seem to have knocked the stuffing all out of them, it appears to me".
But if you will believe me, he merely looked surprised, that is all!
he didn't grasp the situation at all, didn't know he had walked into a trap, didn't discover that he was _in_ a trap.
I could have shot him, from sheer vexation.
With cloudy eye and a struggling intellect he fetched this out: "Marry, I seem not to understand.
It is _proved_ that our wages be double thine; how then may it be that thou'st knocked therefrom the stuffing?
--an miscall not the wonderly word, this being the first time under grace and providence of God it hath been granted me to hear it".
Well, I was stunned; partly with this unlooked-for stupidity on his part, and partly because his fellows so manifestly sided with him and were of his mind--if you might call it mind.
My position was simple enough, plain enough; how could it ever be simplified more?
However, I must try: "Why, look here, brother Dowley, don't you see?
Your wages are merely higher than ours in _name_, not in _fact_".
"Hear him!
They are the _double_--ye have confessed it yourself".
"Yes-yes, I don't deny that at all.
But that's got nothing to do with it; the _amount_ of the wages in mere coins, with meaningless names attached to them to know them by, has got nothing to do with it.
The thing is, how much can you _buy_ with your wages?
--that's the idea.
While it is true that with you a good mechanic is allowed about three dollars and a half a year, and with us only about a dollar and seventy-five--" "There--ye're confessing it again, ye're confessing it again"!
"Confound it, I've never denied it, I tell you!
What I say is this.
With us _half_ a dollar buys more than a _dollar_ buys with you--and THEREFORE it stands to reason and the commonest kind of common-sense, that our wages are _higher_ than yours".
He looked dazed, and said, despairingly: "Verily, I cannot make it out.
Ye've just said ours are the higher, and with the same breath ye take it back".
"Oh, great Scott, isn't it possible to get such a simple thing through your head?
Now look here--let me illustrate.
We pay four cents for a woman's stuff gown, you pay 8.
4.
0, which is four mills more than _double_.
What do you allow a laboring woman who works on a farm"?
"Two mills a day".
"Very good; we allow but half as much; we pay her only a tenth of a cent a day; and--" "Again ye're conf--" "Wait!
Now, you see, the thing is very simple; this time you'll understand it.
For instance, it takes your woman 42 days to earn her gown, at 2 mills a day--7 weeks' work; but ours earns hers in forty days--two days _short_ of 7 weeks.
Your woman has a gown, and her whole seven weeks wages are gone; ours has a gown, and two days' wages left, to buy something else with.
There--_now_ you understand it"!
He looked--well, he merely looked dubious, it's the most I can say; so did the others.
I waited--to let the thing work.
Dowley spoke at last--and betrayed the fact that he actually hadn't gotten away from his rooted and grounded superstitions yet.
He said, with a trifle of hesitancy: "But--but--ye cannot fail to grant that two mills a day is better than one".
Shucks!
Well, of course, I hated to give it up.
So I chanced another flyer: "Let us suppose a case.
Suppose one of your journeymen goes out and buys the following articles: "1 pound of salt; 1 dozen eggs; 1 dozen pints of beer; 1 bushel of wheat; 1 tow-linen suit; 5 pounds of beef; 5 pounds of mutton.
"The lot will cost him 32 cents.
It takes him 32 working days to earn the money--5 weeks and 2 days.
Let him come to us and work 32 days at _half_ the wages; he can buy all those things for a shade under 14 1/2 cents; they will cost him a shade under 29 days' work, and he will have about half a week's wages over.
Carry it through the year; he would save nearly a week's wages every two months, _your_ man nothing; thus saving five or six weeks' wages in a year, your man not a cent.
_Now_ I reckon you understand that 'high wages' and 'low wages' are phrases that don't mean anything in the world until you find out which of them will _buy_ the most"!
It was a crusher.
But, alas!
it didn't crush.
No, I had to give it up.
What those people valued was _high wages_; it didn't seem to be a matter of any consequence to them whether the high wages would buy anything or not.
They stood for "protection," and swore by it, which was reasonable enough, because interested parties had gulled them into the notion that it was protection which had created their high wages.
I proved to them that in a quarter of a century their wages had advanced but 30 per cent.
, while the cost of living had gone up 100; and that with us, in a shorter time, wages had advanced 40 per cent.
while the cost of living had gone steadily down.
But it didn't do any good.
Nothing could unseat their strange beliefs.
Well, I was smarting under a sense of defeat.
Undeserved defeat, but what of that?
That didn't soften the smart any.
And to think of the circumstances!
the first statesman of the age, the capablest man, the best-informed man in the entire world, the loftiest uncrowned head that had moved through the clouds of any political firmament for centuries, sitting here apparently defeated in argument by an
And I could see that those others were sorry for me--which made me blush till I could smell my whiskers scorching.
Put yourself in my place; feel as mean as I did, as ashamed as I felt--wouldn't _you_ have struck below the belt to get even?
Yes, you would; it is simply human nature.
Well, that is what I did.
I am not trying to justify it; I'm only saying that I was mad, and _anybody_ would have done it.
Well, when I make up my mind to hit a man, I don't plan out a love-tap; no, that isn't my way; as long as I'm going to hit him at all, I'm going to hit him a lifter.
And I don't jump at him all of a sudden, and risk making a blundering half-way business of it; no, I get away off yonder to one side, and work up on him gradually, so that he never suspects that I'm going to hit him at all; and by and by, all in a flash,
That is the way I went for brother Dowley.
I started to talking lazy and comfortable, as if I was just talking to pass the time; and the oldest man in the world couldn't have taken the bearings of my starting place and guessed where I was going to fetch up: "Boys, there's a good many curious things
There are written laws--they perish; but there are also unwritten laws--_they_ are eternal.
Take the unwritten law of wages: it says they've got to advance, little by little, straight through the centuries.
And notice how it works.
We know what wages are now, here and there and yonder; we strike an average, and say that's the wages of to-day.
We know what the wages were a hundred years ago, and what they were two hundred years ago; that's as far back as we can get, but it suffices to give us the law of progress, the measure and rate of the periodical augmentation; and so, without a document to
Good, so far.
Do we stop there?
No.
We stop looking backward; we face around and apply the law to the future.
My friends, I can tell you what people's wages are going to be at any date in the future you want to know, for hundreds and hundreds of years".
"What, goodman, what"!
"Yes.
In seven hundred years wages will have risen to six times what they are now, here in your region, and farm hands will be allowed 3 cents a day, and mechanics 6".
"I would't I might die now and live then"!
interrupted Smug, the wheelwright, with a fine avaricious glow in his eye.
"And that isn't all; they'll get their board besides--such as it is: it won't bloat them.
Two hundred and fifty years later--pay attention now--a mechanic's wages will be--mind you, this is law, not guesswork; a mechanic's wages will then be _twenty_ cents a day"!
There was a general gasp of awed astonishment, Dickon the mason murmured, with raised eyes and hands: "More than three weeks' pay for one day's work"!
"Riches!
--of a truth, yes, riches"!
muttered Marco, his breath coming quick and short, with excitement.
"Wages will keep on rising, little by little, little by little, as steadily as a tree grows, and at the end of three hundred and forty years more there'll be at least _one_ country where the mechanic's average wage will be _two hundred_ cents a day"!
It knocked them absolutely dumb!
Not a man of them could get his breath for upwards of two minutes.
Then the coal-burner said prayerfully: "Might I but live to see it"!
"It is the income of an earl"!
said Smug.
"An earl, say ye"?
said Dowley; "ye could say more than that and speak no lie; there's no earl in the realm of Bagdemagus that hath an income like to that.
Income of an earl--mf!
it's the income of an angel"!
"Now, then, that is what is going to happen as regards wages.
In that remote day, that man will earn, with _one_ week's work, that bill of goods which it takes you upwards of _fifty_ weeks to earn now.
Some other pretty surprising things are going to happen, too.
Brother Dowley, who is it that determines, every spring, what the particular wage of each kind of mechanic, laborer, and servant shall be for that year"?
"Sometimes the courts, sometimes the town council; but most of all, the magistrate.
Ye may say, in general terms, it is the magistrate that fixes the wages".
"Doesn't ask any of those poor devils to _help_ him fix their wages for them, does he"?
"Hm!
That _were_ an idea!
The master that's to pay him the money is the one that's rightly concerned in that matter, ye will notice".
"Yes--but I thought the other man might have some little trifle at stake in it, too; and even his wife and children, poor creatures.
The masters are these: nobles, rich men, the prosperous generally.
These few, who do no work, determine what pay the vast hive shall have who _do_ work.
You see?
They're a 'combine'--a trade union, to coin a new phrase--who band themselves together to force their lowly brother to take what they choose to give.
Thirteen hundred years hence--so says the unwritten law--the 'combine' will be the other way, and then how these fine people's posterity will fume and fret and grit their teeth over the insolent tyranny of trade unions!
Yes, indeed!
the magistrate will tranquilly arrange the wages from now clear away down into the nineteenth century; and then all of a sudden the wage-earner will consider that a couple of thousand years or so is enough of this one-sided sort of thing; and he will rise
Ah, he will have a long and bitter account of wrong and humiliation to settle".
"Do ye believe--" "That he actually will help to fix his own wages?
Yes, indeed.
And he will be strong and able, then".
"Brave times, brave times, of a truth"!
sneered the prosperous smith.
"Oh,--and there's another detail.
In that day, a master may hire a man for only just one day, or one week, or one month at a time, if he wants to".
"What"?
"It's true.
Moreover, a magistrate won't be able to force a man to work for a master a whole year on a stretch whether the man wants to or not".
"Will there be _no_ law or sense in that day"?
"Both of them, Dowley.
In that day a man will be his own property, not the property of magistrate and master.
And he can leave town whenever he wants to, if the wages don't suit him!
--and they can't put him in the pillory for it".
"Perdition catch such an age"!
shouted Dowley, in strong indignation.
"An age of dogs, an age barren of reverence for superiors and respect for authority!
The pillory--" "Oh, wait, brother; say no good word for that institution.
I think the pillory ought to be abolished".
"A most strange idea.
Why"?
"Well, I'll tell you why.
Is a man ever put in the pillory for a capital crime"?
"No".
"Is it right to condemn a man to a slight punishment for a small offense and then kill him"?
There was no answer.
I had scored my first point!
For the first time, the smith wasn't up and ready.
The company noticed it.
Good effect.
"You don't answer, brother.
You were about to glorify the pillory a while ago, and shed some pity on a future age that isn't going to use it.
I think the pillory ought to be abolished.
What usually happens when a poor fellow is put in the pillory for some little offense that didn't amount to anything in the world?
The mob try to have some fun with him, don't they"?
"Yes".
"They begin by clodding him; and they laugh themselves to pieces to see him try to dodge one clod and get hit with another"?
"Yes".
"Then they throw dead cats at him, don't they"?
"Yes".
"Well, then, suppose he has a few personal enemies in that mob and here and there a man or a woman with a secret grudge against him--and suppose especially that he is unpopular in the community, for his pride, or his prosperity, or one thing or
"There is no doubt of it".
"As a rule he is crippled for life, isn't he?
--jaws broken, teeth smashed out?
--or legs mutilated, gangrened, presently cut off?
--or an eye knocked out, maybe both eyes"?
"It is true, God knoweth it".
"And if he is unpopular he can depend on _dying_, right there in the stocks, can't he"?
"He surely can!
One may not deny it".
"I take it none of _you_ are unpopular--by reason of pride or insolence, or conspicuous prosperity, or any of those things that excite envy and malice among the base scum of a village?
_You_ wouldn't think it much of a risk to take a chance in the stocks"?
Dowley winced, visibly.
I judged he was hit.
But he didn't betray it by any spoken word.
As for the others, they spoke out plainly, and with strong feeling.
They said they had seen enough of the stocks to know what a man's chance in them was, and they would never consent to enter them if they could compromise on a quick death by hanging.
"Well, to change the subject--for I think I've established my point that the stocks ought to be abolished.
I think some of our laws are pretty unfair.
For instance, if I do a thing which ought to deliver me to the stocks, and you know I did it and yet keep still and don't report me, _you_ will get the stocks if anybody informs on you".
"Ah, but that would serve you but right," said Dowley, "for you _must_ inform.
So saith the law".
The others coincided.
"Well, all right, let it go, since you vote me down.
But there's one thing which certainly isn't fair.
The magistrate fixes a mechanic's wage at one cent a day, for instance.
The law says that if any master shall venture, even under utmost press of business, to pay anything _over_ that cent a day, even for a single day, he shall be both fined and pilloried for it; and whoever knows he did it and doesn't inform, they also shall
Now it seems to me unfair, Dowley, and a deadly peril to all of us, that because you thoughtlessly confessed, a while ago, that within a week you have paid a cent and fifteen mil--" Oh, I tell _you_ it was a smasher!
You ought to have seen them to go to pieces, the whole gang.
I had just slipped up on poor smiling and complacent Dowley so nice and easy and softly, that he never suspected anything was going to happen till the blow came crashing down and knocked him all to rags.
A fine effect.
In fact, as fine as any I ever produced, with so little time to work it up in.
But I saw in a moment that I had overdone the thing a little.
I was expecting to scare them, but I wasn't expecting to scare them to death.
They were mighty near it, though.
You see they had been a whole lifetime learning to appreciate the pillory; and to have that thing staring them in the face, and every one of them distinctly at the mercy of me, a stranger, if I chose to go and report--well, it was awful, and they couldn't
Pale, shaky, dumb, pitiful?
Why, they weren't any better than so many dead men.
It was very uncomfortable.
Of course, I thought they would appeal to me to keep mum, and then we would shake hands, and take a drink all round, and laugh it off, and there an end.
But no; you see I was an unknown person, among a cruelly oppressed and suspicious people, a people always accustomed to having advantage taken of their helplessness, and never expecting just or kind treatment from any but their own families and very
Appeal to _me_ to be gentle, to be fair, to be generous?
Of course, they wanted to, but they couldn't dare.
CHAPTER XXXIV THE YANKEE AND THE KING SOLD AS SLAVES Well, what had I better do?
Nothing in a hurry, sure.
I must get up a diversion; anything to employ me while I could think, and while these poor fellows could have a chance to come to life again.
There sat Marco, petrified in the act of trying to get the hang of his miller-gun--turned to stone, just in the attitude he was in when my pile-driver fell, the toy still gripped in his unconscious fingers.
So I took it from him and proposed to explain its mystery.
Mystery!
a simple little thing like that; and yet it was mysterious enough, for that race and that age.
I never saw such an awkward people, with machinery; you see, they were totally unused to it.
The miller-gun was a little double-barreled tube of toughened glass, with a neat little trick of a spring to it, which upon pressure would let a shot escape.
But the shot wouldn't hurt anybody, it would only drop into your hand.
In the gun were two sizes--wee mustard-seed shot, and another sort that were several times larger.
They were money.
The mustard-seed shot represented milrays, the larger ones mills.
So the gun was a purse; and very handy, too; you could pay out money in the dark with it, with accuracy; and you could carry it in your mouth; or in your vest pocket, if you had one.
I made them of several sizes --one size so large that it would carry the equivalent of a dollar.
Using shot for money was a good thing for the government; the metal cost nothing, and the money couldn't be counterfeited, for I was the only person in the kingdom who knew how to manage a shot tower.
"Paying the shot" soon came to be a common phrase.
Yes, and I knew it would still be passing men's lips, away down in the nineteenth century, yet none would suspect how and when it originated.
The king joined us, about this time, mightily refreshed by his nap, and feeling good.
Anything could make me nervous now, I was so uneasy--for our lives were in danger; and so it worried me to detect a complacent something in the king's eye which seemed to indicate that he had been loading himself up for a performance of some kind or other;
I was right.
He began, straight off, in the most innocently artful, and transparent, and lubberly way, to lead up to the subject of agriculture.
The cold sweat broke out all over me.
I wanted to whisper in his ear, "Man, we are in awful danger!
every moment is worth a principality till we get back these men's confidence; _don't_ waste any of this golden time".
But of course I couldn't do it.
Whisper to him?
It would look as if we were conspiring.
So I had to sit there and look calm and pleasant while the king stood over that dynamite mine and mooned along about his damned onions and things.
At first the tumult of my own thoughts, summoned by the danger-signal and swarming to the rescue from every quarter of my skull, kept up such a hurrah and confusion and fifing and drumming that I couldn't take in a word; but presently when my mob of
"--whileas others do yet maintain, with much show of reason, that this is not of necessity the case, instancing that plums and other like cereals do be always dug in the unripe state--" The audience exhibited distinct distress; yes, and also fear.
"--yet are they clearly wholesome, the more especially when one doth assuage the asperities of their nature by admixture of the tranquilizing juice of the wayward cabbage--" The wild light of terror began to glow in these men's eyes, and one of them
I was in miserable apprehension; I sat upon thorns.
"--and further instancing the known truth that in the case of animals, the young, which may be called the green fruit of the creature, is the better, all confessing that when a goat is ripe, his fur doth heat and sore engame his flesh, the which defect,
With a fierce shout, "The one would betray us, the other is mad!
Kill them!
Kill them"!
they flung themselves upon us.
What joy flamed up in the king's eye!
He might be lame in agriculture, but this kind of thing was just in his line.
He had been fasting long, he was hungry for a fight.
He hit the blacksmith a crack under the jaw that lifted him clear off his feet and stretched him flat on his back.
"St. George for Britain"!
and he downed the wheelwright.
The mason was big, but I laid him out like nothing.
The three gathered themselves up and came again; went down again; came again; and kept on repeating this, with native British pluck, until they were battered to jelly, reeling with exhaustion, and so blind that they couldn't tell us from each other; and
Hammering each other--for we stepped aside and looked on while they rolled, and struggled, and gouged, and pounded, and bit, with the strict and wordless attention to business of so many bulldogs.
We looked on without apprehension, for they were fast getting past ability to go for help against us, and the arena was far enough from the public road to be safe from intrusion.
Well, while they were gradually playing out, it suddenly occurred to me to wonder what had become of Marco.
I looked around; he was nowhere to be seen.
Oh, but this was ominous!
I pulled the king's sleeve, and we glided away and rushed for the hut.
No Marco there, no Phyllis there!
They had gone to the road for help, sure.
I told the king to give his heels wings, and I would explain later.
We made good time across the open ground, and as we darted into the shelter of the wood I glanced back and saw a mob of excited peasants swarm into view, with Marco and his wife at their head.
They were making a world of noise, but that couldn't hurt anybody; the wood was dense, and as soon as we were well into its depths we would take to a tree and let them whistle.
Ah, but then came another sound--dogs!
Yes, that was quite another matter.
It magnified our contract--we must find running water.
We tore along at a good gait, and soon left the sounds far behind and modified to a murmur.
We struck a stream and darted into it.
We waded swiftly down it, in the dim forest light, for as much as three hundred yards, and then came across an oak with a great bough sticking out over the water.
We climbed up on this bough, and began to work our way along it to the body of the tree; now we began to hear those sounds more plainly; so the mob had struck our trail.
For a while the sounds approached pretty fast.
And then for another while they didn't.
No doubt the dogs had found the place where we had entered the stream, and were now waltzing up and down the shores trying to pick up the trail again.
When we were snugly lodged in the tree and curtained with foliage, the king was satisfied, but I was doubtful.
I believed we could crawl along a branch and get into the next tree, and I judged it worth while to try.
We tried it, and made a success of it, though the king slipped, at the junction, and came near failing to connect.
We got comfortable lodgment and satisfactory concealment among the foliage, and then we had nothing to do but listen to the hunt.
Presently we heard it coming--and coming on the jump, too; yes, and down both sides of the stream.
Louder--louder--next minute it swelled swiftly up into a roar of shoutings, barkings, tramplings, and swept by like a cyclone.
"I was afraid that the overhanging branch would suggest something to them," said I, "but I don't mind the disappointment.
Come, my liege, it were well that we make good use of our time.
We've flanked them.
Dark is coming on, presently.
If we can cross the stream and get a good start, and borrow a couple of horses from somebody's pasture to use for a few hours, we shall be safe enough".
We started down, and got nearly to the lowest limb, when we seemed to hear the hunt returning.
We stopped to listen.
"Yes," said I, "they're baffled, they've given it up, they're on their way home.
We will climb back to our roost again, and let them go by".
So we climbed back.
The king listened a moment and said: "They still search--I wit the sign.
We did best to abide".
He was right.
He knew more about hunting than I did.
The noise approached steadily, but not with a rush.
The king said: "They reason that we were advantaged by no parlous start of them, and being on foot are as yet no mighty way from where we took the water".
"Yes, sire, that is about it, I am afraid, though I was hoping better things".
The noise drew nearer and nearer, and soon the van was drifting under us, on both sides of the water.
A voice called a halt from the other bank, and said: "An they were so minded, they could get to yon tree by this branch that overhangs, and yet not touch ground.
Ye will do well to send a man up it".
"Marry, that we will do"!
I was obliged to admire my cuteness in foreseeing this very thing and swapping trees to beat it.
But, don't you know, there are some things that can beat smartness and foresight?
Awkwardness and stupidity can.
The best swordsman in the world doesn't need to fear the second best swordsman in the world; no, the person for him to be afraid of is some ignorant antagonist who has never had a sword in his hand before; he doesn't do the thing he ought to do, and so the
Well, how could I, with all my gifts, make any valuable preparation against a near-sighted, cross-eyed, pudding-headed clown who would aim himself at the wrong tree and hit the right one?
And that is what he did.
He went for the wrong tree, which was, of course, the right one by mistake, and up he started.
Matters were serious now.
We remained still, and awaited developments.
The peasant toiled his difficult way up.
The king raised himself up and stood; he made a leg ready, and when the comer's head arrived in reach of it there was a dull thud, and down went the man floundering to the ground.
There was a wild outbreak of anger below, and the mob swarmed in from all around, and there we were treed, and prisoners.
Another man started up; the bridging bough was detected, and a volunteer started up the tree that furnished the bridge.
The king ordered me to play Horatius and keep the bridge.
For a while the enemy came thick and fast; but no matter, the head man of each procession always got a buffet that dislodged him as soon as he came in reach.
The king's spirits rose, his joy was limitless.
He said that if nothing occurred to mar the prospect we should have a beautiful night, for on this line of tactics we could hold the tree against the whole country-side.
However, the mob soon came to that conclusion themselves; wherefore they called off the assault and began to debate other plans.
They had no weapons, but there were plenty of stones, and stones might answer.
We had no objections.
A stone might possibly penetrate to us once in a while, but it wasn't very likely; we were well protected by boughs and foliage, and were not visible from any good aiming point.
If they would but waste half an hour in stone-throwing, the dark would come to our help.
We were feeling very well satisfied.
We could smile; almost laugh.
But we didn't; which was just as well, for we should have been interrupted.
Before the stones had been raging through the leaves and bouncing from the boughs fifteen minutes, we began to notice a smell.
A couple of sniffs of it was enough of an explanation --it was smoke!
Our game was up at last.
We recognized that.
When smoke invites you, you have to come.
They raised their pile of dry brush and damp weeds higher and higher, and when they saw the thick cloud begin to roll up and smother the tree, they broke out in a storm of joy-clamors.
I got enough breath to say: "Proceed, my liege; after you is manners".
The king gasped: "Follow me down, and then back thyself against one side of the trunk, and leave me the other.
Then will we fight.
Let each pile his dead according to his own fashion and taste".
Then he descended, barking and coughing, and I followed.
I struck the ground an instant after him; we sprang to our appointed places, and began to give and take with all our might.
The powwow and racket were prodigious; it was a tempest of riot and confusion and thick-falling blows.
Suddenly some horsemen tore into the midst of the crowd, and a voice shouted: "Hold--or ye are dead men"!
How good it sounded!
The owner of the voice bore all the marks of a gentleman: picturesque and costly raiment, the aspect of command, a hard countenance, with complexion and features marred by dissipation.
The mob fell humbly back, like so many spaniels.
The gentleman inspected us critically, then said sharply to the peasants: "What are ye doing to these people"?
"They be madmen, worshipful sir, that have come wandering we know not whence, and--" "Ye know not whence?
Do ye pretend ye know them not"?
"Most honored sir, we speak but the truth.
They are strangers and unknown to any in this region; and they be the most violent and bloodthirsty madmen that ever--" "Peace!
Ye know not what ye say.
They are not mad.
Who are ye?
And whence are ye?
Explain".
"We are but peaceful strangers, sir," I said, "and traveling upon our own concerns.
We are from a far country, and unacquainted here.
We have purposed no harm; and yet but for your brave interference and protection these people would have killed us.
As you have divined, sir, we are not mad; neither are we violent or bloodthirsty".
The gentleman turned to his retinue and said calmly: "Lash me these animals to their kennels"!
The mob vanished in an instant; and after them plunged the horsemen, laying about them with their whips and pitilessly riding down such as were witless enough to keep the road instead of taking to the bush.
The shrieks and supplications presently died away in the distance, and soon the horsemen began to straggle back.
Meantime the gentleman had been questioning us more closely, but had dug no particulars out of us.
We were lavish of recognition of the service he was doing us, but we revealed nothing more than that we were friendless strangers from a far country.
When the escort were all returned, the gentleman said to one of his servants: "Bring the led-horses and mount these people".
"Yes, my lord".
We were placed toward the rear, among the servants.
We traveled pretty fast, and finally drew rein some time after dark at a roadside inn some ten or twelve miles from the scene of our troubles.
My lord went immediately to his room, after ordering his supper, and we saw no more of him.
At dawn in the morning we breakfasted and made ready to start.
My lord's chief attendant sauntered forward at that moment with indolent grace, and said: "Ye have said ye should continue upon this road, which is our direction likewise; wherefore my lord, the earl Grip, hath given commandment that ye retain the horses
We could do nothing less than express our thanks and accept the offer.
We jogged along, six in the party, at a moderate and comfortable gait, and in conversation learned that my lord Grip was a very great personage in his own region, which lay a day's journey beyond Cambenet.
We loitered to such a degree that it was near the middle of the forenoon when we entered the market square of the town.
We dismounted, and left our thanks once more for my lord, and then approached a crowd assembled in the center of the square, to see what might be the object of interest.
It was the remnant of that old peregrinating band of slaves!
So they had been dragging their chains about, all this weary time.
That poor husband was gone, and also many others; and some few purchases had been added to the gang.
The king was not interested, and wanted to move along, but I was absorbed, and full of pity.
I could not take my eyes away from these worn and wasted wrecks of humanity.
There they sat, grounded upon the ground, silent, uncomplaining, with bowed heads, a pathetic sight.
And by hideous contrast, a redundant orator was making a speech to another gathering not thirty steps away, in fulsome laudation of "our glorious British liberties"!
I was boiling.
I had forgotten I was a plebeian, I was remembering I was a man.
Cost what it might, I would mount that rostrum and-- Click!
the king and I were handcuffed together!
Our companions, those servants, had done it; my lord Grip stood looking on.
The king burst out in a fury, and said: "What meaneth this ill-mannered jest"?
My lord merely said to his head miscreant, coolly: "Put up the slaves and sell them"!
_Slaves!
_ The word had a new sound--and how unspeakably awful!
The king lifted his manacles and brought them down with a deadly force; but my lord was out of the way when they arrived.
A dozen of the rascal's servants sprang forward, and in a moment we were helpless, with our hands bound behind us.
We so loudly and so earnestly proclaimed ourselves freemen, that we got the interested attention of that liberty-mouthing orator and his patriotic crowd, and they gathered about us and assumed a very determined attitude.
The orator said: "If, indeed, ye are freemen, ye have nought to fear--the God-given liberties of Britain are about ye for your shield and shelter!
(Applause.
) Ye shall soon see.
Bring forth your proofs".
"What proofs"?
"Proof that ye are freemen".
Ah--I remembered!
I came to myself; I said nothing.
But the king stormed out: "Thou'rt insane, man.
It were better, and more in reason, that this thief and scoundrel here prove that we are _not_ freemen".
You see, he knew his own laws just as other people so often know the laws; by words, not by effects.
They take a _meaning_, and get to be very vivid, when you come to apply them to yourself.
All hands shook their heads and looked disappointed; some turned away, no longer interested.
The orator said--and this time in the tones of business, not of sentiment: "An ye do not know your country's laws, it were time ye learned them.
Ye are strangers to us; ye will not deny that.
Ye may be freemen, we do not deny that; but also ye may be slaves.
The law is clear: it doth not require the claimant to prove ye are slaves, it requireth you to prove ye are not".
I said: "Dear sir, give us only time to send to Astolat; or give us only time to send to the Valley of Holiness--" "Peace, good man, these are extraordinary requests, and you may not hope to have them granted.
It would cost much time, and would unwarrantably inconvenience your master--" "_Master_, idiot"!
stormed the king.
"I have no master, I myself am the m--" "Silence, for God's sake"!
I got the words out in time to stop the king.
We were in trouble enough already; it could not help us any to give these people the notion that we were lunatics.
There is no use in stringing out the details.
The earl put us up and sold us at auction.
This same infernal law had existed in our own South in my own time, more than thirteen hundred years later, and under it hundreds of freemen who could not prove that they were freemen had been sold into lifelong slavery without the circumstance making any
Well, that's the way we are made.
Yes, we were sold at auction, like swine.
In a big town and an active market we should have brought a good price; but this place was utterly stagnant and so we sold at a figure which makes me ashamed, every time I think of it.
The King of England brought seven dollars, and his prime minister nine; whereas the king was easily worth twelve dollars and I as easily worth fifteen.
But that is the way things always go; if you force a sale on a dull market, I don't care what the property is, you are going to make a poor business of it, and you can make up your mind to it.
If the earl had had wit enough to-- However, there is no occasion for my working my sympathies up on his account.
Let him go, for the present; I took his number, so to speak.
The slave-dealer bought us both, and hitched us onto that long chain of his, and we constituted the rear of his procession.
We took up our line of march and passed out of Cambenet at noon; and it seemed to me unaccountably strange and odd that the King of England and his chief minister, marching manacled and fettered and yoked, in a slave convoy, could move by all manner of
Dear, dear, it only shows that there is nothing diviner about a king than there is about a tramp, after all.
He is just a cheap and hollow artificiality when you don't know he is a king.
But reveal his quality, and dear me it takes your very breath away to look at him.
I reckon we are all fools.
Born so, no doubt.
CHAPTER XXXV A PITIFUL INCIDENT It's a world of surprises.
The king brooded; this was natural.
What would he brood about, should you say?
Why, about the prodigious nature of his fall, of course--from the loftiest place in the world to the lowest; from the most illustrious station in the world to the obscurest; from the grandest vocation among men to the basest.
No, I take my oath that the thing that graveled him most, to start with, was not this, but the price he had fetched!
He couldn't seem to get over that seven dollars.
Well, it stunned me so, when I first found it out, that I couldn't believe it; it didn't seem natural.
But as soon as my mental sight cleared and I got a right focus on it, I saw I was mistaken; it _was_ natural.
For this reason: a king is a mere artificiality, and so a king's feelings, like the impulses of an automatic doll, are mere artificialities; but as a man, he is a reality, and his feelings, as a man, are real, not phantoms.
It shames the average man to be valued below his own estimate of his worth, and the king certainly wasn't anything more than an average man, if he was up that high.
Confound him, he wearied me with arguments to show that in anything like a fair market he would have fetched twenty-five dollars, sure--a thing which was plainly nonsense, and full or the baldest conceit; I wasn't worth it myself.
But it was tender ground for me to argue on.
In fact, I had to simply shirk argument and do the diplomatic instead.
I had to throw conscience aside, and brazenly concede that he ought to have brought twenty-five dollars; whereas I was quite well aware that in all the ages, the world had never seen a king that was worth half the money, and during the next thirteen
Yes, he tired me.
If he began to talk about the crops; or about the recent weather; or about the condition of politics; or about dogs, or cats, or morals, or theology--no matter what --I sighed, for I knew what was coming; he was going to get out of it a palliation of that
Wherever we halted where there was a crowd, he would give me a look which said plainly: "if that thing could be tried over again now, with this kind of folk, you would see a different result".
Well, when he was first sold, it secretly tickled me to see him go for seven dollars; but before he was done with his sweating and worrying I wished he had fetched a hundred.
The thing never got a chance to die, for every day, at one place or another, possible purchasers looked us over, and, as often as any other way, their comment on the king was something like this: "Here's a two-dollar-and-a-half chump with a thirty-dollar
Pity but style was marketable".
At last this sort of remark produced an evil result.
Our owner was a practical person and he perceived that this defect must be mended if he hoped to find a purchaser for the king.
So he went to work to take the style out of his sacred majesty.
I could have given the man some valuable advice, but I didn't; you mustn't volunteer advice to a slave-driver unless you want to damage the cause you are arguing for.
I had found it a sufficiently difficult job to reduce the king's style to a peasant's style, even when he was a willing and anxious pupil; now then, to undertake to reduce the king's style to a slave's style--and by force--go to!
it was a stately contract.
Never mind the details--it will save me trouble to let you imagine them.
I will only remark that at the end of a week there was plenty of evidence that lash and club and fist had done their work well; the king's body was a sight to see--and to weep over; but his spirit?
--why, it wasn't even phased.
Even that dull clod of a slave-driver was able to see that there can be such a thing as a slave who will remain a man till he dies; whose bones you can break, but whose manhood you can't.
This man found that from his first effort down to his latest, he couldn't ever come within reach of the king, but the king was ready to plunge for him, and did it.
So he gave up at last, and left the king in possession of his style unimpaired.
The fact is, the king was a good deal more than a king, he was a man; and when a man is a man, you can't knock it out of him.
We had a rough time for a month, tramping to and fro in the earth, and suffering.
And what Englishman was the most interested in the slavery question by that time?
His grace the king!
Yes; from being the most indifferent, he was become the most interested.
He was become the bitterest hater of the institution I had ever heard talk.
And so I ventured to ask once more a question which I had asked years before and had gotten such a sharp answer that I had not thought it prudent to meddle in the matter further.
Would he abolish slavery?
His answer was as sharp as before, but it was music this time; I shouldn't ever wish to hear pleasanter, though the profanity was not good, being awkwardly put together, and with the crash-word almost in the middle instead of at the end, where, of course,
I was ready and willing to get free now; I hadn't wanted to get free any sooner.
No, I cannot quite say that.
I had wanted to, but I had not been willing to take desperate chances, and had always dissuaded the king from them.
But now--ah, it was a new atmosphere!
Liberty would be worth any cost that might be put upon it now.
I set about a plan, and was straightway charmed with it.
It would require time, yes, and patience, too, a great deal of both.
One could invent quicker ways, and fully as sure ones; but none that would be as picturesque as this; none that could be made so dramatic.
And so I was not going to give this one up.
It might delay us months, but no matter, I would carry it out or break something.
Now and then we had an adventure.
One night we were overtaken by a snow-storm while still a mile from the village we were making for.
Almost instantly we were shut up as in a fog, the driving snow was so thick.
You couldn't see a thing, and we were soon lost.
The slave-driver lashed us desperately, for he saw ruin before him, but his lashings only made matters worse, for they drove us further from the road and from likelihood of succor.
So we had to stop at last and slump down in the snow where we were.
The storm continued until toward midnight, then ceased.
By this time two of our feebler men and three of our women were dead, and others past moving and threatened with death.
Our master was nearly beside himself.
He stirred up the living, and made us stand, jump, slap ourselves, to restore our circulation, and he helped as well as he could with his whip.
Now came a diversion.
We heard shrieks and yells, and soon a woman came running and crying; and seeing our group, she flung herself into our midst and begged for protection.
A mob of people came tearing after her, some with torches, and they said she was a witch who had caused several cows to die by a strange disease, and practiced her arts by help of a devil in the form of a black cat.
This poor woman had been stoned until she hardly looked human, she was so battered and bloody.
The mob wanted to burn her.
Well, now, what do you suppose our master did?
When we closed around this poor creature to shelter her, he saw his chance.
He said, burn her here, or they shouldn't have her at all.
Imagine that!
They were willing.
They fastened her to a post; they brought wood and piled it about her; they applied the torch while she shrieked and pleaded and strained her two young daughters to her breast; and our brute, with a heart solely for business, lashed us into position about
That was the sort of master we had.
I took _his_ number.
That snow-storm cost him nine of his flock; and he was more brutal to us than ever, after that, for many days together, he was so enraged over his loss.
We had adventures all along.
One day we ran into a procession.
And such a procession!
All the riffraff of the kingdom seemed to be comprehended in it; and all drunk at that.
In the van was a cart with a coffin in it, and on the coffin sat a comely young girl of about eighteen suckling a baby, which she squeezed to her breast in a passion of love every little while, and every little while wiped from its face the tears which her
Men and women, boys and girls, trotted along beside or after the cart, hooting, shouting profane and ribald remarks, singing snatches of foul song, skipping, dancing--a very holiday of hellions, a sickening sight.
We had struck a suburb of London, outside the walls, and this was a sample of one sort of London society.
Our master secured a good place for us near the gallows.
A priest was in attendance, and he helped the girl climb up, and said comforting words to her, and made the under-sheriff provide a stool for her.
Then he stood there by her on the gallows, and for a moment looked down upon the mass of upturned faces at his feet, then out over the solid pavement of heads that stretched away on every side occupying the vacancies far and near, and then began to tell
And there was pity in his voice --how seldom a sound that was in that ignorant and savage land!
I remember every detail of what he said, except the words he said it in; and so I change it into my own words: "Law is intended to mete out justice.
Sometimes it fails.
This cannot be helped.
We can only grieve, and be resigned, and pray for the soul of him who falls unfairly by the arm of the law, and that his fellows may be few.
A law sends this poor young thing to death--and it is right.
But another law had placed her where she must commit her crime or starve with her child--and before God that law is responsible for both her crime and her ignominious death!
"A little while ago this young thing, this child of eighteen years, was as happy a wife and mother as any in England; and her lips were blithe with song, which is the native speech of glad and innocent hearts.
Her young husband was as happy as she; for he was doing his whole duty, he worked early and late at his handicraft, his bread was honest bread well and fairly earned, he was prospering, he was furnishing shelter and sustenance to his family, he was adding
By consent of a treacherous law, instant destruction fell upon this holy home and swept it away!
That young husband was waylaid and impressed, and sent to sea.
The wife knew nothing of it.
She sought him everywhere, she moved the hardest hearts with the supplications of her tears, the broken eloquence of her despair.
Weeks dragged by, she watching, waiting, hoping, her mind going slowly to wreck under the burden of her misery.
Little by little all her small possessions went for food.
When she could no longer pay her rent, they turned her out of doors.
She begged, while she had strength; when she was starving at last, and her milk failing, she stole a piece of linen cloth of the value of a fourth part of a cent, thinking to sell it and save her child.
But she was seen by the owner of the cloth.
She was put in jail and brought to trial.
The man testified to the facts.
A plea was made for her, and her sorrowful story was told in her behalf.
She spoke, too, by permission, and said she did steal the cloth, but that her mind was so disordered of late by trouble that when she was overborne with hunger all acts, criminal or other, swam meaningless through her brain and she knew nothing rightly,
For a moment all were touched, and there was disposition to deal mercifully with her, seeing that she was so young and friendless, and her case so piteous, and the law that robbed her of her support to blame as being the first and only cause of her
--and so he must require sentence.
"When the judge put on his black cap, the owner of the stolen linen rose trembling up, his lip quivering, his face as gray as ashes; and when the awful words came, he cried out, 'Oh, poor child, poor child, I did not know it was death!
' and fell as a tree falls.
When they lifted him up his reason was gone; before the sun was set, he had taken his own life.
A kindly man; a man whose heart was right, at bottom; add his murder to this that is to be now done here; and charge them both where they belong --to the rulers and the bitter laws of Britain.
The time is come, my child; let me pray over thee--not _for_ thee, dear abused poor heart and innocent, but for them that be guilty of thy ruin and death, who need it more".
After his prayer they put the noose around the young girl's neck, and they had great trouble to adjust the knot under her ear, because she was devouring the baby all the time, wildly kissing it, and snatching it to her face and her breast, and drenching it
Even the hangman couldn't stand it, but turned away.
When all was ready the priest gently pulled and tugged and forced the child out of the mother's arms, and stepped quickly out of her reach; but she clasped her hands, and made a wild spring toward him, with a shriek; but the rope--and the
Then she went on her knees and stretched out her hands and cried: "One more kiss--oh, my God, one more, one more,--it is the dying that begs it"!
She got it; she almost smothered the little thing.
And when they got it away again, she cried out: "Oh, my child, my darling, it will die!
It has no home, it has no father, no friend, no mother--" "It has them all"!
said that good priest.
"All these will I be to it till I die".
You should have seen her face then!
Gratitude?
Lord, what do you want with words to express that?
Words are only painted fire; a look is the fire itself.
She gave that look, and carried it away to the treasury of heaven, where all things that are divine belong.
CHAPTER XXXVI AN ENCOUNTER IN THE DARK London--to a slave--was a sufficiently interesting place.
It was merely a great big village; and mainly mud and thatch.
The streets were muddy, crooked, unpaved.
The populace was an ever flocking and drifting swarm of rags, and splendors, of nodding plumes and shining armor.
The king had a palace there; he saw the outside of it.
It made him sigh; yes, and swear a little, in a poor juvenile sixth century way.
We saw knights and grandees whom we knew, but they didn't know us in our rags and dirt and raw welts and bruises, and wouldn't have recognized us if we had hailed them, nor stopped to answer, either, it being unlawful to speak with slaves on a chain.
Sandy passed within ten yards of me on a mule--hunting for me, I imagined.
But the thing which clean broke my heart was something which happened in front of our old barrack in a square, while we were enduring the spectacle of a man being boiled to death in oil for counterfeiting pennies.
It was the sight of a newsboy--and I couldn't get at him!
Still, I had one comfort--here was proof that Clarence was still alive and banging away.
I meant to be with him before long; the thought was full of cheer.
I had one little glimpse of another thing, one day, which gave me a great uplift.
It was a wire stretching from housetop to housetop.
Telegraph or telephone, sure.
I did very much wish I had a little piece of it.
It was just what I needed, in order to carry out my project of escape.
My idea was to get loose some night, along with the king, then gag and bind our master, change clothes with him, batter him into the aspect of a stranger, hitch him to the slave-chain, assume possession of the property, march to Camelot, and-- But you get
It was all feasible, if I could only get hold of a slender piece of iron which I could shape into a lock-pick.
I could then undo the lumbering padlocks with which our chains were fastened, whenever I might choose.
But I never had any luck; no such thing ever happened to fall in my way.
However, my chance came at last.
A gentleman who had come twice before to dicker for me, without result, or indeed any approach to a result, came again.
I was far from expecting ever to belong to him, for the price asked for me from the time I was first enslaved was exorbitant, and always provoked either anger or derision, yet my master stuck stubbornly to it--twenty-two dollars.
He wouldn't bate a cent.
The king was greatly admired, because of his grand physique, but his kingly style was against him, and he wasn't salable; nobody wanted that kind of a slave.
I considered myself safe from parting from him because of my extravagant price.
No, I was not expecting to ever belong to this gentleman whom I have spoken of, but he had something which I expected would belong to me eventually, if he would but visit us often enough.
It was a steel thing with a long pin to it, with which his long cloth outside garment was fastened together in front.
There were three of them.
He had disappointed me twice, because he did not come quite close enough to me to make my project entirely safe; but this time I succeeded; I captured the lower clasp of the three, and when he missed it he thought he had lost it on the way.
I had a chance to be glad about a minute, then straightway a chance to be sad again.
For when the purchase was about to fail, as usual, the master suddenly spoke up and said what would be worded thus --in modern English: "I'll tell you what I'll do.
I'm tired supporting these two for no good.
Give me twenty-two dollars for this one, and I'll throw the other one in".
The king couldn't get his breath, he was in such a fury.
He began to choke and gag, and meantime the master and the gentleman moved away discussing.
"An ye will keep the offer open--" "'Tis open till the morrow at this hour".
"Then I will answer you at that time," said the gentleman, and disappeared, the master following him.
I had a time of it to cool the king down, but I managed it.
I whispered in his ear, to this effect: "Your grace _will_ go for nothing, but after another fashion.
And so shall I. To-night we shall both be free".
"Ah!
How is that"?
"With this thing which I have stolen, I will unlock these locks and cast off these chains to-night.
When he comes about nine-thirty to inspect us for the night, we will seize him, gag him, batter him, and early in the morning we will march out of this town, proprietors of this caravan of slaves".
That was as far as I went, but the king was charmed and satisfied.
That evening we waited patiently for our fellow-slaves to get to sleep and signify it by the usual sign, for you must not take many chances on those poor fellows if you can avoid it.
It is best to keep your own secrets.
No doubt they fidgeted only about as usual, but it didn't seem so to me.
It seemed to me that they were going to be forever getting down to their regular snoring.
As the time dragged on I got nervously afraid we shouldn't have enough of it left for our needs; so I made several premature attempts, and merely delayed things by it; for I couldn't seem to touch a padlock, there in the dark, without starting a rattle out
But finally I did get my last iron off, and was a free man once more.
I took a good breath of relief, and reached for the king's irons.
Too late!
in comes the master, with a light in one hand and his heavy walking-staff in the other.
I snuggled close among the wallow of snorers, to conceal as nearly as possible that I was naked of irons; and I kept a sharp lookout and prepared to spring for my man the moment he should bend over me.
But he didn't approach.
He stopped, gazed absently toward our dusky mass a minute, evidently thinking about something else; then set down his light, moved musingly toward the door, and before a body could imagine what he was going to do, he was out of the door and had closed it
"Quick"!
said the king.
"Fetch him back"!
Of course, it was the thing to do, and I was up and out in a moment.
But, dear me, there were no lamps in those days, and it was a dark night.
But I glimpsed a dim figure a few steps away.
I darted for it, threw myself upon it, and then there was a state of things and lively!
We fought and scuffled and struggled, and drew a crowd in no time.
They took an immense interest in the fight and encouraged us all they could, and, in fact, couldn't have been pleasanter or more cordial if it had been their own fight.
Then a tremendous row broke out behind us, and as much as half of our audience left us, with a rush, to invest some sympathy in that.
Lanterns began to swing in all directions; it was the watch gathering from far and near.
Presently a halberd fell across my back, as a reminder, and I knew what it meant.
I was in custody.
So was my adversary.
We were marched off toward prison, one on each side of the watchman.
Here was disaster, here was a fine scheme gone to sudden destruction!
I tried to imagine what would happen when the master should discover that it was I who had been fighting him; and what would happen if they jailed us together in the general apartment for brawlers and petty law-breakers, as was the custom; and what might--
CHAPTER XXXVII AN AWFUL PREDICAMENT Sleep?
It was impossible.
It would naturally have been impossible in that noisome cavern of a jail, with its mangy crowd of drunken, quarrelsome, and song-singing rapscallions.
But the thing that made sleep all the more a thing not to be dreamed of, was my racking impatience to get out of this place and find out the whole size of what might have happened yonder in the slave-quarters in consequence of that intolerable miscarriage
It was a long night, but the morning got around at last.
I made a full and frank explanation to the court.
I said I was a slave, the property of the great Earl Grip, who had arrived just after dark at the Tabard inn in the village on the other side of the water, and had stopped there over night, by compulsion, he being taken deadly sick with a strange and
I had been ordered to cross to the city in all haste and bring the best physician; I was doing my best; naturally I was running with all my might; the night was dark, I ran against this common person here, who seized me by the throat and began to pummel
from the court.
"Take him hence and give him a few stripes whereby to teach him how to treat the servant of a nobleman after a different fashion another time.
Go"!
Then the court begged my pardon, and hoped I would not fail to tell his lordship it was in no wise the court's fault that this high-handed thing had happened.
I said I would make it all right, and so took my leave.
Took it just in time, too; he was starting to ask me why I didn't fetch out these facts the moment I was arrested.
I said I would if I had thought of it--which was true --but that I was so battered by that man that all my wit was knocked out of me--and so forth and so on, and got myself away, still mumbling.
I didn't wait for breakfast.
No grass grew under my feet.
I was soon at the slave quarters.
Empty--everybody gone!
That is, everybody except one body--the slave-master's.
It lay there all battered to pulp; and all about were the evidences of a terrific fight.
There was a rude board coffin on a cart at the door, and workmen, assisted by the police, were thinning a road through the gaping crowd in order that they might bring it in.
I picked out a man humble enough in life to condescend to talk with one so shabby as I, and got his account of the matter.
"There were sixteen slaves here.
They rose against their master in the night, and thou seest how it ended".
"Yes.
How did it begin"?
"There was no witness but the slaves.
They said the slave that was most valuable got free of his bonds and escaped in some strange way--by magic arts 'twas thought, by reason that he had no key, and the locks were neither broke nor in any wise injured.
When the master discovered his loss, he was mad with despair, and threw himself upon his people with his heavy stick, who resisted and brake his back and in other and divers ways did give him hurts that brought him swiftly to his end".
"This is dreadful.
It will go hard with the slaves, no doubt, upon the trial".
"Marry, the trial is over".
"Over"!
"Would they be a week, think you--and the matter so simple?
They were not the half of a quarter of an hour at it".
"Why, I don't see how they could determine which were the guilty ones in so short a time".
"_Which_ ones?
Indeed, they considered not particulars like to that.
They condemned them in a body.
Wit ye not the law?
--which men say the Romans left behind them here when they went--that if one slave killeth his master all the slaves of that man must die for it".
"True.
I had forgotten.
And when will these die"?
"Belike within a four and twenty hours; albeit some say they will wait a pair of days more, if peradventure they may find the missing one meantime".
The missing one!
It made me feel uncomfortable.
"Is it likely they will find him"?
"Before the day is spent--yes.
They seek him everywhere.
They stand at the gates of the town, with certain of the slaves who will discover him to them if he cometh, and none can pass out but he will be first examined".
"Might one see the place where the rest are confined"?
"The outside of it--yes.
The inside of it--but ye will not want to see that".
I took the address of that prison for future reference and then sauntered off.
At the first second-hand clothing shop I came to, up a back street, I got a rough rig suitable for a common seaman who might be going on a cold voyage, and bound up my face with a liberal bandage, saying I had a toothache.
This concealed my worst bruises.
It was a transformation.
I no longer resembled my former self.
Then I struck out for that wire, found it and followed it to its den.
It was a little room over a butcher's shop--which meant that business wasn't very brisk in the telegraphic line.
The young chap in charge was drowsing at his table.
I locked the door and put the vast key in my bosom.
This alarmed the young fellow, and he was going to make a noise; but I said: "Save your wind; if you open your mouth you are dead, sure.
Tackle your instrument.
Lively, now!
Call Camelot".
"This doth amaze me!
How should such as you know aught of such matters as--" "Call Camelot!
I am a desperate man.
Call Camelot, or get away from the instrument and I will do it myself".
"What--you"?
"Yes--certainly.
Stop gabbling.
Call the palace".
He made the call.
"Now, then, call Clarence".
"Clarence _who_"?
"Never mind Clarence who.
Say you want Clarence; you'll get an answer".
He did so.
We waited five nerve-straining minutes--ten minutes --how long it did seem!
--and then came a click that was as familiar to me as a human voice; for Clarence had been my own pupil.
"Now, my lad, vacate!
They would have known _my_ touch, maybe, and so your call was surest; but I'm all right now".
He vacated the place and cocked his ear to listen--but it didn't win.
I used a cipher.
I didn't waste any time in sociabilities with Clarence, but squared away for business, straight-off--thus: "The king is here and in danger.
We were captured and brought here as slaves.
We should not be able to prove our identity --and the fact is, I am not in a position to try.
Send a telegram for the palace here which will carry conviction with it".
His answer came straight back: "They don't know anything about the telegraph; they haven't had any experience yet, the line to London is so new.
Better not venture that.
They might hang you.
Think up something else".
Might hang us!
Little he knew how closely he was crowding the facts.
I couldn't think up anything for the moment.
Then an idea struck me, and I started it along: "Send five hundred picked knights with Launcelot in the lead; and send them on the jump.
Let them enter by the southwest gate, and look out for the man with a white cloth around his right arm".
The answer was prompt: "They shall start in half an hour".
"All right, Clarence; now tell this lad here that I'm a friend of yours and a dead-head; and that he must be discreet and say nothing about this visit of mine".
The instrument began to talk to the youth and I hurried away.
I fell to ciphering.
In half an hour it would be nine o'clock.
Knights and horses in heavy armor couldn't travel very fast.
These would make the best time they could, and now that the ground was in good condition, and no snow or mud, they would probably make a seven-mile gait; they would have to change horses a couple of times; they would arrive about six, or a little after; it
We would surround that prison and have the king out in no time.
It would be showy and picturesque enough, all things considered, though I would have preferred noonday, on account of the more theatrical aspect the thing would have.
Now, then, in order to increase the strings to my bow, I thought I would look up some of those people whom I had formerly recognized, and make myself known.
That would help us out of our scrape, without the knights.
But I must proceed cautiously, for it was a risky business.
I must get into sumptuous raiment, and it wouldn't do to run and jump into it.
No, I must work up to it by degrees, buying suit after suit of clothes, in shops wide apart, and getting a little finer article with each change, until I should finally reach silk and velvet, and be ready for my project.
So I started.
But the scheme fell through like scat!
The first corner I turned, I came plump upon one of our slaves, snooping around with a watchman.
I coughed at the moment, and he gave me a sudden look that bit right into my marrow.
I judge he thought he had heard that cough before.
I turned immediately into a shop and worked along down the counter, pricing things and watching out of the corner of my eye.
Those people had stopped, and were talking together and looking in at the door.
I made up my mind to get out the back way, if there was a back way, and I asked the shopwoman if I could step out there and look for the escaped slave, who was believed to be in hiding back there somewhere, and said I was an officer in disguise, and my
She was blazing with eagerness to see one of those already celebrated murderers, and she started on the errand at once.
I slipped out the back way, locked the door behind me, put the key in my pocket and started off, chuckling to myself and comfortable.
Well, I had gone and spoiled it again, made another mistake.
A double one, in fact.
There were plenty of ways to get rid of that officer by some simple and plausible device, but no, I must pick out a picturesque one; it is the crying defect of my character.
And then, I had ordered my procedure upon what the officer, being human, would _naturally_ do; whereas when you are least expecting it, a man will now and then go and do the very thing which it's _not_ natural for him to do.
The natural thing for the officer to do, in this case, was to follow straight on my heels; he would find a stout oaken door, securely locked, between him and me; before he could break it down, I should be far away and engaged in slipping into a succession
But instead of doing the natural thing, the officer took me at my word, and followed my instructions.
And so, as I came trotting out of that cul de sac, full of satisfaction with my own cleverness, he turned the corner and I walked right into his handcuffs.
If I had known it was a cul de sac--however, there isn't any excusing a blunder like that, let it go.
Charge it up to profit and loss.
Of course, I was indignant, and swore I had just come ashore from a long voyage, and all that sort of thing--just to see, you know, if it would deceive that slave.
But it didn't.
He knew me.
Then I reproached him for betraying me.
He was more surprised than hurt.
He stretched his eyes wide, and said: "What, wouldst have me let thee, of all men, escape and not hang with us, when thou'rt the very _cause_ of our hanging?
Go to"!
"Go to" was their way of saying "I should smile"!
or "I like that"!
Queer talkers, those people.
Well, there was a sort of bastard justice in his view of the case, and so I dropped the matter.
When you can't cure a disaster by argument, what is the use to argue?
It isn't my way.
So I only said: "You're not going to be hanged.
None of us are".
Both men laughed, and the slave said: "Ye have not ranked as a fool--before.
You might better keep your reputation, seeing the strain would not be for long".
"It will stand it, I reckon.
Before to-morrow we shall be out of prison, and free to go where we will, besides".
The witty officer lifted at his left ear with his thumb, made a rasping noise in his throat, and said: "Out of prison--yes--ye say true.
And free likewise to go where ye will, so ye wander not out of his grace the Devil's sultry realm".
I kept my temper, and said, indifferently: "Now I suppose you really think we are going to hang within a day or two".
"I thought it not many minutes ago, for so the thing was decided and proclaimed".
"Ah, then you've changed your mind, is that it"?
"Even that.
I only _thought_, then; I _know_, now".
I felt sarcastical, so I said: "Oh, sapient servant of the law, condescend to tell us, then, what you _know_".
"That ye will all be hanged _to-day_, at mid-afternoon!
Oho!
that shot hit home!
Lean upon me".
The fact is I did need to lean upon somebody.
My knights couldn't arrive in time.
They would be as much as three hours too late.
Nothing in the world could save the King of England; nor me, which was more important.
More important, not merely to me, but to the nation--the only nation on earth standing ready to blossom into civilization.
I was sick.
I said no more, there wasn't anything to say.
I knew what the man meant; that if the missing slave was found, the postponement would be revoked, the execution take place to-day.
Well, the missing slave was found.
CHAPTER XXXVIII SIR LAUNCELOT AND KNIGHTS TO THE RESCUE Nearing four in the afternoon.
The scene was just outside the walls of London.
A cool, comfortable, superb day, with a brilliant sun; the kind of day to make one want to live, not die.
The multitude was prodigious and far-reaching; and yet we fifteen poor devils hadn't a friend in it.
There was something painful in that thought, look at it how you might.
There we sat, on our tall scaffold, the butt of the hate and mockery of all those enemies.
We were being made a holiday spectacle.
They had built a sort of grand stand for the nobility and gentry, and these were there in full force, with their ladies.
We recognized a good many of them.
The crowd got a brief and unexpected dash of diversion out of the king.
The moment we were freed of our bonds he sprang up, in his fantastic rags, with face bruised out of all recognition, and proclaimed himself Arthur, King of Britain, and denounced the awful penalties of treason upon every soul there present if hair of his
It startled and surprised him to hear them break into a vast roar of laughter.
It wounded his dignity, and he locked himself up in silence.
Then, although the crowd begged him to go on, and tried to provoke him to it by catcalls, jeers, and shouts of: "Let him speak!
The king!
The king!
his humble subjects hunger and thirst for words of wisdom out of the mouth of their master his Serene and Sacred Raggedness"!
But it went for nothing.
He put on all his majesty and sat under this rain of contempt and insult unmoved.
He certainly was great in his way.
Absently, I had taken off my white bandage and wound it about my right arm.
When the crowd noticed this, they began upon me.
They said: "Doubtless this sailor-man is his minister--observe his costly badge of office"!
I let them go on until they got tired, and then I said: "Yes, I am his minister, The Boss; and to-morrow you will hear that from Camelot which--" I got no further.
They drowned me out with joyous derision.
But presently there was silence; for the sheriffs of London, in their official robes, with their subordinates, began to make a stir which indicated that business was about to begin.
In the hush which followed, our crime was recited, the death warrant read, then everybody uncovered while a priest uttered a prayer.
Then a slave was blindfolded; the hangman unslung his rope.
There lay the smooth road below us, we upon one side of it, the banked multitude wailing its other side--a good clear road, and kept free by the police--how good it would be to see my five hundred horsemen come tearing down it!
But no, it was out of the possibilities.
I followed its receding thread out into the distance--not a horseman on it, or sign of one.
There was a jerk, and the slave hung dangling; dangling and hideously squirming, for his limbs were not tied.
A second rope was unslung, in a moment another slave was dangling.
In a minute a third slave was struggling in the air.
It was dreadful.
I turned away my head a moment, and when I turned back I missed the king!
They were blindfolding him!
I was paralyzed; I couldn't move, I was choking, my tongue was petrified.
They finished blindfolding him, they led him under the rope.
I couldn't shake off that clinging impotence.
But when I saw them put the noose around his neck, then everything let go in me and I made a spring to the rescue--and as I made it I shot one more glance abroad--by George!
here they came, a-tilting!
--five hundred mailed and belted knights on bicycles!
The grandest sight that ever was seen.
Lord, how the plumes streamed, how the sun flamed and flashed from the endless procession of webby wheels!
I waved my right arm as Launcelot swept in--he recognized my rag --I tore away noose and bandage, and shouted: "On your knees, every rascal of you, and salute the king!
Who fails shall sup in hell to-night"!
I always use that high style when I'm climaxing an effect.
Well, it was noble to see Launcelot and the boys swarm up onto that scaffold and heave sheriffs and such overboard.
And it was fine to see that astonished multitude go down on their knees and beg their lives of the king they had just been deriding and insulting.
And as he stood apart there, receiving this homage in rags, I thought to myself, well, really there is something peculiarly grand about the gait and bearing of a king, after all.
I was immensely satisfied.
Take the whole situation all around, it was one of the gaudiest effects I ever instigated.
And presently up comes Clarence, his own self!
and winks, and says, very modernly: "Good deal of a surprise, wasn't it?
I knew you'd like it.
I've had the boys practicing this long time, privately; and just hungry for a chance to show off".
CHAPTER XXXIX THE YANKEE'S FIGHT WITH THE KNIGHTS Home again, at Camelot.
A morning or two later I found the paper, damp from the press, by my plate at the breakfast table.
I turned to the advertising columns, knowing I should find something of personal interest to me there.
It was this: DE PAR LE ROI.
Know that the great lord and illus- trious Kni8ht, SIR SAGRAMOR LE DESIROUS having condescended to meet the King's Minister, Hank Mor- gan, the which is surnamed The Boss, for satisfgction of offence anciently given, these wilL engage in the lists by
The battle will be a l outrance, sith the said offence was of a deadly sort, admitting of no comPosition.
DE PAR LE ROI Clarence's editorial reference to this affair was to this effect: It will be observed, by a gl7nce at our advertising columns, that the commu- nity is to be favored with a treat of un- usual interest in the tournament line.
The names of the artists are warrant of good enterrainment.
The box-office will be open at noon of the 13th; ad- mission 3 cents, reserved seatsh 5; pro- ceeds to go to the hospital fund The royal pair and all the Court will be pres- ent.
With these exceptions, and the press and the clergy, the free list is strict- ly susPended.
Parties are hereby warn- ed against buying tickets of speculators; they will not be good at the door.
Everybody knows and likes The Boss, everybody knows and likes Sir Sag.
; come, let us give the lads a good send- off.
ReMember, the proceeds go to a great and free charity, and one whose broad begevolence stretches out its help- ing hand, warm with the blood of a lov- ing heart, to all that suffer, regardless of race, creed, condition or color--the only charity yet
Turn out, all hands!
fetch along your dou3hnuts and your gum-drops and have a good time.
Pie for sale on the grounds, and rocks to crack it with; and ciRcus-lemonade--three drops of lime juice to a barrel of water.
N.B.
This is the first tournament under the new law, whidh allow each combatant to use any weapon he may pre- fer.
You may want to make a note of that.
Up to the day set, there was no talk in all Britain of anything but this combat.
All other topics sank into insignificance and passed out of men's thoughts and interest.
It was not because a tournament was a great matter, it was not because Sir Sagramor had found the Holy Grail, for he had not, but had failed; it was not because the second (official) personage in the kingdom was one of the duellists; no, all these features
Yet there was abundant reason for the extraordinary interest which this coming fight was creating.
It was born of the fact that all the nation knew that this was not to be a duel between mere men, so to speak, but a duel between two mighty magicians; a duel not of muscle but of mind, not of human skill but of superhuman art and craft; a final struggle
It was realized that the most prodigious achievements of the most renowned knights could not be worthy of comparison with a spectacle like this; they could be but child's play, contrasted with this mysterious and awful battle of the gods.
Yes, all the world knew it was going to be in reality a duel between Merlin and me, a measuring of his magic powers against mine.
It was known that Merlin had been busy whole days and nights together, imbuing Sir Sagramor's arms and armor with supernal powers of offense and defense, and that he had procured for him from the spirits of the air a fleecy veil which would render the
Against Sir Sagramor, so weaponed and protected, a thousand knights could accomplish nothing; against him no known enchantments could prevail.
These facts were sure; regarding them there was no doubt, no reason for doubt.
There was but one question: might there be still other enchantments, _unknown_ to Merlin, which could render Sir Sagramor's veil transparent to me, and make his enchanted mail vulnerable to my weapons?
This was the one thing to be decided in the lists.
Until then the world must remain in suspense.
So the world thought there was a vast matter at stake here, and the world was right, but it was not the one they had in their minds.
No, a far vaster one was upon the cast of this die: _the life of knight-errantry_.
I was a champion, it was true, but not the champion of the frivolous black arts, I was the champion of hard unsentimental common-sense and reason.
I was entering the lists to either destroy knight-errantry or be its victim.
Vast as the show-grounds were, there were no vacant spaces in them outside of the lists, at ten o'clock on the morning of the 16th.
The mammoth grand-stand was clothed in flags, streamers, and rich tapestries, and packed with several acres of small-fry tributary kings, their suites, and the British aristocracy; with our own royal gang in the chief place, and each and every individual a
The huge camp of beflagged and gay-colored tents at one end of the lists, with a stiff-standing sentinel at every door and a shining shield hanging by him for challenge, was another fine sight.
You see, every knight was there who had any ambition or any caste feeling; for my feeling toward their order was not much of a secret, and so here was their chance.
If I won my fight with Sir Sagramor, others would have the right to call me out as long as I might be willing to respond.
Down at our end there were but two tents; one for me, and another for my servants.
At the appointed hour the king made a sign, and the heralds, in their tabards, appeared and made proclamation, naming the combatants and stating the cause of quarrel.
There was a pause, then a ringing bugle-blast, which was the signal for us to come forth.
All the multitude caught their breath, and an eager curiosity flashed into every face.
Out from his tent rode great Sir Sagramor, an imposing tower of iron, stately and rigid, his huge spear standing upright in its socket and grasped in his strong hand, his grand horse's face and breast cased in steel, his body clothed in rich trappings that
A great shout went up, of welcome and admiration.
And then out I came.
But I didn't get any shout.
There was a wondering and eloquent silence for a moment, then a great wave of laughter began to sweep along that human sea, but a warning bugle-blast cut its career short.
I was in the simplest and comfortablest of gymnast costumes--flesh-colored tights from neck to heel, with blue silk puffings about my loins, and bareheaded.
My horse was not above medium size, but he was alert, slender-limbed, muscled with watchsprings, and just a greyhound to go.
He was a beauty, glossy as silk, and naked as he was when he was born, except for bridle and ranger-saddle.
The iron tower and the gorgeous bedquilt came cumbrously but gracefully pirouetting down the lists, and we tripped lightly up to meet them.
We halted; the tower saluted, I responded; then we wheeled and rode side by side to the grand-stand and faced our king and queen, to whom we made obeisance.
The queen exclaimed: "Alack, Sir Boss, wilt fight naked, and without lance or sword or--" But the king checked her and made her understand, with a polite phrase or two, that this was none of her business.
The bugles rang again; and we separated and rode to the ends of the lists, and took position.
Now old Merlin stepped into view and cast a dainty web of gossamer threads over Sir Sagramor which turned him into Hamlet's ghost; the king made a sign, the bugles blew, Sir Sagramor laid his great lance in rest, and the next moment here he came thundering
A chorus of encouraging shouts burst out for him, and one brave voice flung out a heartening word for me--said: "Go it, slim Jim"!
It was an even bet that Clarence had procured that favor for me --and furnished the language, too.
When that formidable lance-point was within a yard and a half of my breast I twitched my horse aside without an effort, and the big knight swept by, scoring a blank.
I got plenty of applause that time.
We turned, braced up, and down we came again.
Another blank for the knight, a roar of applause for me.
This same thing was repeated once more; and it fetched such a whirlwind of applause that Sir Sagramor lost his temper, and at once changed his tactics and set himself the task of chasing me down.
Why, he hadn't any show in the world at that; it was a game of tag, with all the advantage on my side; I whirled out of his path with ease whenever I chose, and once I slapped him on the back as I went to the rear.
Finally I took the chase into my own hands; and after that, turn, or twist, or do what he would, he was never able to get behind me again; he found himself always in front at the end of his maneuver.
So he gave up that business and retired to his end of the lists.
His temper was clear gone now, and he forgot himself and flung an insult at me which disposed of mine.
I slipped my lasso from the horn of my saddle, and grasped the coil in my right hand.
This time you should have seen him come!
--it was a business trip, sure; by his gait there was blood in his eye.
I was sitting my horse at ease, and swinging the great loop of my lasso in wide circles about my head; the moment he was under way, I started for him; when the space between us had narrowed to forty feet, I sent the snaky spirals of the rope a-cleaving
The next moment the rope sprang taut and yanked Sir Sagramor out of the saddle!
Great Scott, but there was a sensation!
Unquestionably, the popular thing in this world is novelty.
These people had never seen anything of that cowboy business before, and it carried them clear off their feet with delight.
From all around and everywhere, the shout went up: "Encore!
encore"!
I wondered where they got the word, but there was no time to cipher on philological matters, because the whole knight-errantry hive was just humming now, and my prospect for trade couldn't have been better.
The moment my lasso was released and Sir Sagramor had been assisted to his tent, I hauled in the slack, took my station and began to swing my loop around my head again.
I was sure to have use for it as soon as they could elect a successor for Sir Sagramor, and that couldn't take long where there were so many hungry candidates.
Indeed, they elected one straight off --Sir Hervis de Revel.
_Bzz_!
Here he came, like a house afire; I dodged: he passed like a flash, with my horse-hair coils settling around his neck; a second or so later, _fst_!
his saddle was empty.
I got another encore; and another, and another, and still another.
When I had snaked five men out, things began to look serious to the ironclads, and they stopped and consulted together.
As a result, they decided that it was time to waive etiquette and send their greatest and best against me.
To the astonishment of that little world, I lassoed Sir Lamorak de Galis, and after him Sir Galahad.
So you see there was simply nothing to be done now, but play their right bower--bring out the superbest of the superb, the mightiest of the mighty, the great Sir Launcelot himself!
A proud moment for me?
I should think so.
Yonder was Arthur, King of Britain; yonder was Guenever; yes, and whole tribes of little provincial kings and kinglets; and in the tented camp yonder, renowned knights from many lands; and likewise the selectest body known to chivalry, the Knights of the
Across my mind flitted the dear image of a certain hello-girl of West Hartford, and I wished she could see me now.
In that moment, down came the Invincible, with the rush of a whirlwind--the courtly world rose to its feet and bent forward --the fateful coils went circling through the air, and before you could wink I was towing Sir Launcelot across the field on his
Said I to myself, as I coiled my lariat and hung it on my saddle-horn, and sat there drunk with glory, "The victory is perfect--no other will venture against me--knight-errantry is dead".
Now imagine my astonishment--and everybody else's, too--to hear the peculiar bugle-call which announces that another competitor is about to enter the lists!
There was a mystery here; I couldn't account for this thing.
Next, I noticed Merlin gliding away from me; and then I noticed that my lasso was gone!
The old sleight-of-hand expert had stolen it, sure, and slipped it under his robe.
The bugle blew again.
I looked, and down came Sagramor riding again, with his dust brushed off and his veil nicely re-arranged.
I trotted up to meet him, and pretended to find him by the sound of his horse's hoofs.
He said: "Thou'rt quick of ear, but it will not save thee from this"!
and he touched the hilt of his great sword.
"An ye are not able to see it, because of the influence of the veil, know that it is no cumbrous lance, but a sword--and I ween ye will not be able to avoid it".
His visor was up; there was death in his smile.
I should never be able to dodge his sword, that was plain.
Somebody was going to die this time.
If he got the drop on me, I could name the corpse.
We rode forward together, and saluted the royalties.
This time the king was disturbed.
He said: "Where is thy strange weapon"?
"It is stolen, sire".
"Hast another at hand"?
"No, sire, I brought only the one".
Then Merlin mixed in: "He brought but the one because there was but the one to bring.
There exists none other but that one.
It belongeth to the king of the Demons of the Sea.
This man is a pretender, and ignorant, else he had known that that weapon can be used in but eight bouts only, and then it vanisheth away to its home under the sea".
"Then is he weaponless," said the king.
"Sir Sagramore, ye will grant him leave to borrow".
"And I will lend"!
said Sir Launcelot, limping up.
"He is as brave a knight of his hands as any that be on live, and he shall have mine".
He put his hand on his sword to draw it, but Sir Sagramor said: "Stay, it may not be.
He shall fight with his own weapons; it was his privilege to choose them and bring them.
If he has erred, on his head be it".
"Knight"!
said the king.
"Thou'rt overwrought with passion; it disorders thy mind.
Wouldst kill a naked man"?
"An he do it, he shall answer it to me," said Sir Launcelot.
"I will answer it to any he that desireth"!
retorted Sir Sagramor hotly.
Merlin broke in, rubbing his hands and smiling his lowdownest smile of malicious gratification: "'Tis well said, right well said!
And 'tis enough of parleying, let my lord the king deliver the battle signal".
The king had to yield.
The bugle made proclamation, and we turned apart and rode to our stations.
There we stood, a hundred yards apart, facing each other, rigid and motionless, like horsed statues.
And so we remained, in a soundless hush, as much as a full minute, everybody gazing, nobody stirring.
It seemed as if the king could not take heart to give the signal.
But at last he lifted his hand, the clear note of the bugle followed, Sir Sagramor's long blade described a flashing curve in the air, and it was superb to see him come.
I sat still.
On he came.
I did not move.
People got so excited that they shouted to me: "Fly, fly!
Save thyself!
This is murther"!
I never budged so much as an inch till that thundering apparition had got within fifteen paces of me; then I snatched a dragoon revolver out of my holster, there was a flash and a roar, and the revolver was back in the holster before anybody could tell
Here was a riderless horse plunging by, and yonder lay Sir Sagramor, stone dead.
The people that ran to him were stricken dumb to find that the life was actually gone out of the man and no reason for it visible, no hurt upon his body, nothing like a wound.
There was a hole through the breast of his chain-mail, but they attached no importance to a little thing like that; and as a bullet wound there produces but little blood, none came in sight because of the clothing and swaddlings under the armor.
The body was dragged over to let the king and the swells look down upon it.
They were stupefied with astonishment naturally.
I was requested to come and explain the miracle.
But I remained in my tracks, like a statue, and said: "If it is a command, I will come, but my lord the king knows that I am where the laws of combat require me to remain while any desire to come against me".
I waited.
Nobody challenged.
Then I said: "If there are any who doubt that this field is well and fairly won, I do not wait for them to challenge me, I challenge them".
"It is a gallant offer," said the king, "and well beseems you.
Whom will you name first"?
"I name none, I challenge all!
Here I stand, and dare the chivalry of England to come against me--not by individuals, but in mass"!
"What"!
shouted a score of knights.
"You have heard the challenge.
Take it, or I proclaim you recreant knights and vanquished, every one"!
It was a "bluff" you know.
At such a time it is sound judgment to put on a bold face and play your hand for a hundred times what it is worth; forty-nine times out of fifty nobody dares to "call," and you rake in the chips.
But just this once--well, things looked squally!
In just no time, five hundred knights were scrambling into their saddles, and before you could wink a widely scattering drove were under way and clattering down upon me.
I snatched both revolvers from the holsters and began to measure distances and calculate chances.
Bang!
One saddle empty.
Bang!
another one.
Bang--bang, and I bagged two.
Well, it was nip and tuck with us, and I knew it.
If I spent the eleventh shot without convincing these people, the twelfth man would kill me, sure.
And so I never did feel so happy as I did when my ninth downed its man and I detected the wavering in the crowd which is premonitory of panic.
An instant lost now could knock out my last chance.
But I didn't lose it.
I raised both revolvers and pointed them--the halted host stood their ground just about one good square moment, then broke and fled.
The day was mine.
Knight-errantry was a doomed institution.
The march of civilization was begun.
How did I feel?
Ah, you never could imagine it.
And Brer Merlin?
His stock was flat again.
Somehow, every time the magic of fol-de-rol tried conclusions with the magic of science, the magic of fol-de-rol got left.
CHAPTER XL THREE YEARS LATER When I broke the back of knight-errantry that time, I no longer felt obliged to work in secret.
So, the very next day I exposed my hidden schools, my mines, and my vast system of clandestine factories and workshops to an astonished world.
That is to say, I exposed the nineteenth century to the inspection of the sixth.
Well, it is always a good plan to follow up an advantage promptly.
The knights were temporarily down, but if I would keep them so I must just simply paralyze them--nothing short of that would answer.
You see, I was "bluffing" that last time in the field; it would be natural for them to work around to that conclusion, if I gave them a chance.
So I must not give them time; and I didn't.
I renewed my challenge, engraved it on brass, posted it up where any priest could read it to them, and also kept it standing in the advertising columns of the paper.
I not only renewed it, but added to its proportions.
I said, name the day, and I would take fifty assistants and stand up _against the massed chivalry of the whole earth and destroy it_.
I was not bluffing this time.
I meant what I said; I could do what I promised.
There wasn't any way to misunderstand the language of that challenge.
Even the dullest of the chivalry perceived that this was a plain case of "put up, or shut up".
They were wise and did the latter.
In all the next three years they gave me no trouble worth mentioning.
Consider the three years sped.
Now look around on England.
A happy and prosperous country, and strangely altered.
Schools everywhere, and several colleges; a number of pretty good newspapers.
Even authorship was taking a start; Sir Dinadan the Humorist was first in the field, with a volume of gray-headed jokes which I had been familiar with during thirteen centuries.
If he had left out that old rancid one about the lecturer I wouldn't have said anything; but I couldn't stand that one.
I suppressed the book and hanged the author.
Slavery was dead and gone; all men were equal before the law; taxation had been equalized.
The telegraph, the telephone, the phonograph, the typewriter, the sewing-machine, and all the thousand willing and handy servants of steam and electricity were working their way into favor.
We had a steamboat or two on the Thames, we had steam warships, and the beginnings of a steam commercial marine; I was getting ready to send out an expedition to discover America.
We were building several lines of railway, and our line from Camelot to London was already finished and in operation.
I was shrewd enough to make all offices connected with the passenger service places of high and distinguished honor.
My idea was to attract the chivalry and nobility, and make them useful and keep them out of mischief.
The plan worked very well, the competition for the places was hot.
The conductor of the 4.
33 express was a duke; there wasn't a passenger conductor on the line below the degree of earl.
They were good men, every one, but they had two defects which I couldn't cure, and so had to wink at: they wouldn't lay aside their armor, and they would "knock down" fare --I mean rob the company.
There was hardly a knight in all the land who wasn't in some useful employment.
They were going from end to end of the country in all manner of useful missionary capacities; their penchant for wandering, and their experience in it, made them altogether the most effective spreaders of civilization we had.
They went clothed in steel and equipped with sword and lance and battle-axe, and if they couldn't persuade a person to try a sewing-machine on the installment plan, or a melodeon, or a barbed-wire fence, or a prohibition journal, or any of the other
I was very happy.
Things were working steadily toward a secretly longed-for point.
You see, I had two schemes in my head which were the vastest of all my projects.
The one was to overthrow the Catholic Church and set up the Protestant faith on its ruins --not as an Established Church, but a go-as-you-please one; and the other project was to get a decree issued by and by, commanding that upon Arthur's death unlimited
Arthur was good for thirty years yet, he being about my own age--that is to say, forty--and I believed that in that time I could easily have the active part of the population of that day ready and eager for an event which should be the first of its kind in
The result to be a republic.
Well, I may as well confess, though I do feel ashamed when I think of it: I was beginning to have a base hankering to be its first president myself.
Yes, there was more or less human nature in me; I found that out.
Clarence was with me as concerned the revolution, but in a modified way.
His idea was a republic, without privileged orders, but with a hereditary royal family at the head of it instead of an elective chief magistrate.
He believed that no nation that had ever known the joy of worshiping a royal family could ever be robbed of it and not fade away and die of melancholy.
I urged that kings were dangerous.
He said, then have cats.
He was sure that a royal family of cats would answer every purpose.
They would be as useful as any other royal family, they would know as much, they would have the same virtues and the same treacheries, the same disposition to get up shindies with other royal cats, they would be laughably vain and absurd and never know it,
"And as a rule," said he, in his neat modern English, "the character of these cats would be considerably above the character of the average king, and this would be an immense moral advantage to the nation, for the reason that a nation always models its
The worship of royalty being founded in unreason, these graceful and harmless cats would easily become as sacred as any other royalties, and indeed more so, because it would presently be noticed that they hanged nobody, beheaded nobody, imprisoned nobody,
The eyes of the whole harried world would soon be fixed upon this humane and gentle system, and royal butchers would presently begin to disappear; their subjects would fill the vacancies with catlings from our own royal house; we should become a factory;
The reign of universal peace would begin then, to end no more forever...
.
Me-e-e-yow-ow-ow-ow--fzt!
--wow"!
Hang him, I supposed he was in earnest, and was beginning to be persuaded by him, until he exploded that cat-howl and startled me almost out of my clothes.
But he never could be in earnest.
He didn't know what it was.
He had pictured a distinct and perfectly rational and feasible improvement upon constitutional monarchy, but he was too feather-headed to know it, or care anything about it, either.
I was going to give him a scolding, but Sandy came flying in at that moment, wild with terror, and so choked with sobs that for a minute she could not get her voice.
I ran and took her in my arms, and lavished caresses upon her and said, beseechingly: "Speak, darling, speak!
What is it"?
Her head fell limp upon my bosom, and she gasped, almost inaudibly: "HELLO-CENTRAL"!
"Quick"!
I shouted to Clarence; "telephone the king's homeopath to come"!
In two minutes I was kneeling by the child's crib, and Sandy was dispatching servants here, there, and everywhere, all over the palace.
I took in the situation almost at a glance--membranous croup!
I bent down and whispered: "Wake up, sweetheart!
Hello-Central".
She opened her soft eyes languidly, and made out to say: "Papa".
That was a comfort.
She was far from dead yet.
I sent for preparations of sulphur, I rousted out the croup-kettle myself; for I don't sit down and wait for doctors when Sandy or the child is sick.
I knew how to nurse both of them, and had had experience.
This little chap had lived in my arms a good part of its small life, and often I could soothe away its troubles and get it to laugh through the tear-dews on its eye-lashes when even its mother couldn't.
Sir Launcelot, in his richest armor, came striding along the great hall now on his way to the stock-board; he was president of the stock-board, and occupied the Siege Perilous, which he had bought of Sir Galahad; for the stock-board consisted of the
Seats at it were worth--well, you would never believe the figure, so it is no use to state it.
Sir Launcelot was a bear, and he had put up a corner in one of the new lines, and was just getting ready to squeeze the shorts to-day; but what of that?
He was the same old Launcelot, and when he glanced in as he was passing the door and found out that his pet was sick, that was enough for him; bulls and bears might fight it out their own way for all him, he would come right in here and stand by little
And that was what he did.
He shied his helmet into the corner, and in half a minute he had a new wick in the alcohol lamp and was firing up on the croup-kettle.
By this time Sandy had built a blanket canopy over the crib, and everything was ready.
Sir Launcelot got up steam, he and I loaded up the kettle with unslaked lime and carbolic acid, with a touch of lactic acid added thereto, then filled the thing up with water and inserted the steam-spout under the canopy.
Everything was ship-shape now, and we sat down on either side of the crib to stand our watch.
Sandy was so grateful and so comforted that she charged a couple of church-wardens with willow-bark and sumach-tobacco for us, and told us to smoke as much as we pleased, it couldn't get under the canopy, and she was used to smoke, being the first lady in
Well, there couldn't be a more contented or comfortable sight than Sir Launcelot in his noble armor sitting in gracious serenity at the end of a yard of snowy church-warden.
He was a beautiful man, a lovely man, and was just intended to make a wife and children happy.
But, of course Guenever--however, it's no use to cry over what's done and can't be helped.
Well, he stood watch-and-watch with me, right straight through, for three days and nights, till the child was out of danger; then he took her up in his great arms and kissed her, with his plumes falling about her golden head, then laid her softly in
And no instinct warned me that I should never look upon him again in this world!
Lord, what a world of heart-break it is.
The doctors said we must take the child away, if we would coax her back to health and strength again.
And she must have sea-air.
So we took a man-of-war, and a suite of two hundred and sixty persons, and went cruising about, and after a fortnight of this we stepped ashore on the French coast, and the doctors thought it would be a good idea to make something of a stay there.
The little king of that region offered us his hospitalities, and we were glad to accept.
If he had had as many conveniences as he lacked, we should have been plenty comfortable enough; even as it was, we made out very well, in his queer old castle, by the help of comforts and luxuries from the ship.
At the end of a month I sent the vessel home for fresh supplies, and for news.
We expected her back in three or four days.
She would bring me, along with other news, the result of a certain experiment which I had been starting.
It was a project of mine to replace the tournament with something which might furnish an escape for the extra steam of the chivalry, keep those bucks entertained and out of mischief, and at the same time preserve the best thing in them, which was their
I had had a choice band of them in private training for some time, and the date was now arriving for their first public effort.
This experiment was baseball.
In order to give the thing vogue from the start, and place it out of the reach of criticism, I chose my nines by rank, not capacity.
There wasn't a knight in either team who wasn't a sceptered sovereign.
As for material of this sort, there was a glut of it always around Arthur.
You couldn't throw a brick in any direction and not cripple a king.
Of course, I couldn't get these people to leave off their armor; they wouldn't do that when they bathed.
They consented to differentiate the armor so that a body could tell one team from the other, but that was the most they would do.
So, one of the teams wore chain-mail ulsters, and the other wore plate-armor made of my new Bessemer steel.
Their practice in the field was the most fantastic thing I ever saw.
Being ball-proof, they never skipped out of the way, but stood still and took the result; when a Bessemer was at the bat and a ball hit him, it would bound a hundred and fifty yards sometimes.
And when a man was running, and threw himself on his stomach to slide to his base, it was like an iron-clad coming into port.
At first I appointed men of no rank to act as umpires, but I had to discontinue that.
These people were no easier to please than other nines.
The umpire's first decision was usually his last; they broke him in two with a bat, and his friends toted him home on a shutter.
When it was noticed that no umpire ever survived a game, umpiring got to be unpopular.
So I was obliged to appoint somebody whose rank and lofty position under the government would protect him.
Here are the names of the nines: BESSEMERS ULSTERS KING ARTHUR.
EMPEROR LUCIUS.
KING LOT OF LOTHIAN.
KING LOGRIS.
KING OF NORTHGALIS.
KING MARHALT OF IRELAND.
KING MARSIL.
KING MORGANORE.
KING OF LITTLE BRITAIN.
KING MARK OF CORNWALL.
KING LABOR.
KING NENTRES OF GARLOT.
KING PELLAM OF LISTENGESE.
KING MELIODAS OF LIONES.
KING BAGDEMAGUS.
KING OF THE LAKE.
KING TOLLEME LA FEINTES.
THE SOWDAN OF SYRIA.
Umpire--CLARENCE.
The first public game would certainly draw fifty thousand people; and for solid fun would be worth going around the world to see.
Everything would be favorable; it was balmy and beautiful spring weather now, and Nature was all tailored out in her new clothes.
CHAPTER XLI THE INTERDICT However, my attention was suddenly snatched from such matters; our child began to lose ground again, and we had to go to sitting up with her, her case became so serious.
We couldn't bear to allow anybody to help in this service, so we two stood watch-and-watch, day in and day out.
Ah, Sandy, what a right heart she had, how simple, and genuine, and good she was!
She was a flawless wife and mother; and yet I had married her for no other particular reasons, except that by the customs of chivalry she was my property until some knight should win her from me in the field.
She had hunted Britain over for me; had found me at the hanging-bout outside of London, and had straightway resumed her old place at my side in the placidest way and as of right.
I was a New Englander, and in my opinion this sort of partnership would compromise her, sooner or later.
She couldn't see how, but I cut argument short and we had a wedding.
Now I didn't know I was drawing a prize, yet that was what I did draw.
Within the twelvemonth I became her worshiper; and ours was the dearest and perfectest comradeship that ever was.
People talk about beautiful friendships between two persons of the same sex.
What is the best of that sort, as compared with the friendship of man and wife, where the best impulses and highest ideals of both are the same?
There is no place for comparison between the two friendships; the one is earthly, the other divine.
In my dreams, along at first, I still wandered thirteen centuries away, and my unsatisfied spirit went calling and harking all up and down the unreplying vacancies of a vanished world.
Many a time Sandy heard that imploring cry come from my lips in my sleep.
With a grand magnanimity she saddled that cry of mine upon our child, conceiving it to be the name of some lost darling of mine.
It touched me to tears, and it also nearly knocked me off my feet, too, when she smiled up in my face for an earned reward, and played her quaint and pretty surprise upon me: "The name of one who was dear to thee is here preserved, here made holy, and the
Now thou'lt kiss me, as knowing the name I have given the child".
But I didn't know it, all the same.
I hadn't an idea in the world; but it would have been cruel to confess it and spoil her pretty game; so I never let on, but said: "Yes, I know, sweetheart--how dear and good it is of you, too!
But I want to hear these lips of yours, which are also mine, utter it first--then its music will be perfect".
Pleased to the marrow, she murmured: "HELLO-CENTRAL"!
I didn't laugh--I am always thankful for that--but the strain ruptured every cartilage in me, and for weeks afterward I could hear my bones clack when I walked.
She never found out her mistake.
The first time she heard that form of salute used at the telephone she was surprised, and not pleased; but I told her I had given order for it: that henceforth and forever the telephone must always be invoked with that reverent formality, in perpetual
This was not true.
But it answered.
Well, during two weeks and a half we watched by the crib, and in our deep solicitude we were unconscious of any world outside of that sick-room.
Then our reward came: the center of the universe turned the corner and began to mend.
Grateful?
It isn't the term.
There _isn't_ any term for it.
You know that yourself, if you've watched your child through the Valley of the Shadow and seen it come back to life and sweep night out of the earth with one all-illuminating smile that you could cover with your hand.
Why, we were back in this world in one instant!
Then we looked the same startled thought into each other's eyes at the same moment; more than two weeks gone, and that ship not back yet!
In another minute I appeared in the presence of my train.
They had been steeped in troubled bodings all this time--their faces showed it.
I called an escort and we galloped five miles to a hilltop overlooking the sea.
Where was my great commerce that so lately had made these glistening expanses populous and beautiful with its white-winged flocks?
Vanished, every one!
Not a sail, from verge to verge, not a smoke-bank--just a dead and empty solitude, in place of all that brisk and breezy life.
I went swiftly back, saying not a word to anybody.
I told Sandy this ghastly news.
We could imagine no explanation that would begin to explain.
Had there been an invasion?
an earthquake?
a pestilence?
Had the nation been swept out of existence?
But guessing was profitless.
I must go--at once.
I borrowed the king's navy--a "ship" no bigger than a steam launch--and was soon ready.
The parting--ah, yes, that was hard.
As I was devouring the child with last kisses, it brisked up and jabbered out its vocabulary!
--the first time in more than two weeks, and it made fools of us for joy.
The darling mispronunciations of childhood!
--dear me, there's no music that can touch it; and how one grieves when it wastes away and dissolves into correctness, knowing it will never visit his bereaved ear again.
Well, how good it was to be able to carry that gracious memory away with me!
I approached England the next morning, with the wide highway of salt water all to myself.
There were ships in the harbor, at Dover, but they were naked as to sails, and there was no sign of life about them.
It was Sunday; yet at Canterbury the streets were empty; strangest of all, there was not even a priest in sight, and no stroke of a bell fell upon my ear.
The mournfulness of death was everywhere.
I couldn't understand it.
At last, in the further edge of that town I saw a small funeral procession --just a family and a few friends following a coffin--no priest; a funeral without bell, book, or candle; there was a church there close at hand, but they passed it by weeping, and
Now I knew!
Now I understood the stupendous calamity that had overtaken England.
Invasion?
Invasion is a triviality to it.
It was the INTERDICT!
I asked no questions; I didn't need to ask any.
The Church had struck; the thing for me to do was to get into a disguise, and go warily.
One of my servants gave me a suit of clothes, and when we were safe beyond the town I put them on, and from that time I traveled alone; I could not risk the embarrassment of company.
A miserable journey.
A desolate silence everywhere.
Even in London itself.
Traffic had ceased; men did not talk or laugh, or go in groups, or even in couples; they moved aimlessly about, each man by himself, with his head down, and woe and terror at his heart.
The Tower showed recent war-scars.
Verily, much had been happening.
Of course, I meant to take the train for Camelot.
Train!
Why, the station was as vacant as a cavern.
I moved on.
The journey to Camelot was a repetition of what I had already seen.
The Monday and the Tuesday differed in no way from the Sunday.
I arrived far in the night.
From being the best electric-lighted town in the kingdom and the most like a recumbent sun of anything you ever saw, it was become simply a blot--a blot upon darkness--that is to say, it was darker and solider than the rest of the darkness, and so you
I found no life stirring in the somber streets.
I groped my way with a heavy heart.
The vast castle loomed black upon the hilltop, not a spark visible about it.
The drawbridge was down, the great gate stood wide, I entered without challenge, my own heels making the only sound I heard--and it was sepulchral enough, in those huge vacant courts.
CHAPTER XLII WAR!
I found Clarence alone in his quarters, drowned in melancholy; and in place of the electric light, he had reinstituted the ancient rag-lamp, and sat there in a grisly twilight with all curtains drawn tight.
He sprang up and rushed for me eagerly, saying: "Oh, it's worth a billion milrays to look upon a live person again"!
He knew me as easily as if I hadn't been disguised at all.
Which frightened me; one may easily believe that.
"Quick, now, tell me the meaning of this fearful disaster," I said.
"How did it come about"?
"Well, if there hadn't been any Queen Guenever, it wouldn't have come so early; but it would have come, anyway.
It would have come on your own account by and by; by luck, it happened to come on the queen's".
"_And_ Sir Launcelot's"?
"Just so".
"Give me the details".
"I reckon you will grant that during some years there has been only one pair of eyes in these kingdoms that has not been looking steadily askance at the queen and Sir Launcelot--" "Yes, King Arthur's".
"--and only one heart that was without suspicion--" "Yes--the king's; a heart that isn't capable of thinking evil of a friend".
"Well, the king might have gone on, still happy and unsuspecting, to the end of his days, but for one of your modern improvements --the stock-board.
When you left, three miles of the London, Canterbury and Dover were ready for the rails, and also ready and ripe for manipulation in the stock-market.
It was wildcat, and everybody knew it.
The stock was for sale at a give-away.
What does Sir Launcelot do, but--" "Yes, I know; he quietly picked up nearly all of it for a song; then he bought about twice as much more, deliverable upon call; and he was about to call when I left".
"Very well, he did call.
The boys couldn't deliver.
Oh, he had them--and he just settled his grip and squeezed them.
They were laughing in their sleeves over their smartness in selling stock to him at 15 and 16 and along there that wasn't worth 10.
Well, when they had laughed long enough on that side of their mouths, they rested-up that side by shifting the laugh to the other side.
That was when they compromised with the Invincible at 283"!
"Good land"!
"He skinned them alive, and they deserved it--anyway, the whole kingdom rejoiced.
Well, among the flayed were Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, nephews to the king.
End of the first act.
Act second, scene first, an apartment in Carlisle castle, where the court had gone for a few days' hunting.
Persons present, the whole tribe of the king's nephews.
Mordred and Agravaine propose to call the guileless Arthur's attention to Guenever and Sir Launcelot.
Sir Gawaine, Sir Gareth, and Sir Gaheris will have nothing to do with it.
A dispute ensues, with loud talk; in the midst of it enter the king.
Mordred and Agravaine spring their devastating tale upon him.
_Tableau_.
A trap is laid for Launcelot, by the king's command, and Sir Launcelot walks into it.
He made it sufficiently uncomfortable for the ambushed witnesses--to wit, Mordred, Agravaine, and twelve knights of lesser rank, for he killed every one of them but Mordred; but of course that couldn't straighten matters between Launcelot and the king, and
"Oh, dear, only one thing could result--I see that.
War, and the knights of the realm divided into a king's party and a Sir Launcelot's party".
"Yes--that was the way of it.
The king sent the queen to the stake, proposing to purify her with fire.
Launcelot and his knights rescued her, and in doing it slew certain good old friends of yours and mine--in fact, some of the best we ever had; to wit, Sir Belias le Orgulous, Sir Segwarides, Sir Griflet le Fils de Dieu, Sir Brandiles, Sir Aglovale--" "Oh,
"--wait, I'm not done yet--Sir Tor, Sir Gauter, Sir Gillimer--" "The very best man in my subordinate nine.
What a handy right-fielder he was"!
"--Sir Reynold's three brothers, Sir Damus, Sir Priamus, Sir Kay the Stranger--" "My peerless short-stop!
I've seen him catch a daisy-cutter in his teeth.
Come, I can't stand this"!
"--Sir Driant, Sir Lambegus, Sir Herminde, Sir Pertilope, Sir Perimones, and--whom do you think"?
"Rush!
Go on".
"Sir Gaheris, and Sir Gareth--both"!
"Oh, incredible!
Their love for Launcelot was indestructible".
"Well, it was an accident.
They were simply onlookers; they were unarmed, and were merely there to witness the queen's punishment.
Sir Launcelot smote down whoever came in the way of his blind fury, and he killed these without noticing who they were.
Here is an instantaneous photograph one of our boys got of the battle; it's for sale on every news-stand.
There--the figures nearest the queen are Sir Launcelot with his sword up, and Sir Gareth gasping his latest breath.
You can catch the agony in the queen's face through the curling smoke.
It's a rattling battle-picture".
"Indeed, it is.
We must take good care of it; its historical value is incalculable.
Go on".
"Well, the rest of the tale is just war, pure and simple.
Launcelot retreated to his town and castle of Joyous Gard, and gathered there a great following of knights.
The king, with a great host, went there, and there was desperate fighting during several days, and, as a result, all the plain around was paved with corpses and cast-iron.
Then the Church patched up a peace between Arthur and Launcelot and the queen and everybody--everybody but Sir Gawaine.
He was bitter about the slaying of his brothers, Gareth and Gaheris, and would not be appeased.
He notified Launcelot to get him thence, and make swift preparation, and look to be soon attacked.
So Launcelot sailed to his Duchy of Guienne with his following, and Gawaine soon followed with an army, and he beguiled Arthur to go with him.
Arthur left the kingdom in Sir Mordred's hands until you should return--" "Ah--a king's customary wisdom"!
"Yes.
Sir Mordred set himself at once to work to make his kingship permanent.
He was going to marry Guenever, as a first move; but she fled and shut herself up in the Tower of London.
Mordred attacked; the Bishop of Canterbury dropped down on him with the Interdict.
The king returned; Mordred fought him at Dover, at Canterbury, and again at Barham Down.
Then there was talk of peace and a composition.
Terms, Mordred to have Cornwall and Kent during Arthur's life, and the whole kingdom afterward".
"Well, upon my word!
My dream of a republic to _be_ a dream, and so remain".
"Yes.
The two armies lay near Salisbury.
Gawaine--Gawaine's head is at Dover Castle, he fell in the fight there--Gawaine appeared to Arthur in a dream, at least his ghost did, and warned him to refrain from conflict for a month, let the delay cost what it might.
But battle was precipitated by an accident.
Arthur had given order that if a sword was raised during the consultation over the proposed treaty with Mordred, sound the trumpet and fall on!
for he had no confidence in Mordred.
Mordred had given a similar order to _his_ people.
Well, by and by an adder bit a knight's heel; the knight forgot all about the order, and made a slash at the adder with his sword.
Inside of half a minute those two prodigious hosts came together with a crash!
They butchered away all day.
Then the king--however, we have started something fresh since you left--our paper has".
"No?
What is that"?
"War correspondence"!
"Why, that's good".
"Yes, the paper was booming right along, for the Interdict made no impression, got no grip, while the war lasted.
I had war correspondents with both armies.
I will finish that battle by reading you what one of the boys says: 'Then the king looked about him, and then was he ware of all his host and of all his good knights were left no more on live but two knights, that was Sir Lucan de Butlere, and his brother
Jesu mercy, said the king, where are all my noble knights becomen?
Alas that ever I should see this doleful day.
For now, said Arthur, I am come to mine end.
But would to God that I wist where were that traitor Sir Mordred, that hath caused all this mischief.
Then was King Arthur ware where Sir Mordred leaned upon his sword among a great heap of dead men.
Now give me my spear, said Arthur unto Sir Lucan, for yonder I have espied the traitor that all this woe hath wrought.
Sir, let him be, said Sir Lucan, for he is unhappy; and if ye pass this unhappy day, ye shall be right well revenged upon him.
Good lord, remember ye of your night's dream, and what the spirit of Sir Gawaine told you this night, yet God of his great goodness hath preserved you hitherto.
Therefore, for God's sake, my lord, leave off by this.
For blessed be God ye have won the field: for here we be three on live, and with Sir Mordred is none on live.
And if ye leave off now, this wicked day of destiny is past.
Tide me death, betide me life, saith the king, now I see him yonder alone, he shall never escape mine hands, for at a better avail shall I never have him.
God speed you well, said Sir Bedivere.
Then the king gat his spear in both his hands, and ran toward Sir Mordred crying, Traitor, now is thy death day come.
And when Sir Mordred heard Sir Arthur, he ran until him with his sword drawn in his hand.
And then King Arthur smote Sir Mordred under the shield, with a foin of his spear throughout the body more than a fathom.
And when Sir Mordred felt that he had his death's wound, he thrust himself, with the might that he had, up to the butt of King Arthur's spear.
And right so he smote his father Arthur with his sword holden in both his hands, on the side of the head, that the sword pierced the helmet and the brain-pan, and therewithal Sir Mordred fell stark dead to the earth.
And the noble Arthur fell in a swoon to the earth, and there he swooned oft-times--'" "That is a good piece of war correspondence, Clarence; you are a first-rate newspaper man.
Well--is the king all right?
Did he get well"?
"Poor soul, no.
He is dead".
I was utterly stunned; it had not seemed to me that any wound could be mortal to him.
"And the queen, Clarence"?
"She is a nun, in Almesbury".
"What changes!
and in such a short while.
It is inconceivable.
What next, I wonder"?
"I can tell you what next".
"Well"?
"Stake our lives and stand by them"!
"What do you mean by that"?
"The Church is master now.
The Interdict included you with Mordred; it is not to be removed while you remain alive.
The clans are gathering.
The Church has gathered all the knights that are left alive, and as soon as you are discovered we shall have business on our hands".
"Stuff!
With our deadly scientific war-material; with our hosts of trained--" "Save your breath--we haven't sixty faithful left"!
"What are you saying?
Our schools, our colleges, our vast workshops, our--" "When those knights come, those establishments will empty themselves and go over to the enemy.
Did you think you had educated the superstition out of those people"?
"I certainly did think it".
"Well, then, you may unthink it.
They stood every strain easily --until the Interdict.
Since then, they merely put on a bold outside--at heart they are quaking.
Make up your mind to it --when the armies come, the mask will fall".
"It's hard news.
We are lost.
They will turn our own science against us".
"No they won't".
"Why"?
"Because I and a handful of the faithful have blocked that game.
I'll tell you what I've done, and what moved me to it.
Smart as you are, the Church was smarter.
It was the Church that sent you cruising--through her servants, the doctors".
"Clarence"!
"It is the truth.
I know it.
Every officer of your ship was the Church's picked servant, and so was every man of the crew".
"Oh, come"!
"It is just as I tell you.
I did not find out these things at once, but I found them out finally.
Did you send me verbal information, by the commander of the ship, to the effect that upon his return to you, with supplies, you were going to leave Cadiz--" "Cadiz!
I haven't been at Cadiz at all"!
"--going to leave Cadiz and cruise in distant seas indefinitely, for the health of your family?
Did you send me that word"?
"Of course not.
I would have written, wouldn't I"?
"Naturally.
I was troubled and suspicious.
When the commander sailed again I managed to ship a spy with him.
I have never heard of vessel or spy since.
I gave myself two weeks to hear from you in.
Then I resolved to send a ship to Cadiz.
There was a reason why I didn't".
"What was that"?
"Our navy had suddenly and mysteriously disappeared!
Also, as suddenly and as mysteriously, the railway and telegraph and telephone service ceased, the men all deserted, poles were cut down, the Church laid a ban upon the electric light!
I had to be up and doing--and straight off.
Your life was safe--nobody in these kingdoms but Merlin would venture to touch such a magician as you without ten thousand men at his back--I had nothing to think of but how to put preparations in the best trim against your coming.
I felt safe myself--nobody would be anxious to touch a pet of yours.
So this is what I did.
From our various works I selected all the men--boys I mean--whose faithfulness under whatsoever pressure I could swear to, and I called them together secretly and gave them their instructions.
There are fifty-two of them; none younger than fourteen, and none above seventeen years old".
"Why did you select boys"?
"Because all the others were born in an atmosphere of superstition and reared in it.
It is in their blood and bones.
We imagined we had educated it out of them; they thought so, too; the Interdict woke them up like a thunderclap!
It revealed them to themselves, and it revealed them to me, too.
With boys it was different.
Such as have been under our training from seven to ten years have had no acquaintance with the Church's terrors, and it was among these that I found my fifty-two.
As a next move, I paid a private visit to that old cave of Merlin's--not the small one--the big one--" "Yes, the one where we secretly established our first great electric plant when I was projecting a miracle".
"Just so.
And as that miracle hadn't become necessary then, I thought it might be a good idea to utilize the plant now.
I've provisioned the cave for a siege--" "A good idea, a first-rate idea".
"I think so.
I placed four of my boys there as a guard--inside, and out of sight.
Nobody was to be hurt--while outside; but any attempt to enter--well, we said just let anybody try it!
Then I went out into the hills and uncovered and cut the secret wires which connected your bedroom with the wires that go to the dynamite deposits under all our vast factories, mills, workshops, magazines, etc.
, and about midnight I and my boys turned out and connected that wire with the cave, and nobody but you and I suspects where the other end of it goes to.
We laid it under ground, of course, and it was all finished in a couple of hours or so.
We sha'n't have to leave our fortress now when we want to blow up our civilization".
"It was the right move--and the natural one; military necessity, in the changed condition of things.
Well, what changes _have_ come!
We expected to be besieged in the palace some time or other, but --however, go on".
"Next, we built a wire fence".
"Wire fence"?
"Yes.
You dropped the hint of it yourself, two or three years ago".
"Oh, I remember--the time the Church tried her strength against us the first time, and presently thought it wise to wait for a hopefuler season.
Well, how have you arranged the fence"?
"I start twelve immensely strong wires--naked, not insulated --from a big dynamo in the cave--dynamo with no brushes except a positive and a negative one--" "Yes, that's right".
"The wires go out from the cave and fence in a circle of level ground a hundred yards in diameter; they make twelve independent fences, ten feet apart--that is to say, twelve circles within circles--and their ends come into the cave again".
"Right; go on".
"The fences are fastened to heavy oaken posts only three feet apart, and these posts are sunk five feet in the ground".
"That is good and strong".
"Yes.
The wires have no ground-connection outside of the cave.
They go out from the positive brush of the dynamo; there is a ground-connection through the negative brush; the other ends of the wire return to the cave, and each is grounded independently".
"No, no, that won't do"!
"Why"?
"It's too expensive--uses up force for nothing.
You don't want any ground-connection except the one through the negative brush.
The other end of every wire must be brought back into the cave and fastened independently, and _without_ any ground-connection.
Now, then, observe the economy of it.
A cavalry charge hurls itself against the fence; you are using no power, you are spending no money, for there is only one ground-connection till those horses come against the wire; the moment they touch it they form a connection with the negative brush
Don't you see?
--you are using no energy until it is needed; your lightning is there, and ready, like the load in a gun; but it isn't costing you a cent till you touch it off.
Oh, yes, the single ground-connection--" "Of course!
I don't know how I overlooked that.
It's not only cheaper, but it's more effectual than the other way, for if wires break or get tangled, no harm is done".
"No, especially if we have a tell-tale in the cave and disconnect the broken wire.
Well, go on.
The gatlings"?
"Yes--that's arranged.
In the center of the inner circle, on a spacious platform six feet high, I've grouped a battery of thirteen gatling guns, and provided plenty of ammunition".
"That's it.
They command every approach, and when the Church's knights arrive, there's going to be music.
The brow of the precipice over the cave--" "I've got a wire fence there, and a gatling.
They won't drop any rocks down on us".
"Well, and the glass-cylinder dynamite torpedoes"?
"That's attended to.
It's the prettiest garden that was ever planted.
It's a belt forty feet wide, and goes around the outer fence--distance between it and the fence one hundred yards--kind of neutral ground that space is.
There isn't a single square yard of that whole belt but is equipped with a torpedo.
We laid them on the surface of the ground, and sprinkled a layer of sand over them.
It's an innocent looking garden, but you let a man start in to hoe it once, and you'll see".
"You tested the torpedoes"?
"Well, I was going to, but--" "But what?
Why, it's an immense oversight not to apply a--" "Test?
Yes, I know; but they're all right; I laid a few in the public road beyond our lines and they've been tested".
"Oh, that alters the case.
Who did it"?
"A Church committee".
"How kind"!
"Yes.
They came to command us to make submission.
You see they didn't really come to test the torpedoes; that was merely an incident".
"Did the committee make a report"?
"Yes, they made one.
You could have heard it a mile".
"Unanimous"?
"That was the nature of it.
After that I put up some signs, for the protection of future committees, and we have had no intruders since".
"Clarence, you've done a world of work, and done it perfectly".
"We had plenty of time for it; there wasn't any occasion for hurry".
We sat silent awhile, thinking.
Then my mind was made up, and I said: "Yes, everything is ready; everything is shipshape, no detail is wanting.
I know what to do now".
"So do I; sit down and wait".
"No, _sir_!
rise up and _strike_"!
"Do you mean it"?
"Yes, indeed!
The _de_fensive isn't in my line, and the _of_fensive is.
That is, when I hold a fair hand--two-thirds as good a hand as the enemy.
Oh, yes, we'll rise up and strike; that's our game".
"A hundred to one you are right.
When does the performance begin"?
"_Now!
_ We'll proclaim the Republic".
"Well, that _will_ precipitate things, sure enough"!
"It will make them buzz, I tell you!
England will be a hornets' nest before noon to-morrow, if the Church's hand hasn't lost its cunning--and we know it hasn't.
Now you write and I'll dictate thus: "PROCLAMATION --- "BE IT KNOWN UNTO ALL.
Whereas the king having died and left no heir, it becomes my duty to continue the executive authority vested in me, until a government shall have been created and set in motion.
The monarchy has lapsed, it no longer exists.
By consequence, all political power has reverted to its original source, the people of the nation.
With the monarchy, its several adjuncts died also; wherefore there is no longer a nobility, no longer a privileged class, no longer an Established Church; all men are become exactly equal; they are upon one common level, and religion is free.
_A Republic is hereby proclaimed_, as being the natural estate of a nation when other authority has ceased.
It is the duty of the British people to meet together immediately, and by their votes elect representatives and deliver into their hands the government".
I signed it "The Boss," and dated it from Merlin's Cave.
Clarence said-- "Why, that tells where we are, and invites them to call right away".
"That is the idea.
We _strike_--by the Proclamation--then it's their innings.
Now have the thing set up and printed and posted, right off; that is, give the order; then, if you've got a couple of bicycles handy at the foot of the hill, ho for Merlin's Cave"!
"I shall be ready in ten minutes.
What a cyclone there is going to be to-morrow when this piece of paper gets to work!
...
It's a pleasant old palace, this is; I wonder if we shall ever again --but never mind about that".
CHAPTER XLIII THE BATTLE OF THE SAND BELT In Merlin's Cave--Clarence and I and fifty-two fresh, bright, well-educated, clean-minded young British boys.
At dawn I sent an order to the factories and to all our great works to stop operations and remove all life to a safe distance, as everything was going to be blown up by secret mines, "_and no telling at what moment--therefore, vacate at once_".
These people knew me, and had confidence in my word.
They would clear out without waiting to part their hair, and I could take my own time about dating the explosion.
You couldn't hire one of them to go back during the century, if the explosion was still impending.
We had a week of waiting.
It was not dull for me, because I was writing all the time.
During the first three days, I finished turning my old diary into this narrative form; it only required a chapter or so to bring it down to date.
The rest of the week I took up in writing letters to my wife.
It was always my habit to write to Sandy every day, whenever we were separate, and now I kept up the habit for love of it, and of her, though I couldn't do anything with the letters, of course, after I had written them.
But it put in the time, you see, and was almost like talking; it was almost as if I was saying, "Sandy, if you and Hello-Central were here in the cave, instead of only your photographs, what good times we could have"!
And then, you know, I could imagine the baby goo-gooing something out in reply, with its fists in its mouth and itself stretched across its mother's lap on its back, and she a-laughing and admiring and worshipping, and now and then tickling under the
Why, it was almost like having us all together again.
I had spies out every night, of course, to get news.
Every report made things look more and more impressive.
The hosts were gathering, gathering; down all the roads and paths of England the knights were riding, and priests rode with them, to hearten these original Crusaders, this being the Church's war.
All the nobilities, big and little, were on their way, and all the gentry.
This was all as was expected.
We should thin out this sort of folk to such a degree that the people would have nothing to do but just step to the front with their republic and-- Ah, what a donkey I was!
Toward the end of the week I began to get this large and disenchanting fact through my head: that the mass of the nation had swung their caps and shouted for the republic for about one day, and there an end!
The Church, the nobles, and the gentry then turned one grand, all-disapproving frown upon them and shriveled them into sheep!
From that moment the sheep had begun to gather to the fold--that is to say, the camps--and offer their valueless lives and their valuable wool to the "righteous cause".
Why, even the very men who had lately been slaves were in the "righteous cause," and glorifying it, praying for it, sentimentally slabbering over it, just like all the other commoners.
Imagine such human muck as this; conceive of this folly!
Yes, it was now "Death to the Republic"!
everywhere--not a dissenting voice.
All England was marching against us!
Truly, this was more than I had bargained for.
I watched my fifty-two boys narrowly; watched their faces, their walk, their unconscious attitudes: for all these are a language --a language given us purposely that it may betray us in times of emergency, when we have secrets which we want to keep.
I knew that that thought would keep saying itself over and over again in their minds and hearts, _All England is marching against us!
_ and ever more strenuously imploring attention with each repetition, ever more sharply realizing itself to their imaginations, until even in their sleep they would find no rest from it, but hear the vague and flitting creatures of the dreams say, _All
--_is marching against you_!
I knew all this would happen; I knew that ultimately the pressure would become so great that it would compel utterance; therefore, I must be ready with an answer at that time--an answer well chosen and tranquilizing.
I was right.
The time came.
They HAD to speak.
Poor lads, it was pitiful to see, they were so pale, so worn, so troubled.
At first their spokesman could hardly find voice or words; but he presently got both.
This is what he said--and he put it in the neat modern English taught him in my schools: "We have tried to forget what we are--English boys!
We have tried to put reason before sentiment, duty before love; our minds approve, but our hearts reproach us.
While apparently it was only the nobility, only the gentry, only the twenty-five or thirty thousand knights left alive out of the late wars, we were of one mind, and undisturbed by any troubling doubt; each and every one of these fifty-two lads who stand
' But think!
--the matter is altered--_All England is marching against us_!
Oh, sir, consider!
--reflect!
--these people are our people, they are bone of our bone, flesh of our flesh, we love them--do not ask us to destroy our nation"!
Well, it shows the value of looking ahead, and being ready for a thing when it happens.
If I hadn't foreseen this thing and been fixed, that boy would have had me!
--I couldn't have said a word.
But I was fixed.
I said: "My boys, your hearts are in the right place, you have thought the worthy thought, you have done the worthy thing.
You are English boys, you will remain English boys, and you will keep that name unsmirched.
Give yourselves no further concern, let your minds be at peace.
Consider this: while all England is marching against us, who is in the van?
Who, by the commonest rules of war, will march in the front?
Answer me".
"The mounted host of mailed knights".
"True.
They are thirty thousand strong.
Acres deep they will march.
Now, observe: none but _they_ will ever strike the sand-belt!
Then there will be an episode!
Immediately after, the civilian multitude in the rear will retire, to meet business engagements elsewhere.
None but nobles and gentry are knights, and _none but these_ will remain to dance to our music after that episode.
It is absolutely true that we shall have to fight nobody but these thirty thousand knights.
Now speak, and it shall be as you decide.
Shall we avoid the battle, retire from the field"?
"NO!
!
"!
The shout was unanimous and hearty.
"Are you--are you--well, afraid of these thirty thousand knights"?
That joke brought out a good laugh, the boys' troubles vanished away, and they went gaily to their posts.
Ah, they were a darling fifty-two!
As pretty as girls, too.
I was ready for the enemy now.
Let the approaching big day come along--it would find us on deck.
The big day arrived on time.
At dawn the sentry on watch in the corral came into the cave and reported a moving black mass under the horizon, and a faint sound which he thought to be military music.
Breakfast was just ready; we sat down and ate it.
This over, I made the boys a little speech, and then sent out a detail to man the battery, with Clarence in command of it.
The sun rose presently and sent its unobstructed splendors over the land, and we saw a prodigious host moving slowly toward us, with the steady drift and aligned front of a wave of the sea.
Nearer and nearer it came, and more and more sublimely imposing became its aspect; yes, all England was there, apparently.
Soon we could see the innumerable banners fluttering, and then the sun struck the sea of armor and set it all aflash.
Yes, it was a fine sight; I hadn't ever seen anything to beat it.
At last we could make out details.
All the front ranks, no telling how many acres deep, were horsemen--plumed knights in armor.
Suddenly we heard the blare of trumpets; the slow walk burst into a gallop, and then--well, it was wonderful to see!
Down swept that vast horse-shoe wave--it approached the sand-belt--my breath stood still; nearer, nearer--the strip of green turf beyond the yellow belt grew narrow--narrower still--became a mere ribbon in front of the horses--then disappeared under their
Great Scott!
Why, the whole front of that host shot into the sky with a thunder-crash, and became a whirling tempest of rags and fragments; and along the ground lay a thick wall of smoke that hid what was left of the multitude from our sight.
Time for the second step in the plan of campaign!
I touched a button, and shook the bones of England loose from her spine!
In that explosion all our noble civilization-factories went up in the air and disappeared from the earth.
It was a pity, but it was necessary.
We could not afford to let the enemy turn our own weapons against us.
Now ensued one of the dullest quarter-hours I had ever endured.
We waited in a silent solitude enclosed by our circles of wire, and by a circle of heavy smoke outside of these.
We couldn't see over the wall of smoke, and we couldn't see through it.
But at last it began to shred away lazily, and by the end of another quarter-hour the land was clear and our curiosity was enabled to satisfy itself.
No living creature was in sight!
We now perceived that additions had been made to our defenses.
The dynamite had dug a ditch more than a hundred feet wide, all around us, and cast up an embankment some twenty-five feet high on both borders of it.
As to destruction of life, it was amazing.
Moreover, it was beyond estimate.
Of course, we could not _count_ the dead, because they did not exist as individuals, but merely as homogeneous protoplasm, with alloys of iron and buttons.
No life was in sight, but necessarily there must have been some wounded in the rear ranks, who were carried off the field under cover of the wall of smoke; there would be sickness among the others--there always is, after an episode like that.
But there would be no reinforcements; this was the last stand of the chivalry of England; it was all that was left of the order, after the recent annihilating wars.
So I felt quite safe in believing that the utmost force that could for the future be brought against us would be but small; that is, of knights.
I therefore issued a congratulatory proclamation to my army in these words: SOLDIERS, CHAMPIONS OF HUMAN LIBERTY AND EQUALITY: Your General congratulates you!
In the pride of his strength and the vanity of his renown, an arrogant enemy came against you.
You were ready.
The conflict was brief; on your side, glorious.
This mighty victory, having been achieved utterly without loss, stands without example in history.
So long as the planets shall continue to move in their orbits, the BATTLE OF THE SAND-BELT will not perish out of the memories of men.
THE BOSS.
I read it well, and the applause I got was very gratifying to me.
I then wound up with these remarks: "The war with the English nation, as a nation, is at an end.
The nation has retired from the field and the war.
Before it can be persuaded to return, war will have ceased.
This campaign is the only one that is going to be fought.
It will be brief --the briefest in history.
Also the most destructive to life, considered from the standpoint of proportion of casualties to numbers engaged.
We are done with the nation; henceforth we deal only with the knights.
English knights can be killed, but they cannot be conquered.
We know what is before us.
While one of these men remains alive, our task is not finished, the war is not ended.
We will kill them all".
[Loud and long continued applause.
] I picketed the great embankments thrown up around our lines by the dynamite explosion--merely a lookout of a couple of boys to announce the enemy when he should appear again.
Next, I sent an engineer and forty men to a point just beyond our lines on the south, to turn a mountain brook that was there, and bring it within our lines and under our command, arranging it in such a way that I could make instant use of it in an
The forty men were divided into two shifts of twenty each, and were to relieve each other every two hours.
In ten hours the work was accomplished.
It was nightfall now, and I withdrew my pickets.
The one who had had the northern outlook reported a camp in sight, but visible with the glass only.
He also reported that a few knights had been feeling their way toward us, and had driven some cattle across our lines, but that the knights themselves had not come very near.
That was what I had been expecting.
They were feeling us, you see; they wanted to know if we were going to play that red terror on them again.
They would grow bolder in the night, perhaps.
I believed I knew what project they would attempt, because it was plainly the thing I would attempt myself if I were in their places and as ignorant as they were.
I mentioned it to Clarence.
"I think you are right," said he; "it is the obvious thing for them to try".
"Well, then," I said, "if they do it they are doomed".
"Certainly".
"They won't have the slightest show in the world".
"Of course they won't".
"It's dreadful, Clarence.
It seems an awful pity".
The thing disturbed me so that I couldn't get any peace of mind for thinking of it and worrying over it.
So, at last, to quiet my conscience, I framed this message to the knights: TO THE HONORABLE THE COMMANDER OF THE INSURGENT CHIVALRY OF ENGLAND: YOU fight in vain.
We know your strength--if one may call it by that name.
We know that at the utmost you cannot bring against us above five and twenty thousand knights.
Therefore, you have no chance--none whatever.
Reflect: we are well equipped, well fortified, we number 54.
Fifty-four what?
Men?
No, MINDS--the capablest in the world; a force against which mere animal might may no more hope to prevail than may the idle waves of the sea hope to prevail against the granite barriers of England.
Be advised.
We offer you your lives; for the sake of your families, do not reject the gift.
We offer you this chance, and it is the last: throw down your arms; surrender unconditionally to the Republic, and all will be forgiven.
(Signed) THE BOSS.
I read it to Clarence, and said I proposed to send it by a flag of truce.
He laughed the sarcastic laugh he was born with, and said: "Somehow it seems impossible for you to ever fully realize what these nobilities are.
Now let us save a little time and trouble.
Consider me the commander of the knights yonder.
Now, then, you are the flag of truce; approach and deliver me your message, and I will give you your answer".
I humored the idea.
I came forward under an imaginary guard of the enemy's soldiers, produced my paper, and read it through.
For answer, Clarence struck the paper out of my hand, pursed up a scornful lip and said with lofty disdain: "Dismember me this animal, and return him in a basket to the base-born knave who sent him; other answer have I none"!
How empty is theory in presence of fact!
And this was just fact, and nothing else.
It was the thing that would have happened, there was no getting around that.
I tore up the paper and granted my mistimed sentimentalities a permanent rest.
Then, to business.
I tested the electric signals from the gatling platform to the cave, and made sure that they were all right; I tested and retested those which commanded the fences--these were signals whereby I could break and renew the electric current in each fence
I placed the brook-connection under the guard and authority of three of my best boys, who would alternate in two-hour watches all night and promptly obey my signal, if I should have occasion to give it --three revolver-shots in quick succession.
Sentry-duty was discarded for the night, and the corral left empty of life; I ordered that quiet be maintained in the cave, and the electric lights turned down to a glimmer.
As soon as it was good and dark, I shut off the current from all the fences, and then groped my way out to the embankment bordering our side of the great dynamite ditch.
I crept to the top of it and lay there on the slant of the muck to watch.
But it was too dark to see anything.
As for sounds, there were none.
The stillness was deathlike.
True, there were the usual night-sounds of the country--the whir of night-birds, the buzzing of insects, the barking of distant dogs, the mellow lowing of far-off kine --but these didn't seem to break the stillness, they only intensified it, and added a
I presently gave up looking, the night shut down so black, but I kept my ears strained to catch the least suspicious sound, for I judged I had only to wait, and I shouldn't be disappointed.
However, I had to wait a long time.
At last I caught what you may call in distinct glimpses of sound dulled metallic sound.
I pricked up my ears, then, and held my breath, for this was the sort of thing I had been waiting for.
This sound thickened, and approached--from toward the north.
Presently, I heard it at my own level--the ridge-top of the opposite embankment, a hundred feet or more away.
Then I seemed to see a row of black dots appear along that ridge--human heads?
I couldn't tell; it mightn't be anything at all; you can't depend on your eyes when your imagination is out of focus.
However, the question was soon settled.
I heard that metallic noise descending into the great ditch.
It augmented fast, it spread all along, and it unmistakably furnished me this fact: an armed host was taking up its quarters in the ditch.
Yes, these people were arranging a little surprise party for us.
We could expect entertainment about dawn, possibly earlier.
I groped my way back to the corral now; I had seen enough.
I went to the platform and signaled to turn the current on to the two inner fences.
Then I went into the cave, and found everything satisfactory there--nobody awake but the working-watch.
I woke Clarence and told him the great ditch was filling up with men, and that I believed all the knights were coming for us in a body.
It was my notion that as soon as dawn approached we could expect the ditch's ambuscaded thousands to swarm up over the embankment and make an assault, and be followed immediately by the rest of their army.
Clarence said: "They will be wanting to send a scout or two in the dark to make preliminary observations.
Why not take the lightning off the outer fences, and give them a chance"?
"I've already done it, Clarence.
Did you ever know me to be inhospitable"?
"No, you are a good heart.
I want to go and--" "Be a reception committee?
I will go, too".
We crossed the corral and lay down together between the two inside fences.
Even the dim light of the cave had disordered our eyesight somewhat, but the focus straightway began to regulate itself and soon it was adjusted for present circumstances.
We had had to feel our way before, but we could make out to see the fence posts now.
We started a whispered conversation, but suddenly Clarence broke off and said: "What is that"?
"What is what"?
"That thing yonder".
"What thing--where"?
"There beyond you a little piece--dark something--a dull shape of some kind--against the second fence".
I gazed and he gazed.
I said: "Could it be a man, Clarence"?
"No, I think not.
If you notice, it looks a lit--why, it _is_ a man!
--leaning on the fence".
"I certainly believe it is; let us go and see".
We crept along on our hands and knees until we were pretty close, and then looked up.
Yes, it was a man--a dim great figure in armor, standing erect, with both hands on the upper wire--and, of course, there was a smell of burning flesh.
Poor fellow, dead as a door-nail, and never knew what hurt him.
He stood there like a statue--no motion about him, except that his plumes swished about a little in the night wind.
We rose up and looked in through the bars of his visor, but couldn't make out whether we knew him or not--features too dim and shadowed.
We heard muffled sounds approaching, and we sank down to the ground where we were.
We made out another knight vaguely; he was coming very stealthily, and feeling his way.
He was near enough now for us to see him put out a hand, find an upper wire, then bend and step under it and over the lower one.
Now he arrived at the first knight--and started slightly when he discovered him.
He stood a moment--no doubt wondering why the other one didn't move on; then he said, in a low voice, "Why dreamest thou here, good Sir Mar--" then he laid his hand on the corpse's shoulder--and just uttered a little soft moan and sunk down dead.
Killed by a dead man, you see--killed by a dead friend, in fact.
There was something awful about it.
These early birds came scattering along after each other, about one every five minutes in our vicinity, during half an hour.
They brought no armor of offense but their swords; as a rule, they carried the sword ready in the hand, and put it forward and found the wires with it.
We would now and then see a blue spark when the knight that caused it was so far away as to be invisible to us; but we knew what had happened, all the same; poor fellow, he had touched a charged wire with his sword and been electrocuted.
We had brief intervals of grim stillness, interrupted with piteous regularity by the clash made by the falling of an iron-clad; and this sort of thing was going on, right along, and was very creepy there in the dark and lonesomeness.
We concluded to make a tour between the inner fences.
We elected to walk upright, for convenience's sake; we argued that if discerned, we should be taken for friends rather than enemies, and in any case we should be out of reach of swords, and these gentry did not seem to have any spears along.
Well, it was a curious trip.
Everywhere dead men were lying outside the second fence--not plainly visible, but still visible; and we counted fifteen of those pathetic statues--dead knights standing with their hands on the upper wire.
One thing seemed to be sufficiently demonstrated: our current was so tremendous that it killed before the victim could cry out.
Pretty soon we detected a muffled and heavy sound, and next moment we guessed what it was.
It was a surprise in force coming!
I whispered Clarence to go and wake the army, and notify it to wait in silence in the cave for further orders.
He was soon back, and we stood by the inner fence and watched the silent lightning do its awful work upon that swarming host.
One could make out but little of detail; but he could note that a black mass was piling itself up beyond the second fence.
That swelling bulk was dead men!
Our camp was enclosed with a solid wall of the dead--a bulwark, a breastwork, of corpses, you may say.
One terrible thing about this thing was the absence of human voices; there were no cheers, no war cries; being intent upon a surprise, these men moved as noiselessly as they could; and always when the front rank was near enough to their goal to make it
I sent a current through the third fence now; and almost immediately through the fourth and fifth, so quickly were the gaps filled up.
I believed the time was come now for my climax; I believed that that whole army was in our trap.
Anyway, it was high time to find out.
So I touched a button and set fifty electric suns aflame on the top of our precipice.
Land, what a sight!
We were enclosed in three walls of dead men!
All the other fences were pretty nearly filled with the living, who were stealthily working their way forward through the wires.
The sudden glare paralyzed this host, petrified them, you may say, with astonishment; there was just one instant for me to utilize their immobility in, and I didn't lose the chance.
You see, in another instant they would have recovered their faculties, then they'd have burst into a cheer and made a rush, and my wires would have gone down before it; but that lost instant lost them their opportunity forever; while even that slight
_There_ was a groan you could _hear_!
It voiced the death-pang of eleven thousand men.
It swelled out on the night with awful pathos.
A glance showed that the rest of the enemy--perhaps ten thousand strong--were between us and the encircling ditch, and pressing forward to the assault.
Consequently we had them _all!
_ and had them past help.
Time for the last act of the tragedy.
I fired the three appointed revolver shots--which meant: "Turn on the water"!
There was a sudden rush and roar, and in a minute the mountain brook was raging through the big ditch and creating a river a hundred feet wide and twenty-five deep.
"Stand to your guns, men!
Open fire"!
The thirteen gatlings began to vomit death into the fated ten thousand.
They halted, they stood their ground a moment against that withering deluge of fire, then they broke, faced about and swept toward the ditch like chaff before a gale.
A full fourth part of their force never reached the top of the lofty embankment; the three-fourths reached it and plunged over--to death by drowning.
Within ten short minutes after we had opened fire, armed resistance was totally annihilated, the campaign was ended, we fifty-four were masters of England.
Twenty-five thousand men lay dead around us.
But how treacherous is fortune!
In a little while--say an hour --happened a thing, by my own fault, which--but I have no heart to write that.
Let the record end here.
CHAPTER XLIV A POSTSCRIPT BY CLARENCE I, Clarence, must write it for him.
He proposed that we two go out and see if any help could be accorded the wounded.
I was strenuous against the project.
I said that if there were many, we could do but little for them; and it would not be wise for us to trust ourselves among them, anyway.
But he could seldom be turned from a purpose once formed; so we shut off the electric current from the fences, took an escort along, climbed over the enclosing ramparts of dead knights, and moved out upon the field.
The first wounded mall who appealed for help was sitting with his back against a dead comrade.
When The Boss bent over him and spoke to him, the man recognized him and stabbed him.
That knight was Sir Meliagraunce, as I found out by tearing off his helmet.
He will not ask for help any more.
We carried The Boss to the cave and gave his wound, which was not very serious, the best care we could.
In this service we had the help of Merlin, though we did not know it.
He was disguised as a woman, and appeared to be a simple old peasant goodwife.
In this disguise, with brown-stained face and smooth shaven, he had appeared a few days after The Boss was hurt and offered to cook for us, saying her people had gone off to join certain new camps which the enemy were forming, and that she was starving.
The Boss had been getting along very well, and had amused himself with finishing up his record.
We were glad to have this woman, for we were short handed.
We were in a trap, you see--a trap of our own making.
If we stayed where we were, our dead would kill us; if we moved out of our defenses, we should no longer be invincible.
We had conquered; in turn we were conquered.
The Boss recognized this; we all recognized it.
If we could go to one of those new camps and patch up some kind of terms with the enemy--yes, but The Boss could not go, and neither could I, for I was among the first that were made sick by the poisonous air bred by those dead thousands.
Others were taken down, and still others.
To-morrow-- _To-morrow.
_ It is here.
And with it the end.
About midnight I awoke, and saw that hag making curious passes in the air about The Boss's head and face, and wondered what it meant.
Everybody but the dynamo-watch lay steeped in sleep; there was no sound.
The woman ceased from her mysterious foolery, and started tip-toeing toward the door.
I called out: "Stop!
What have you been doing"?
She halted, and said with an accent of malicious satisfaction: "Ye were conquerors; ye are conquered!
These others are perishing --you also.
Ye shall all die in this place--every one--except _him_.
He sleepeth now--and shall sleep thirteen centuries.
I am Merlin"!
Then such a delirium of silly laughter overtook him that he reeled about like a drunken man, and presently fetched up against one of our wires.
His mouth is spread open yet; apparently he is still laughing.
I suppose the face will retain that petrified laugh until the corpse turns to dust.
The Boss has never stirred--sleeps like a stone.
If he does not wake to-day we shall understand what kind of a sleep it is, and his body will then be borne to a place in one of the remote recesses of the cave where none will ever find it to desecrate it.
As for the rest of us--well, it is agreed that if any one of us ever escapes alive from this place, he will write the fact here, and loyally hide this Manuscript with The Boss, our dear good chief, whose property it is, be he alive or dead.
THE END OF THE MANUSCRIPT FINAL P.S. BY M.T. The dawn was come when I laid the Manuscript aside.
The rain had almost ceased, the world was gray and sad, the exhausted storm was sighing and sobbing itself to rest.
I went to the stranger's room, and listened at his door, which was slightly ajar.
I could hear his voice, and so I knocked.
There was no answer, but I still heard the voice.
I peeped in.
The man lay on his back in bed, talking brokenly but with spirit, and punctuating with his arms, which he thrashed about, restlessly, as sick people do in delirium.
I slipped in softly and bent over him.
His mutterings and ejaculations went on.
I spoke--merely a word, to call his attention.
His glassy eyes and his ashy face were alight in an instant with pleasure, gratitude, gladness, welcome: "Oh, Sandy, you are come at last--how I have longed for you!
Sit by me--do not leave me--never leave me again, Sandy, never again.
Where is your hand?
--give it me, dear, let me hold it--there --now all is well, all is peace, and I am happy again--_we_ are happy again, isn't it so, Sandy?
You are so dim, so vague, you are but a mist, a cloud, but you are _here_, and that is blessedness sufficient; and I have your hand; don't take it away--it is for only a little while, I shall not require it long...
.
Was that the child?
...
Hello-Central!
...
she doesn't answer.
Asleep, perhaps?
Bring her when she wakes, and let me touch her hands, her face, her hair, and tell her good-bye...
.
Sandy!
Yes, you are there.
I lost myself a moment, and I thought you were gone...
.
Have I been sick long?
It must be so; it seems months to me.
And such dreams!
such strange and awful dreams, Sandy!
Dreams that were as real as reality--delirium, of course, but _so_ real!
Why, I thought the king was dead, I thought you were in Gaul and couldn't get home, I thought there was a revolution; in the fantastic frenzy of these dreams, I thought that Clarence and I and a handful of my cadets fought and exterminated the whole
But even that was not the strangest.
I seemed to be a creature out of a remote unborn age, centuries hence, and even _that_ was as real as the rest!
Yes, I seemed to have flown back out of that age into this of ours, and then forward to it again, and was set down, a stranger and forlorn in that strange England, with an abyss of thirteen centuries yawning between me and you!
between me and my home and my friends!
between me and all that is dear to me, all that could make life worth the living!
It was awful --awfuler than you can ever imagine, Sandy.
Ah, watch by me, Sandy --stay by me every moment--_don't_ let me go out of my mind again; death is nothing, let it come, but not with those dreams, not with the torture of those hideous dreams--I cannot endure _that_ again...
.
Sandy?
..".
He lay muttering incoherently some little time; then for a time he lay silent, and apparently sinking away toward death.
Presently his fingers began to pick busily at the coverlet, and by that sign I knew that his end was at hand with the first suggestion of the death-rattle in his throat he started up slightly, and seemed to listen: then he said: "A bugle?
...
It is the king!
The drawbridge, there!
Man the battlements!
--turn out the--" He was getting up his last "effect"; but he never finished it.Produced by David Widger ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN (Tom Sawyer's Comrade) By Mark Twain Complete CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. Civilizing Huck.
--Miss Watson.
--Tom Sawyer Waits.
CHAPTER II.
The Boys Escape Jim.
--Torn Sawyer's Gang.
--Deep-laid Plans.
CHAPTER III.
A Good Going-over.
--Grace Triumphant.
--"One of Tom Sawyers's Lies".
CHAPTER IV.
Huck and the Judge.
--Superstition.
CHAPTER V. Huck's Father.
--The Fond Parent.
--Reform.
CHAPTER VI.
He Went for Judge Thatcher.
--Huck Decided to Leave.
--Political Economy.
--Thrashing Around.
CHAPTER VII.
Laying for Him.
--Locked in the Cabin.
--Sinking the Body.
--Resting.
CHAPTER VIII.
Sleeping in the Woods.
--Raising the Dead.
--Exploring the Island.
--Finding Jim.
--Jim's Escape.
--Signs.
--Balum.
CHAPTER IX.
The Cave.
--The Floating House.
CHAPTER X. The Find.
--Old Hank Bunker.
--In Disguise.
CHAPTER XI.
Huck and the Woman.
--The Search.
--Prevarication.
--Going to Goshen.
CHAPTER XII.
Slow Navigation.
--Borrowing Things.
--Boarding the Wreck.
--The Plotters.
--Hunting for the Boat.
CHAPTER XIII.
Escaping from the Wreck.
--The Watchman.
--Sinking.
CHAPTER XIV.
A General Good Time.
--The Harem.
--French.
CHAPTER XV.
Huck Loses the Raft.
--In the Fog.
--Huck Finds the Raft.
--Trash.
CHAPTER XVI.
Expectation.
--A White Lie.
--Floating Currency.
--Running by Cairo.
--Swimming Ashore.
CHAPTER XVII.
An Evening Call.
--The Farm in Arkansaw.
--Interior Decorations.
--Stephen Dowling Bots.
--Poetical Effusions.
CHAPTER XVIII.
Col.
Grangerford.
--Aristocracy.
--Feuds.
--The Testament.
--Recovering the Raft.
--The Wood--pile.
--Pork and Cabbage.
CHAPTER XIX.
Tying Up Day--times.
--An Astronomical Theory.
--Running a Temperance Revival.
--The Duke of Bridgewater.
--The Troubles of Royalty.
CHAPTER XX.
Huck Explains.
--Laying Out a Campaign.
--Working the Camp--meeting.
--A Pirate at the Camp--meeting.
--The Duke as a Printer.
CHAPTER XXI.
Sword Exercise.
--Hamlet's Soliloquy.
--They Loafed Around Town.
--A Lazy Town.
--Old Boggs.
--Dead.
CHAPTER XXII.
Sherburn.
--Attending the Circus.
--Intoxication in the Ring.
--The Thrilling Tragedy.
CHAPTER XXIII.
Sold.
--Royal Comparisons.
--Jim Gets Home-sick.
CHAPTER XXIV.
Jim in Royal Robes.
--They Take a Passenger.
--Getting Information.
--Family Grief.
CHAPTER XXV.
Is It Them?
--Singing the "Doxologer".
--Awful Square--Funeral Orgies.
--A Bad Investment .
CHAPTER XXVI.
A Pious King.
--The King's Clergy.
--She Asked His Pardon.
--Hiding in the Room.
--Huck Takes the Money.
CHAPTER XXVII.
The Funeral.
--Satisfying Curiosity.
--Suspicious of Huck,--Quick Sales and Small.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
The Trip to England.
--"The Brute"!
--Mary Jane Decides to Leave.
--Huck Parting with Mary Jane.
--Mumps.
--The Opposition Line.
CHAPTER XXIX.
Contested Relationship.
--The King Explains the Loss.
--A Question of Handwriting.
--Digging up the Corpse.
--Huck Escapes.
CHAPTER XXX.
The King Went for Him.
--A Royal Row.
--Powerful Mellow.
CHAPTER XXXI.
Ominous Plans.
--News from Jim.
--Old Recollections.
--A Sheep Story.
--Valuable Information.
CHAPTER XXXII.
Still and Sunday--like.
--Mistaken Identity.
--Up a Stump.
--In a Dilemma.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
A Nigger Stealer.
--Southern Hospitality.
--A Pretty Long Blessing.
--Tar and Feathers.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
The Hut by the Ash Hopper.
--Outrageous.
--Climbing the Lightning Rod.
--Troubled with Witches.
CHAPTER XXXV.
Escaping Properly.
--Dark Schemes.
--Discrimination in Stealing.
--A Deep Hole.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
The Lightning Rod.
--His Level Best.
--A Bequest to Posterity.
--A High Figure.
CHAPTER XXXVII.
The Last Shirt.
--Mooning Around.
--Sailing Orders.
--The Witch Pie.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
The Coat of Arms.
--A Skilled Superintendent.
--Unpleasant Glory.
--A Tearful Subject.
CHAPTER XXXIX.
Rats.
--Lively Bed--fellows.
--The Straw Dummy.
CHAPTER XL.
Fishing.
--The Vigilance Committee.
--A Lively Run.
--Jim Advises a Doctor.
CHAPTER XLI.
The Doctor.
--Uncle Silas.
--Sister Hotchkiss.
--Aunt Sally in Trouble.
CHAPTER XLII.
Tom Sawyer Wounded.
--The Doctor's Story.
--Tom Confesses.
--Aunt Polly Arrives.
--Hand Out Them Letters .
CHAPTER THE LAST.
Out of Bondage.
--Paying the Captive.
--Yours Truly, Huck Finn.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
The Widows Moses and the "Bulrushers" Miss Watson Huck Stealing Away They Tip-toed Along Jim Tom Sawyer's Band of Robbers Huck Creeps into his Window Miss Watson's Lecture The Robbers Dispersed Rubbing the Lamp !
!
!
!
Judge Thatcher surprised Jim Listening "Pap" Huck and his Father Reforming the Drunkard Falling from Grace The Widows Moses and the "Bulrushers" Miss Watson Huck Stealing Away They Tip-toed Along Jim Tom Sawyer's Band of Robbers Huck Creeps into his
!
!
!
Judge Thatcher surprised Jim Listening "Pap" Huck and his Father Reforming the Drunkard Falling from Grace Getting out of the Way Solid Comfort Thinking it Over Raising a Howl "Git Up" The Shanty Shooting the Pig Taking a Rest In the Woods Watching the
Lordy, Lordy"!
In a Fix "Hello, What's Up"?
The Wreck We turned in and Slept Turning over the Truck Solomon and his Million Wives The story of "Sollermun" "We Would Sell the Raft" Among the Snags Asleep on the Raft "Something being Raftsman" "Boy, that's a Lie" "Here I is, Huck" Climbing up the Bank
"Buck" "It made Her look Spidery" "They got him out and emptied Him" The House Col.
Grangerford Young Harney Shepherdson Miss Charlotte "And asked me if I Liked Her" "Behind the Wood-pile" Hiding Day-times "And Dogs a-Coming" "By rights I am a Duke"!
"I am the Late Dauphin" Tail Piece On the Raft The King as Juliet "Courting on the Sly" "A Pirate for Thirty Years" Another little Job Practizing Hamlet's Soliloquy "Gimme a Chaw" A Little Monthly Drunk The Death of Boggs Sherburn steps out A Dead Head He
"Was you in my Room"?
Jawing In Trouble Indignation How to Find Them He Wrote Hannah with the Mumps The Auction The True Brothers The Doctor leads Huck The Duke Wrote "Gentlemen, Gentlemen"!
"Jim Lit Out" The King shakes Huck The Duke went for Him Spanish Moss "Who Nailed Him"?
Thinking He gave him Ten Cents Striking for the Back Country Still and Sunday-like She hugged him tight "Who do you reckon it is"?
"It was Tom Sawyer" "Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume"?
A pretty long Blessing Traveling By Rail Vittles A Simple Job Witches Getting Wood One of the Best Authorities The Breakfast-Horn Smouching the Knives Going down the Lightning-Rod Stealing spoons Tom advises a Witch Pie The Rubbage-Pile "Missus, dey's a
The shadings have not been done in a haphazard fashion, or by guesswork; but painstakingly, and with the trustworthy guidance and support of personal familiarity with these several forms of speech.
I make this explanation for the reason that without it many readers would suppose that all these characters were trying to talk alike and not succeeding.
THE AUTHOR.
HUCKLEBERRY FINN Scene: The Mississippi Valley Time: Forty to fifty years ago CHAPTER I. YOU don't know about me without you have read a book by the name of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer; but that ain't no matter.
That book was made by Mr. Mark Twain, and he told the truth, mainly.
There was things which he stretched, but mainly he told the truth.
That is nothing.
I never seen anybody but lied one time or another, without it was Aunt Polly, or the widow, or maybe Mary.
Aunt Polly--Tom's Aunt Polly, she is--and Mary, and the Widow Douglas is all told about in that book, which is mostly a true book, with some stretchers, as I said before.
Now the way that the book winds up is this: Tom and me found the money that the robbers hid in the cave, and it made us rich.
We got six thousand dollars apiece--all gold.
It was an awful sight of money when it was piled up.
Well, Judge Thatcher he took it and put it out at interest, and it fetched us a dollar a day apiece all the year round--more than a body could tell what to do with.
The Widow Douglas she took me for her son, and allowed she would sivilize me; but it was rough living in the house all the time, considering how dismal regular and decent the widow was in all her ways; and so when I couldn't stand it no longer I lit out.
I got into my old rags and my sugar-hogshead again, and was free and satisfied.
But Tom Sawyer he hunted me up and said he was going to start a band of robbers, and I might join if I would go back to the widow and be respectable.
So I went back.
The widow she cried over me, and called me a poor lost lamb, and she called me a lot of other names, too, but she never meant no harm by it.
She put me in them new clothes again, and I couldn't do nothing but sweat and sweat, and feel all cramped up.
Well, then, the old thing commenced again.
The widow rung a bell for supper, and you had to come to time.
When you got to the table you couldn't go right to eating, but you had to wait for the widow to tuck down her head and grumble a little over the victuals, though there warn't really anything the matter with them,--that is, nothing only everything was
In a barrel of odds and ends it is different; things get mixed up, and the juice kind of swaps around, and the things go better.
After supper she got out her book and learned me about Moses and the Bulrushers, and I was in a sweat to find out all about him; but by and by she let it out that Moses had been dead a considerable long time; so then I didn't care no more about him,
Pretty soon I wanted to smoke, and asked the widow to let me.
But she wouldn't.
She said it was a mean practice and wasn't clean, and I must try to not do it any more.
That is just the way with some people.
They get down on a thing when they don't know nothing about it.
Here she was a-bothering about Moses, which was no kin to her, and no use to anybody, being gone, you see, yet finding a power of fault with me for doing a thing that had some good in it.
And she took snuff, too; of course that was all right, because she done it herself.
Her sister, Miss Watson, a tolerable slim old maid, with goggles on, had just come to live with her, and took a set at me now with a spelling-book.
She worked me middling hard for about an hour, and then the widow made her ease up.
I couldn't stood it much longer.
Then for an hour it was deadly dull, and I was fidgety.
Miss Watson would say, "Don't put your feet up there, Huckleberry;" and "Don't scrunch up like that, Huckleberry--set up straight;" and pretty soon she would say, "Don't gap and stretch like that, Huckleberry--why don't you try to behave"?
Then she told me all about the bad place, and I said I wished I was there.
She got mad then, but I didn't mean no harm.
All I wanted was to go somewheres; all I wanted was a change, I warn't particular.
She said it was wicked to say what I said; said she wouldn't say it for the whole world; she was going to live so as to go to the good place.
Well, I couldn't see no advantage in going where she was going, so I made up my mind I wouldn't try for it.
But I never said so, because it would only make trouble, and wouldn't do no good.
Now she had got a start, and she went on and told me all about the good place.
She said all a body would have to do there was to go around all day long with a harp and sing, forever and ever.
So I didn't think much of it.
But I never said so.
I asked her if she reckoned Tom Sawyer would go there, and she said not by a considerable sight.
I was glad about that, because I wanted him and me to be together.
Miss Watson she kept pecking at me, and it got tiresome and lonesome.
By and by they fetched the niggers in and had prayers, and then everybody was off to bed.
I went up to my room with a piece of candle, and put it on the table.
Then I set down in a chair by the window and tried to think of something cheerful, but it warn't no use.
I felt so lonesome I most wished I was dead.
The stars were shining, and the leaves rustled in the woods ever so mournful; and I heard an owl, away off, who-whooing about somebody that was dead, and a whippowill and a dog crying about somebody that was going to die; and the wind was trying to
Then away out in the woods I heard that kind of a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell about something that's on its mind and can't make itself understood, and so can't rest easy in its grave, and has to go about that way every night grieving.
I got so down-hearted and scared I did wish I had some company.
Pretty soon a spider went crawling up my shoulder, and I flipped it off and it lit in the candle; and before I could budge it was all shriveled up.
I didn't need anybody to tell me that that was an awful bad sign and would fetch me some bad luck, so I was scared and most shook the clothes off of me.
I got up and turned around in my tracks three times and crossed my breast every time; and then I tied up a little lock of my hair with a thread to keep witches away.
But I hadn't no confidence.
You do that when you've lost a horseshoe that you've found, instead of nailing it up over the door, but I hadn't ever heard anybody say it was any way to keep off bad luck when you'd killed a spider.
I set down again, a-shaking all over, and got out my pipe for a smoke; for the house was all as still as death now, and so the widow wouldn't know.
Well, after a long time I heard the clock away off in the town go boom--boom--boom--twelve licks; and all still again--stiller than ever.
Pretty soon I heard a twig snap down in the dark amongst the trees--something was a stirring.
I set still and listened.
Directly I could just barely hear a "me-yow!
me-yow"!
down there.
That was good!
Says I, "me-yow!
me-yow"!
as soft as I could, and then I put out the light and scrambled out of the window on to the shed.
Then I slipped down to the ground and crawled in among the trees, and, sure enough, there was Tom Sawyer waiting for me.
CHAPTER II.
WE went tiptoeing along a path amongst the trees back towards the end of the widow's garden, stooping down so as the branches wouldn't scrape our heads.
When we was passing by the kitchen I fell over a root and made a noise.
We scrouched down and laid still.
Miss Watson's big nigger, named Jim, was setting in the kitchen door; we could see him pretty clear, because there was a light behind him.
He got up and stretched his neck out about a minute, listening.
Then he says: "Who dah"?
He listened some more; then he come tiptoeing down and stood right between us; we could a touched him, nearly.
Well, likely it was minutes and minutes that there warn't a sound, and we all there so close together.
There was a place on my ankle that got to itching, but I dasn't scratch it; and then my ear begun to itch; and next my back, right between my shoulders.
Seemed like I'd die if I couldn't scratch.
Well, I've noticed that thing plenty times since.
If you are with the quality, or at a funeral, or trying to go to sleep when you ain't sleepy--if you are anywheres where it won't do for you to scratch, why you will itch all over in upwards of a thousand places.
Pretty soon Jim says: "Say, who is you?
Whar is you?
Dog my cats ef I didn' hear sumf'n.
Well, I know what I's gwyne to do: I's gwyne to set down here and listen tell I hears it agin".
So he set down on the ground betwixt me and Tom.
He leaned his back up against a tree, and stretched his legs out till one of them most touched one of mine.
My nose begun to itch.
It itched till the tears come into my eyes.
But I dasn't scratch.
Then it begun to itch on the inside.
Next I got to itching underneath.
I didn't know how I was going to set still.
This miserableness went on as much as six or seven minutes; but it seemed a sight longer than that.
I was itching in eleven different places now.
I reckoned I couldn't stand it more'n a minute longer, but I set my teeth hard and got ready to try.
Just then Jim begun to breathe heavy; next he begun to snore--and then I was pretty soon comfortable again.
Tom he made a sign to me--kind of a little noise with his mouth--and we went creeping away on our hands and knees.
When we was ten foot off Tom whispered to me, and wanted to tie Jim to the tree for fun.
But I said no; he might wake and make a disturbance, and then they'd find out I warn't in.
Then Tom said he hadn't got candles enough, and he would slip in the kitchen and get some more.
I didn't want him to try.
I said Jim might wake up and come.
But Tom wanted to resk it; so we slid in there and got three candles, and Tom laid five cents on the table for pay.
Then we got out, and I was in a sweat to get away; but nothing would do Tom but he must crawl to where Jim was, on his hands and knees, and play something on him.
I waited, and it seemed a good while, everything was so still and lonesome.
As soon as Tom was back we cut along the path, around the garden fence, and by and by fetched up on the steep top of the hill the other side of the house.
Tom said he slipped Jim's hat off of his head and hung it on a limb right over him, and Jim stirred a little, but he didn't wake.
Afterwards Jim said the witches be witched him and put him in a trance, and rode him all over the State, and then set him under the trees again, and hung his hat on a limb to show who done it.
And next time Jim told it he said they rode him down to New Orleans; and, after that, every time he told it he spread it more and more, till by and by he said they rode him all over the world, and tired him most to death, and his back was all over
Jim was monstrous proud about it, and he got so he wouldn't hardly notice the other niggers.
Niggers would come miles to hear Jim tell about it, and he was more looked up to than any nigger in that country.
Strange niggers would stand with their mouths open and look him all over, same as if he was a wonder.
Niggers is always talking about witches in the dark by the kitchen fire; but whenever one was talking and letting on to know all about such things, Jim would happen in and say, "Hm!
What you know 'bout witches"?
and that nigger was corked up and had to take a back seat.
Jim always kept that five-center piece round his neck with a string, and said it was a charm the devil give to him with his own hands, and told him he could cure anybody with it and fetch witches whenever he wanted to just by saying something to it; but
Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim anything they had, just for a sight of that five-center piece; but they wouldn't touch it, because the devil had had his hands on it.
Jim was most ruined for a servant, because he got stuck up on account of having seen the devil and been rode by witches.
Well, when Tom and me got to the edge of the hilltop we looked away down into the village and could see three or four lights twinkling, where there was sick folks, maybe; and the stars over us was sparkling ever so fine; and down by the village was the
We went down the hill and found Jo Harper and Ben Rogers, and two or three more of the boys, hid in the old tanyard.
So we unhitched a skiff and pulled down the river two mile and a half, to the big scar on the hillside, and went ashore.
We went to a clump of bushes, and Tom made everybody swear to keep the secret, and then showed them a hole in the hill, right in the thickest part of the bushes.
Then we lit the candles, and crawled in on our hands and knees.
We went about two hundred yards, and then the cave opened up.
Tom poked about amongst the passages, and pretty soon ducked under a wall where you wouldn't a noticed that there was a hole.
We went along a narrow place and got into a kind of room, all damp and sweaty and cold, and there we stopped.
Tom says: "Now, we'll start this band of robbers and call it Tom Sawyer's Gang.
Everybody that wants to join has got to take an oath, and write his name in blood".
Everybody was willing.
So Tom got out a sheet of paper that he had wrote the oath on, and read it.
It swore every boy to stick to the band, and never tell any of the secrets; and if anybody done anything to any boy in the band, whichever boy was ordered to kill that person and his family must do it, and he mustn't eat and he mustn't sleep till he had
And nobody that didn't belong to the band could use that mark, and if he did he must be sued; and if he done it again he must be killed.
And if anybody that belonged to the band told the secrets, he must have his throat cut, and then have his carcass burnt up and the ashes scattered all around, and his name blotted off of the list with blood and never mentioned again by the gang, but have
Everybody said it was a real beautiful oath, and asked Tom if he got it out of his own head.
He said, some of it, but the rest was out of pirate-books and robber-books, and every gang that was high-toned had it.
Some thought it would be good to kill the _families_ of boys that told the secrets.
Tom said it was a good idea, so he took a pencil and wrote it in.
Then Ben Rogers says: "Here's Huck Finn, he hain't got no family; what you going to do 'bout him"?
"Well, hain't he got a father"?
says Tom Sawyer.
"Yes, he's got a father, but you can't never find him these days.
He used to lay drunk with the hogs in the tanyard, but he hain't been seen in these parts for a year or more".
They talked it over, and they was going to rule me out, because they said every boy must have a family or somebody to kill, or else it wouldn't be fair and square for the others.
Well, nobody could think of anything to do--everybody was stumped, and set still.
I was most ready to cry; but all at once I thought of a way, and so I offered them Miss Watson--they could kill her.
Everybody said: "Oh, she'll do.
That's all right.
Huck can come in".
Then they all stuck a pin in their fingers to get blood to sign with, and I made my mark on the paper.
"Now," says Ben Rogers, "what's the line of business of this Gang"?
"Nothing only robbery and murder," Tom said.
"But who are we going to rob?
--houses, or cattle, or--" "Stuff!
stealing cattle and such things ain't robbery; it's burglary," says Tom Sawyer.
"We ain't burglars.
That ain't no sort of style.
We are highwaymen.
We stop stages and carriages on the road, with masks on, and kill the people and take their watches and money".
"Must we always kill the people"?
"Oh, certainly.
It's best.
Some authorities think different, but mostly it's considered best to kill them--except some that you bring to the cave here, and keep them till they're ransomed".
"Ransomed?
What's that"?
"I don't know.
But that's what they do.
I've seen it in books; and so of course that's what we've got to do".
"But how can we do it if we don't know what it is"?
"Why, blame it all, we've _got_ to do it.
Don't I tell you it's in the books?
Do you want to go to doing different from what's in the books, and get things all muddled up"?
"Oh, that's all very fine to _say_, Tom Sawyer, but how in the nation are these fellows going to be ransomed if we don't know how to do it to them?
--that's the thing I want to get at.
Now, what do you reckon it is"?
"Well, I don't know.
But per'aps if we keep them till they're ransomed, it means that we keep them till they're dead".
"Now, that's something _like_.
That'll answer.
Why couldn't you said that before?
We'll keep them till they're ransomed to death; and a bothersome lot they'll be, too--eating up everything, and always trying to get loose".
"How you talk, Ben Rogers.
How can they get loose when there's a guard over them, ready to shoot them down if they move a peg"?
"A guard!
Well, that _is_ good.
So somebody's got to set up all night and never get any sleep, just so as to watch them.
I think that's foolishness.
Why can't a body take a club and ransom them as soon as they get here"?
"Because it ain't in the books so--that's why.
Now, Ben Rogers, do you want to do things regular, or don't you?
--that's the idea.
Don't you reckon that the people that made the books knows what's the correct thing to do?
Do you reckon _you_ can learn 'em anything?
Not by a good deal.
No, sir, we'll just go on and ransom them in the regular way".
"All right.
I don't mind; but I say it's a fool way, anyhow.
Say, do we kill the women, too"?
"Well, Ben Rogers, if I was as ignorant as you I wouldn't let on.
Kill the women?
No; nobody ever saw anything in the books like that.
You fetch them to the cave, and you're always as polite as pie to them; and by and by they fall in love with you, and never want to go home any more".
"Well, if that's the way I'm agreed, but I don't take no stock in it.
Mighty soon we'll have the cave so cluttered up with women, and fellows waiting to be ransomed, that there won't be no place for the robbers.
But go ahead, I ain't got nothing to say".
Little Tommy Barnes was asleep now, and when they waked him up he was scared, and cried, and said he wanted to go home to his ma, and didn't want to be a robber any more.
So they all made fun of him, and called him cry-baby, and that made him mad, and he said he would go straight and tell all the secrets.
But Tom give him five cents to keep quiet, and said we would all go home and meet next week, and rob somebody and kill some people.
Ben Rogers said he couldn't get out much, only Sundays, and so he wanted to begin next Sunday; but all the boys said it would be wicked to do it on Sunday, and that settled the thing.
They agreed to get together and fix a day as soon as they could, and then we elected Tom Sawyer first captain and Jo Harper second captain of the Gang, and so started home.
I clumb up the shed and crept into my window just before day was breaking.
My new clothes was all greased up and clayey, and I was dog-tired.
CHAPTER III.
WELL, I got a good going-over in the morning from old Miss Watson on account of my clothes; but the widow she didn't scold, but only cleaned off the grease and clay, and looked so sorry that I thought I would behave awhile if I could.
Then Miss Watson she took me in the closet and prayed, but nothing come of it.
She told me to pray every day, and whatever I asked for I would get it.
But it warn't so.
I tried it.
Once I got a fish-line, but no hooks.
It warn't any good to me without hooks.
I tried for the hooks three or four times, but somehow I couldn't make it work.
By and by, one day, I asked Miss Watson to try for me, but she said I was a fool.
She never told me why, and I couldn't make it out no way.
I set down one time back in the woods, and had a long think about it.
I says to myself, if a body can get anything they pray for, why don't Deacon Winn get back the money he lost on pork?
Why can't the widow get back her silver snuffbox that was stole?
Why can't Miss Watson fat up?
No, says I to my self, there ain't nothing in it.
I went and told the widow about it, and she said the thing a body could get by praying for it was "spiritual gifts".
This was too many for me, but she told me what she meant--I must help other people, and do everything I could for other people, and look out for them all the time, and never think about myself.
This was including Miss Watson, as I took it.
I went out in the woods and turned it over in my mind a long time, but I couldn't see no advantage about it--except for the other people; so at last I reckoned I wouldn't worry about it any more, but just let it go.
Sometimes the widow would take me one side and talk about Providence in a way to make a body's mouth water; but maybe next day Miss Watson would take hold and knock it all down again.
I judged I could see that there was two Providences, and a poor chap would stand considerable show with the widow's Providence, but if Miss Watson's got him there warn't no help for him any more.
I thought it all out, and reckoned I would belong to the widow's if he wanted me, though I couldn't make out how he was a-going to be any better off then than what he was before, seeing I was so ignorant, and so kind of low-down and ornery.
Pap he hadn't been seen for more than a year, and that was comfortable for me; I didn't want to see him no more.
He used to always whale me when he was sober and could get his hands on me; though I used to take to the woods most of the time when he was around.
Well, about this time he was found in the river drownded, about twelve mile above town, so people said.
They judged it was him, anyway; said this drownded man was just his size, and was ragged, and had uncommon long hair, which was all like pap; but they couldn't make nothing out of the face, because it had been in the water so long it warn't much like a
They said he was floating on his back in the water.
They took him and buried him on the bank.
But I warn't comfortable long, because I happened to think of something.
I knowed mighty well that a drownded man don't float on his back, but on his face.
So I knowed, then, that this warn't pap, but a woman dressed up in a man's clothes.
So I was uncomfortable again.
I judged the old man would turn up again by and by, though I wished he wouldn't.
We played robber now and then about a month, and then I resigned.
All the boys did.
We hadn't robbed nobody, hadn't killed any people, but only just pretended.
We used to hop out of the woods and go charging down on hog-drivers and women in carts taking garden stuff to market, but we never hived any of them.
Tom Sawyer called the hogs "ingots," and he called the turnips and stuff "julery," and we would go to the cave and powwow over what we had done, and how many people we had killed and marked.
But I couldn't see no profit in it.
One time Tom sent a boy to run about town with a blazing stick, which he called a slogan (which was the sign for the Gang to get together), and then he said he had got secret news by his spies that next day a whole parcel of Spanish merchants and rich
He said we must slick up our swords and guns, and get ready.
He never could go after even a turnip-cart but he must have the swords and guns all scoured up for it, though they was only lath and broomsticks, and you might scour at them till you rotted, and then they warn't worth a mouthful of ashes more than what
I didn't believe we could lick such a crowd of Spaniards and A-rabs, but I wanted to see the camels and elephants, so I was on hand next day, Saturday, in the ambuscade; and when we got the word we rushed out of the woods and down the hill.
But there warn't no Spaniards and A-rabs, and there warn't no camels nor no elephants.
It warn't anything but a Sunday-school picnic, and only a primer-class at that.
We busted it up, and chased the children up the hollow; but we never got anything but some doughnuts and jam, though Ben Rogers got a rag doll, and Jo Harper got a hymn-book and a tract; and then the teacher charged in, and made us drop everything and
I didn't see no di'monds, and I told Tom Sawyer so.
He said there was loads of them there, anyway; and he said there was A-rabs there, too, and elephants and things.
I said, why couldn't we see them, then?
He said if I warn't so ignorant, but had read a book called Don Quixote, I would know without asking.
He said it was all done by enchantment.
He said there was hundreds of soldiers there, and elephants and treasure, and so on, but we had enemies which he called magicians; and they had turned the whole thing into an infant Sunday-school, just out of spite.
I said, all right; then the thing for us to do was to go for the magicians.
Tom Sawyer said I was a numskull.
"Why," said he, "a magician could call up a lot of genies, and they would hash you up like nothing before you could say Jack Robinson.
They are as tall as a tree and as big around as a church".
"Well," I says, "s'pose we got some genies to help _us_--can't we lick the other crowd then"?
"How you going to get them"?
"I don't know.
How do _they_ get them"?
"Why, they rub an old tin lamp or an iron ring, and then the genies come tearing in, with the thunder and lightning a-ripping around and the smoke a-rolling, and everything they're told to do they up and do it.
They don't think nothing of pulling a shot-tower up by the roots, and belting a Sunday-school superintendent over the head with it--or any other man".
"Who makes them tear around so"?
"Why, whoever rubs the lamp or the ring.
They belong to whoever rubs the lamp or the ring, and they've got to do whatever he says.
If he tells them to build a palace forty miles long out of di'monds, and fill it full of chewing-gum, or whatever you want, and fetch an emperor's daughter from China for you to marry, they've got to do it--and they've got to do it before sun-up next
And more: they've got to waltz that palace around over the country wherever you want it, you understand".
"Well," says I, "I think they are a pack of flat-heads for not keeping the palace themselves 'stead of fooling them away like that.
And what's more--if I was one of them I would see a man in Jericho before I would drop my business and come to him for the rubbing of an old tin lamp".
"How you talk, Huck Finn.
Why, you'd _have_ to come when he rubbed it, whether you wanted to or not".
"What!
and I as high as a tree and as big as a church?
All right, then; I _would_ come; but I lay I'd make that man climb the highest tree there was in the country".
"Shucks, it ain't no use to talk to you, Huck Finn.
You don't seem to know anything, somehow--perfect saphead".
I thought all this over for two or three days, and then I reckoned I would see if there was anything in it.
I got an old tin lamp and an iron ring, and went out in the woods and rubbed and rubbed till I sweat like an Injun, calculating to build a palace and sell it; but it warn't no use, none of the genies come.
So then I judged that all that stuff was only just one of Tom Sawyer's lies.
I reckoned he believed in the A-rabs and the elephants, but as for me I think different.
It had all the marks of a Sunday-school.
CHAPTER IV.
WELL, three or four months run along, and it was well into the winter now.
I had been to school most all the time and could spell and read and write just a little, and could say the multiplication table up to six times seven is thirty-five, and I don't reckon I could ever get any further than that if I was to live forever.
I don't take no stock in mathematics, anyway.
At first I hated the school, but by and by I got so I could stand it.
Whenever I got uncommon tired I played hookey, and the hiding I got next day done me good and cheered me up.
So the longer I went to school the easier it got to be.
I was getting sort of used to the widow's ways, too, and they warn't so raspy on me.
Living in a house and sleeping in a bed pulled on me pretty tight mostly, but before the cold weather I used to slide out and sleep in the woods sometimes, and so that was a rest to me.
I liked the old ways best, but I was getting so I liked the new ones, too, a little bit.
The widow said I was coming along slow but sure, and doing very satisfactory.
She said she warn't ashamed of me.
One morning I happened to turn over the salt-cellar at breakfast.
I reached for some of it as quick as I could to throw over my left shoulder and keep off the bad luck, but Miss Watson was in ahead of me, and crossed me off.
She says, "Take your hands away, Huckleberry; what a mess you are always making"!
The widow put in a good word for me, but that warn't going to keep off the bad luck, I knowed that well enough.
I started out, after breakfast, feeling worried and shaky, and wondering where it was going to fall on me, and what it was going to be.
There is ways to keep off some kinds of bad luck, but this wasn't one of them kind; so I never tried to do anything, but just poked along low-spirited and on the watch-out.
I went down to the front garden and clumb over the stile where you go through the high board fence.
There was an inch of new snow on the ground, and I seen somebody's tracks.
They had come up from the quarry and stood around the stile a while, and then went on around the garden fence.
It was funny they hadn't come in, after standing around so.
I couldn't make it out.
It was very curious, somehow.
I was going to follow around, but I stooped down to look at the tracks first.
I didn't notice anything at first, but next I did.
There was a cross in the left boot-heel made with big nails, to keep off the devil.
I was up in a second and shinning down the hill.
I looked over my shoulder every now and then, but I didn't see nobody.
I was at Judge Thatcher's as quick as I could get there.
He said: "Why, my boy, you are all out of breath.
Did you come for your interest"?
"No, sir," I says; "is there some for me"?
"Oh, yes, a half-yearly is in last night--over a hundred and fifty dollars.
Quite a fortune for you.
You had better let me invest it along with your six thousand, because if you take it you'll spend it".
"No, sir," I says, "I don't want to spend it.
I don't want it at all--nor the six thousand, nuther.
I want you to take it; I want to give it to you--the six thousand and all".
He looked surprised.
He couldn't seem to make it out.
He says: "Why, what can you mean, my boy"?
I says, "Don't you ask me no questions about it, please.
You'll take it--won't you"?
He says: "Well, I'm puzzled.
Is something the matter"?
"Please take it," says I, "and don't ask me nothing--then I won't have to tell no lies".
He studied a while, and then he says: "Oho-o!
I think I see.
You want to _sell_ all your property to me--not give it.
That's the correct idea".
Then he wrote something on a paper and read it over, and says: "There; you see it says 'for a consideration.
' That means I have bought it of you and paid you for it.
Here's a dollar for you.
Now you sign it".
So I signed it, and left.
Miss Watson's nigger, Jim, had a hair-ball as big as your fist, which had been took out of the fourth stomach of an ox, and he used to do magic with it.
He said there was a spirit inside of it, and it knowed everything.
So I went to him that night and told him pap was here again, for I found his tracks in the snow.
What I wanted to know was, what he was going to do, and was he going to stay?
Jim got out his hair-ball and said something over it, and then he held it up and dropped it on the floor.
It fell pretty solid, and only rolled about an inch.
Jim tried it again, and then another time, and it acted just the same.
Jim got down on his knees, and put his ear against it and listened.
But it warn't no use; he said it wouldn't talk.
He said sometimes it wouldn't talk without money.
I told him I had an old slick counterfeit quarter that warn't no good because the brass showed through the silver a little, and it wouldn't pass nohow, even if the brass didn't show, because it was so slick it felt greasy, and so that would tell on it
(I reckoned I wouldn't say nothing about the dollar I got from the judge.
) I said it was pretty bad money, but maybe the hair-ball would take it, because maybe it wouldn't know the difference.
Jim smelt it and bit it and rubbed it, and said he would manage so the hair-ball would think it was good.
He said he would split open a raw Irish potato and stick the quarter in between and keep it there all night, and next morning you couldn't see no brass, and it wouldn't feel greasy no more, and so anybody in town would take it in a minute, let alone a
Well, I knowed a potato would do that before, but I had forgot it.
Jim put the quarter under the hair-ball, and got down and listened again.
This time he said the hair-ball was all right.
He said it would tell my whole fortune if I wanted it to.
I says, go on.
So the hair-ball talked to Jim, and Jim told it to me.
He says: "Yo' ole father doan' know yit what he's a-gwyne to do.
Sometimes he spec he'll go 'way, en den agin he spec he'll stay.
De bes' way is to res' easy en let de ole man take his own way.
Dey's two angels hoverin' roun' 'bout him.
One uv 'em is white en shiny, en t'other one is black.
De white one gits him to go right a little while, den de black one sail in en bust it all up.
A body can't tell yit which one gwyne to fetch him at de las'.
But you is all right.
You gwyne to have considable trouble in yo' life, en considable joy.
Sometimes you gwyne to git hurt, en sometimes you gwyne to git sick; but every time you's gwyne to git well agin.
Dey's two gals flyin' 'bout you in yo' life.
One uv 'em's light en t'other one is dark.
One is rich en t'other is po'.
You's gwyne to marry de po' one fust en de rich one by en by.
You wants to keep 'way fum de water as much as you kin, en don't run no resk, 'kase it's down in de bills dat you's gwyne to git hung".
When I lit my candle and went up to my room that night there sat pap his own self!
CHAPTER V. I had shut the door to.
Then I turned around and there he was.
I used to be scared of him all the time, he tanned me so much.
I reckoned I was scared now, too; but in a minute I see I was mistaken--that is, after the first jolt, as you may say, when my breath sort of hitched, he being so unexpected; but right away after I see I warn't scared of him worth bothring about.
He was most fifty, and he looked it.
His hair was long and tangled and greasy, and hung down, and you could see his eyes shining through like he was behind vines.
It was all black, no gray; so was his long, mixed-up whiskers.
There warn't no color in his face, where his face showed; it was white; not like another man's white, but a white to make a body sick, a white to make a body's flesh crawl--a tree-toad white, a fish-belly white.
As for his clothes--just rags, that was all.
He had one ankle resting on t'other knee; the boot on that foot was busted, and two of his toes stuck through, and he worked them now and then.
His hat was laying on the floor--an old black slouch with the top caved in, like a lid.
I stood a-looking at him; he set there a-looking at me, with his chair tilted back a little.
I set the candle down.
I noticed the window was up; so he had clumb in by the shed.
He kept a-looking me all over.
By and by he says: "Starchy clothes--very.
You think you're a good deal of a big-bug, _don't_ you"?
"Maybe I am, maybe I ain't," I says.
"Don't you give me none o' your lip," says he.
"You've put on considerable many frills since I been away.
I'll take you down a peg before I get done with you.
You're educated, too, they say--can read and write.
You think you're better'n your father, now, don't you, because he can't?
_I'll_ take it out of you.
Who told you you might meddle with such hifalut'n foolishness, hey?
--who told you you could"?
"The widow.
She told me".
"The widow, hey?
--and who told the widow she could put in her shovel about a thing that ain't none of her business"?
"Nobody never told her".
"Well, I'll learn her how to meddle.
And looky here--you drop that school, you hear?
I'll learn people to bring up a boy to put on airs over his own father and let on to be better'n what _he_ is.
You lemme catch you fooling around that school again, you hear?
Your mother couldn't read, and she couldn't write, nuther, before she died.
None of the family couldn't before _they_ died.
I can't; and here you're a-swelling yourself up like this.
I ain't the man to stand it--you hear?
Say, lemme hear you read".
I took up a book and begun something about General Washington and the wars.
When I'd read about a half a minute, he fetched the book a whack with his hand and knocked it across the house.
He says: "It's so.
You can do it.
I had my doubts when you told me.
Now looky here; you stop that putting on frills.
I won't have it.
I'll lay for you, my smarty; and if I catch you about that school I'll tan you good.
First you know you'll get religion, too.
I never see such a son".
He took up a little blue and yaller picture of some cows and a boy, and says: "What's this"?
"It's something they give me for learning my lessons good".
He tore it up, and says: "I'll give you something better--I'll give you a cowhide".
He set there a-mumbling and a-growling a minute, and then he says: "_Ain't_ you a sweet-scented dandy, though?
A bed; and bedclothes; and a look'n'-glass; and a piece of carpet on the floor--and your own father got to sleep with the hogs in the tanyard.
I never see such a son.
I bet I'll take some o' these frills out o' you before I'm done with you.
Why, there ain't no end to your airs--they say you're rich.
Hey?
--how's that"?
"They lie--that's how".
"Looky here--mind how you talk to me; I'm a-standing about all I can stand now--so don't gimme no sass.
I've been in town two days, and I hain't heard nothing but about you bein' rich.
I heard about it away down the river, too.
That's why I come.
You git me that money to-morrow--I want it".
"I hain't got no money".
"It's a lie.
Judge Thatcher's got it.
You git it.
I want it".
"I hain't got no money, I tell you.
You ask Judge Thatcher; he'll tell you the same".
"All right.
I'll ask him; and I'll make him pungle, too, or I'll know the reason why.
Say, how much you got in your pocket?
I want it".
"I hain't got only a dollar, and I want that to--" "It don't make no difference what you want it for--you just shell it out".
He took it and bit it to see if it was good, and then he said he was going down town to get some whisky; said he hadn't had a drink all day.
When he had got out on the shed he put his head in again, and cussed me for putting on frills and trying to be better than him; and when I reckoned he was gone he come back and put his head in again, and told me to mind about that school, because he was
Next day he was drunk, and he went to Judge Thatcher's and bullyragged him, and tried to make him give up the money; but he couldn't, and then he swore he'd make the law force him.
The judge and the widow went to law to get the court to take me away from him and let one of them be my guardian; but it was a new judge that had just come, and he didn't know the old man; so he said courts mustn't interfere and separate families if they
So Judge Thatcher and the widow had to quit on the business.
That pleased the old man till he couldn't rest.
He said he'd cowhide me till I was black and blue if I didn't raise some money for him.
I borrowed three dollars from Judge Thatcher, and pap took it and got drunk, and went a-blowing around and cussing and whooping and carrying on; and he kept it up all over town, with a tin pan, till most midnight; then they jailed him, and next day they
But he said _he_ was satisfied; said he was boss of his son, and he'd make it warm for _him_.
When he got out the new judge said he was a-going to make a man of him.
So he took him to his own house, and dressed him up clean and nice, and had him to breakfast and dinner and supper with the family, and was just old pie to him, so to speak.
And after supper he talked to him about temperance and such things till the old man cried, and said he'd been a fool, and fooled away his life; but now he was a-going to turn over a new leaf and be a man nobody wouldn't be ashamed of, and he hoped the
The judge said he could hug him for them words; so he cried, and his wife she cried again; pap said he'd been a man that had always been misunderstood before, and the judge said he believed it.
The old man said that what a man wanted that was down was sympathy, and the judge said it was so; so they cried again.
And when it was bedtime the old man rose up and held out his hand, and says: "Look at it, gentlemen and ladies all; take a-hold of it; shake it.
There's a hand that was the hand of a hog; but it ain't so no more; it's the hand of a man that's started in on a new life, and'll die before he'll go back.
You mark them words--don't forget I said them.
It's a clean hand now; shake it--don't be afeard".
So they shook it, one after the other, all around, and cried.
The judge's wife she kissed it.
Then the old man he signed a pledge--made his mark.
The judge said it was the holiest time on record, or something like that.
Then they tucked the old man into a beautiful room, which was the spare room, and in the night some time he got powerful thirsty and clumb out on to the porch-roof and slid down a stanchion and traded his new coat for a jug of forty-rod, and clumb back
And when they come to look at that spare room they had to take soundings before they could navigate it.
The judge he felt kind of sore.
He said he reckoned a body could reform the old man with a shotgun, maybe, but he didn't know no other way.
CHAPTER VI.
WELL, pretty soon the old man was up and around again, and then he went for Judge Thatcher in the courts to make him give up that money, and he went for me, too, for not stopping school.
He catched me a couple of times and thrashed me, but I went to school just the same, and dodged him or outrun him most of the time.
I didn't want to go to school much before, but I reckoned I'd go now to spite pap.
That law trial was a slow business--appeared like they warn't ever going to get started on it; so every now and then I'd borrow two or three dollars off of the judge for him, to keep from getting a cowhiding.
Every time he got money he got drunk; and every time he got drunk he raised Cain around town; and every time he raised Cain he got jailed.
He was just suited--this kind of thing was right in his line.
He got to hanging around the widow's too much and so she told him at last that if he didn't quit using around there she would make trouble for him.
Well, _wasn't_ he mad?
He said he would show who was Huck Finn's boss.
So he watched out for me one day in the spring, and catched me, and took me up the river about three mile in a skiff, and crossed over to the Illinois shore where it was woody and there warn't no houses but an old log hut in a place where the timber was
He kept me with him all the time, and I never got a chance to run off.
We lived in that old cabin, and he always locked the door and put the key under his head nights.
He had a gun which he had stole, I reckon, and we fished and hunted, and that was what we lived on.
Every little while he locked me in and went down to the store, three miles, to the ferry, and traded fish and game for whisky, and fetched it home and got drunk and had a good time, and licked me.
The widow she found out where I was by and by, and she sent a man over to try to get hold of me; but pap drove him off with the gun, and it warn't long after that till I was used to being where I was, and liked it--all but the cowhide part.
It was kind of lazy and jolly, laying off comfortable all day, smoking and fishing, and no books nor study.
Two months or more run along, and my clothes got to be all rags and dirt, and I didn't see how I'd ever got to like it so well at the widow's, where you had to wash, and eat on a plate, and comb up, and go to bed and get up regular, and be forever
I didn't want to go back no more.
I had stopped cussing, because the widow didn't like it; but now I took to it again because pap hadn't no objections.
It was pretty good times up in the woods there, take it all around.
But by and by pap got too handy with his hick'ry, and I couldn't stand it.
I was all over welts.
He got to going away so much, too, and locking me in.
Once he locked me in and was gone three days.
It was dreadful lonesome.
I judged he had got drownded, and I wasn't ever going to get out any more.
I was scared.
I made up my mind I would fix up some way to leave there.
I had tried to get out of that cabin many a time, but I couldn't find no way.
There warn't a window to it big enough for a dog to get through.
I couldn't get up the chimbly; it was too narrow.
The door was thick, solid oak slabs.
Pap was pretty careful not to leave a knife or anything in the cabin when he was away; I reckon I had hunted the place over as much as a hundred times; well, I was most all the time at it, because it was about the only way to put in the time.
But this time I found something at last; I found an old rusty wood-saw without any handle; it was laid in between a rafter and the clapboards of the roof.
I greased it up and went to work.
There was an old horse-blanket nailed against the logs at the far end of the cabin behind the table, to keep the wind from blowing through the chinks and putting the candle out.
I got under the table and raised the blanket, and went to work to saw a section of the big bottom log out--big enough to let me through.
Well, it was a good long job, but I was getting towards the end of it when I heard pap's gun in the woods.
I got rid of the signs of my work, and dropped the blanket and hid my saw, and pretty soon pap come in.
Pap warn't in a good humor--so he was his natural self.
He said he was down town, and everything was going wrong.
His lawyer said he reckoned he would win his lawsuit and get the money if they ever got started on the trial; but then there was ways to put it off a long time, and Judge Thatcher knowed how to do it.
And he said people allowed there'd be another trial to get me away from him and give me to the widow for my guardian, and they guessed it would win this time.
This shook me up considerable, because I didn't want to go back to the widow's any more and be so cramped up and sivilized, as they called it.
Then the old man got to cussing, and cussed everything and everybody he could think of, and then cussed them all over again to make sure he hadn't skipped any, and after that he polished off with a kind of a general cuss all round, including a
He said he would like to see the widow get me.
He said he would watch out, and if they tried to come any such game on him he knowed of a place six or seven mile off to stow me in, where they might hunt till they dropped and they couldn't find me.
That made me pretty uneasy again, but only for a minute; I reckoned I wouldn't stay on hand till he got that chance.
The old man made me go to the skiff and fetch the things he had got.
There was a fifty-pound sack of corn meal, and a side of bacon, ammunition, and a four-gallon jug of whisky, and an old book and two newspapers for wadding, besides some tow.
I toted up a load, and went back and set down on the bow of the skiff to rest.
I thought it all over, and I reckoned I would walk off with the gun and some lines, and take to the woods when I run away.
I guessed I wouldn't stay in one place, but just tramp right across the country, mostly night times, and hunt and fish to keep alive, and so get so far away that the old man nor the widow couldn't ever find me any more.
I judged I would saw out and leave that night if pap got drunk enough, and I reckoned he would.
I got so full of it I didn't notice how long I was staying till the old man hollered and asked me whether I was asleep or drownded.
I got the things all up to the cabin, and then it was about dark.
While I was cooking supper the old man took a swig or two and got sort of warmed up, and went to ripping again.
He had been drunk over in town, and laid in the gutter all night, and he was a sight to look at.
A body would a thought he was Adam--he was just all mud.
Whenever his liquor begun to work he most always went for the govment, this time he says: "Call this a govment!
why, just look at it and see what it's like.
Here's the law a-standing ready to take a man's son away from him--a man's own son, which he has had all the trouble and all the anxiety and all the expense of raising.
Yes, just as that man has got that son raised at last, and ready to go to work and begin to do suthin' for _him_ and give him a rest, the law up and goes for him.
And they call _that_ govment!
That ain't all, nuther.
The law backs that old Judge Thatcher up and helps him to keep me out o' my property.
Here's what the law does: The law takes a man worth six thousand dollars and up'ards, and jams him into an old trap of a cabin like this, and lets him go round in clothes that ain't fitten for a hog.
They call that govment!
A man can't get his rights in a govment like this.
Sometimes I've a mighty notion to just leave the country for good and all.
Yes, and I _told_ 'em so; I told old Thatcher so to his face.
Lots of 'em heard me, and can tell what I said.
Says I, for two cents I'd leave the blamed country and never come a-near it agin.
Them's the very words.
I says look at my hat--if you call it a hat--but the lid raises up and the rest of it goes down till it's below my chin, and then it ain't rightly a hat at all, but more like my head was shoved up through a jint o' stove-pipe.
Look at it, says I--such a hat for me to wear--one of the wealthiest men in this town if I could git my rights.
"Oh, yes, this is a wonderful govment, wonderful.
Why, looky here.
There was a free nigger there from Ohio--a mulatter, most as white as a white man.
He had the whitest shirt on you ever see, too, and the shiniest hat; and there ain't a man in that town that's got as fine clothes as what he had; and he had a gold watch and chain, and a silver-headed cane--the awfulest old gray-headed nabob in the
And what do you think?
They said he was a p'fessor in a college, and could talk all kinds of languages, and knowed everything.
And that ain't the wust.
They said he could _vote_ when he was at home.
Well, that let me out.
Thinks I, what is the country a-coming to?
It was 'lection day, and I was just about to go and vote myself if I warn't too drunk to get there; but when they told me there was a State in this country where they'd let that nigger vote, I drawed out.
I says I'll never vote agin.
Them's the very words I said; they all heard me; and the country may rot for all me--I'll never vote agin as long as I live.
And to see the cool way of that nigger--why, he wouldn't a give me the road if I hadn't shoved him out o' the way.
I says to the people, why ain't this nigger put up at auction and sold?
--that's what I want to know.
And what do you reckon they said?
Why, they said he couldn't be sold till he'd been in the State six months, and he hadn't been there that long yet.
There, now--that's a specimen.
They call that a govment that can't sell a free nigger till he's been in the State six months.
Here's a govment that calls itself a govment, and lets on to be a govment, and thinks it is a govment, and yet's got to set stock-still for six whole months before it can take a hold of a prowling, thieving, infernal, white-shirted free nigger, and--"
He hopped around the cabin considerable, first on one leg and then on the other, holding first one shin and then the other one, and at last he let out with his left foot all of a sudden and fetched the tub a rattling kick.
But it warn't good judgment, because that was the boot that had a couple of his toes leaking out of the front end of it; so now he raised a howl that fairly made a body's hair raise, and down he went in the dirt, and rolled there, and held his toes; and
He said so his own self afterwards.
He had heard old Sowberry Hagan in his best days, and he said it laid over him, too; but I reckon that was sort of piling it on, maybe.
After supper pap took the jug, and said he had enough whisky there for two drunks and one delirium tremens.
That was always his word.
I judged he would be blind drunk in about an hour, and then I would steal the key, or saw myself out, one or t'other.
He drank and drank, and tumbled down on his blankets by and by; but luck didn't run my way.
He didn't go sound asleep, but was uneasy.
He groaned and moaned and thrashed around this way and that for a long time.
At last I got so sleepy I couldn't keep my eyes open all I could do, and so before I knowed what I was about I was sound asleep, and the candle burning.
I don't know how long I was asleep, but all of a sudden there was an awful scream and I was up.
There was pap looking wild, and skipping around every which way and yelling about snakes.
He said they was crawling up his legs; and then he would give a jump and scream, and say one had bit him on the cheek--but I couldn't see no snakes.
He started and run round and round the cabin, hollering "Take him off!
take him off!
he's biting me on the neck"!
I never see a man look so wild in the eyes.
Pretty soon he was all fagged out, and fell down panting; then he rolled over and over wonderful fast, kicking things every which way, and striking and grabbing at the air with his hands, and screaming and saying there was devils a-hold of him.
He wore out by and by, and laid still a while, moaning.
Then he laid stiller, and didn't make a sound.
I could hear the owls and the wolves away off in the woods, and it seemed terrible still.
He was laying over by the corner.
By and by he raised up part way and listened, with his head to one side.
He says, very low: "Tramp--tramp--tramp; that's the dead; tramp--tramp--tramp; they're coming after me; but I won't go.
Oh, they're here!
don't touch me--don't!
hands off--they're cold; let go.
Oh, let a poor devil alone"!
Then he went down on all fours and crawled off, begging them to let him alone, and he rolled himself up in his blanket and wallowed in under the old pine table, still a-begging; and then he went to crying.
I could hear him through the blanket.
By and by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet looking wild, and he see me and went for me.
He chased me round and round the place with a clasp-knife, calling me the Angel of Death, and saying he would kill me, and then I couldn't come for him no more.
I begged, and told him I was only Huck; but he laughed _such_ a screechy laugh, and roared and cussed, and kept on chasing me up.
Once when I turned short and dodged under his arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between my shoulders, and I thought I was gone; but I slid out of the jacket quick as lightning, and saved myself.
Pretty soon he was all tired out, and dropped down with his back against the door, and said he would rest a minute and then kill me.
He put his knife under him, and said he would sleep and get strong, and then he would see who was who.
So he dozed off pretty soon.
By and by I got the old split-bottom chair and clumb up as easy as I could, not to make any noise, and got down the gun.
I slipped the ramrod down it to make sure it was loaded, then I laid it across the turnip barrel, pointing towards pap, and set down behind it to wait for him to stir.
And how slow and still the time did drag along.
CHAPTER VII.
"GIT up!
What you 'bout"?
I opened my eyes and looked around, trying to make out where I was.
It was after sun-up, and I had been sound asleep.
Pap was standing over me looking sour and sick, too.
He says: "What you doin' with this gun"?
I judged he didn't know nothing about what he had been doing, so I says: "Somebody tried to get in, so I was laying for him".
"Why didn't you roust me out"?
"Well, I tried to, but I couldn't; I couldn't budge you".
"Well, all right.
Don't stand there palavering all day, but out with you and see if there's a fish on the lines for breakfast.
I'll be along in a minute".
He unlocked the door, and I cleared out up the river-bank.
I noticed some pieces of limbs and such things floating down, and a sprinkling of bark; so I knowed the river had begun to rise.
I reckoned I would have great times now if I was over at the town.
The June rise used to be always luck for me; because as soon as that rise begins here comes cordwood floating down, and pieces of log rafts--sometimes a dozen logs together; so all you have to do is to catch them and sell them to the wood-yards and the
I went along up the bank with one eye out for pap and t'other one out for what the rise might fetch along.
Well, all at once here comes a canoe; just a beauty, too, about thirteen or fourteen foot long, riding high like a duck.
I shot head-first off of the bank like a frog, clothes and all on, and struck out for the canoe.
I just expected there'd be somebody laying down in it, because people often done that to fool folks, and when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it they'd raise up and laugh at him.
But it warn't so this time.
It was a drift-canoe sure enough, and I clumb in and paddled her ashore.
Thinks I, the old man will be glad when he sees this--she's worth ten dollars.
But when I got to shore pap wasn't in sight yet, and as I was running her into a little creek like a gully, all hung over with vines and willows, I struck another idea: I judged I'd hide her good, and then, 'stead of taking to the woods when I run off,
It was pretty close to the shanty, and I thought I heard the old man coming all the time; but I got her hid; and then I out and looked around a bunch of willows, and there was the old man down the path a piece just drawing a bead on a bird with his gun.
So he hadn't seen anything.
When he got along I was hard at it taking up a "trot" line.
He abused me a little for being so slow; but I told him I fell in the river, and that was what made me so long.
I knowed he would see I was wet, and then he would be asking questions.
We got five catfish off the lines and went home.
While we laid off after breakfast to sleep up, both of us being about wore out, I got to thinking that if I could fix up some way to keep pap and the widow from trying to follow me, it would be a certainer thing than trusting to luck to get far enough off
Well, I didn't see no way for a while, but by and by pap raised up a minute to drink another barrel of water, and he says: "Another time a man comes a-prowling round here you roust me out, you hear?
That man warn't here for no good.
I'd a shot him.
Next time you roust me out, you hear"?
Then he dropped down and went to sleep again; but what he had been saying give me the very idea I wanted.
I says to myself, I can fix it now so nobody won't think of following me.
About twelve o'clock we turned out and went along up the bank.
The river was coming up pretty fast, and lots of driftwood going by on the rise.
By and by along comes part of a log raft--nine logs fast together.
We went out with the skiff and towed it ashore.
Then we had dinner.
Anybody but pap would a waited and seen the day through, so as to catch more stuff; but that warn't pap's style.
Nine logs was enough for one time; he must shove right over to town and sell.
So he locked me in and took the skiff, and started off towing the raft about half-past three.
I judged he wouldn't come back that night.
I waited till I reckoned he had got a good start; then I out with my saw, and went to work on that log again.
Before he was t'other side of the river I was out of the hole; him and his raft was just a speck on the water away off yonder.
I took the sack of corn meal and took it to where the canoe was hid, and shoved the vines and branches apart and put it in; then I done the same with the side of bacon; then the whisky-jug.
I took all the coffee and sugar there was, and all the ammunition; I took the wadding; I took the bucket and gourd; I took a dipper and a tin cup, and my old saw and two blankets, and the skillet and the coffee-pot.
I took fish-lines and matches and other things--everything that was worth a cent.
I cleaned out the place.
I wanted an axe, but there wasn't any, only the one out at the woodpile, and I knowed why I was going to leave that.
I fetched out the gun, and now I was done.
I had wore the ground a good deal crawling out of the hole and dragging out so many things.
So I fixed that as good as I could from the outside by scattering dust on the place, which covered up the smoothness and the sawdust.
Then I fixed the piece of log back into its place, and put two rocks under it and one against it to hold it there, for it was bent up at that place and didn't quite touch ground.
If you stood four or five foot away and didn't know it was sawed, you wouldn't never notice it; and besides, this was the back of the cabin, and it warn't likely anybody would go fooling around there.
It was all grass clear to the canoe, so I hadn't left a track.
I followed around to see.
I stood on the bank and looked out over the river.
All safe.
So I took the gun and went up a piece into the woods, and was hunting around for some birds when I see a wild pig; hogs soon went wild in them bottoms after they had got away from the prairie farms.
I shot this fellow and took him into camp.
I took the axe and smashed in the door.
I beat it and hacked it considerable a-doing it.
I fetched the pig in, and took him back nearly to the table and hacked into his throat with the axe, and laid him down on the ground to bleed; I say ground because it was ground--hard packed, and no boards.
Well, next I took an old sack and put a lot of big rocks in it--all I could drag--and I started it from the pig, and dragged it to the door and through the woods down to the river and dumped it in, and down it sunk, out of sight.
You could easy see that something had been dragged over the ground.
I did wish Tom Sawyer was there; I knowed he would take an interest in this kind of business, and throw in the fancy touches.
Nobody could spread himself like Tom Sawyer in such a thing as that.
Well, last I pulled out some of my hair, and blooded the axe good, and stuck it on the back side, and slung the axe in the corner.
Then I took up the pig and held him to my breast with my jacket (so he couldn't drip) till I got a good piece below the house and then dumped him into the river.
Now I thought of something else.
So I went and got the bag of meal and my old saw out of the canoe, and fetched them to the house.
I took the bag to where it used to stand, and ripped a hole in the bottom of it with the saw, for there warn't no knives and forks on the place--pap done everything with his clasp-knife about the cooking.
Then I carried the sack about a hundred yards across the grass and through the willows east of the house, to a shallow lake that was five mile wide and full of rushes--and ducks too, you might say, in the season.
There was a slough or a creek leading out of it on the other side that went miles away, I don't know where, but it didn't go to the river.
The meal sifted out and made a little track all the way to the lake.
I dropped pap's whetstone there too, so as to look like it had been done by accident.
Then I tied up the rip in the meal sack with a string, so it wouldn't leak no more, and took it and my saw to the canoe again.
It was about dark now; so I dropped the canoe down the river under some willows that hung over the bank, and waited for the moon to rise.
I made fast to a willow; then I took a bite to eat, and by and by laid down in the canoe to smoke a pipe and lay out a plan.
I says to myself, they'll follow the track of that sackful of rocks to the shore and then drag the river for me.
And they'll follow that meal track to the lake and go browsing down the creek that leads out of it to find the robbers that killed me and took the things.
They won't ever hunt the river for anything but my dead carcass.
They'll soon get tired of that, and won't bother no more about me.
All right; I can stop anywhere I want to.
Jackson's Island is good enough for me; I know that island pretty well, and nobody ever comes there.
And then I can paddle over to town nights, and slink around and pick up things I want.
Jackson's Island's the place.
I was pretty tired, and the first thing I knowed I was asleep.
When I woke up I didn't know where I was for a minute.
I set up and looked around, a little scared.
Then I remembered.
The river looked miles and miles across.
The moon was so bright I could a counted the drift logs that went a-slipping along, black and still, hundreds of yards out from shore.
Everything was dead quiet, and it looked late, and _smelt_ late.
You know what I mean--I don't know the words to put it in.
I took a good gap and a stretch, and was just going to unhitch and start when I heard a sound away over the water.
I listened.
Pretty soon I made it out.
It was that dull kind of a regular sound that comes from oars working in rowlocks when it's a still night.
I peeped out through the willow branches, and there it was--a skiff, away across the water.
I couldn't tell how many was in it.
It kept a-coming, and when it was abreast of me I see there warn't but one man in it.
Think's I, maybe it's pap, though I warn't expecting him.
He dropped below me with the current, and by and by he came a-swinging up shore in the easy water, and he went by so close I could a reached out the gun and touched him.
Well, it _was_ pap, sure enough--and sober, too, by the way he laid his oars.
I didn't lose no time.
The next minute I was a-spinning down stream soft but quick in the shade of the bank.
I made two mile and a half, and then struck out a quarter of a mile or more towards the middle of the river, because pretty soon I would be passing the ferry landing, and people might see me and hail me.
I got out amongst the driftwood, and then laid down in the bottom of the canoe and let her float.
I laid there, and had a good rest and a smoke out of my pipe, looking away into the sky; not a cloud in it.
The sky looks ever so deep when you lay down on your back in the moonshine; I never knowed it before.
And how far a body can hear on the water such nights!
I heard people talking at the ferry landing.
I heard what they said, too--every word of it.
One man said it was getting towards the long days and the short nights now.
T'other one said _this_ warn't one of the short ones, he reckoned--and then they laughed, and he said it over again, and they laughed again; then they waked up another fellow and told him, and laughed, but he didn't laugh; he ripped out something brisk,
The first fellow said he 'lowed to tell it to his old woman--she would think it was pretty good; but he said that warn't nothing to some things he had said in his time.
I heard one man say it was nearly three o'clock, and he hoped daylight wouldn't wait more than about a week longer.
After that the talk got further and further away, and I couldn't make out the words any more; but I could hear the mumble, and now and then a laugh, too, but it seemed a long ways off.
I was away below the ferry now.
I rose up, and there was Jackson's Island, about two mile and a half down stream, heavy timbered and standing up out of the middle of the river, big and dark and solid, like a steamboat without any lights.
There warn't any signs of the bar at the head--it was all under water now.
It didn't take me long to get there.
I shot past the head at a ripping rate, the current was so swift, and then I got into the dead water and landed on the side towards the Illinois shore.
I run the canoe into a deep dent in the bank that I knowed about; I had to part the willow branches to get in; and when I made fast nobody could a seen the canoe from the outside.
I went up and set down on a log at the head of the island, and looked out on the big river and the black driftwood and away over to the town, three mile away, where there was three or four lights twinkling.
A monstrous big lumber-raft was about a mile up stream, coming along down, with a lantern in the middle of it.
I watched it come creeping down, and when it was most abreast of where I stood I heard a man say, "Stern oars, there!
heave her head to stabboard"!
I heard that just as plain as if the man was by my side.
There was a little gray in the sky now; so I stepped into the woods, and laid down for a nap before breakfast.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE sun was up so high when I waked that I judged it was after eight o'clock.
I laid there in the grass and the cool shade thinking about things, and feeling rested and ruther comfortable and satisfied.
I could see the sun out at one or two holes, but mostly it was big trees all about, and gloomy in there amongst them.
There was freckled places on the ground where the light sifted down through the leaves, and the freckled places swapped about a little, showing there was a little breeze up there.
A couple of squirrels set on a limb and jabbered at me very friendly.
I was powerful lazy and comfortable--didn't want to get up and cook breakfast.
Well, I was dozing off again when I thinks I hears a deep sound of "boom"!
away up the river.
I rouses up, and rests on my elbow and listens; pretty soon I hears it again.
I hopped up, and went and looked out at a hole in the leaves, and I see a bunch of smoke laying on the water a long ways up--about abreast the ferry.
And there was the ferryboat full of people floating along down.
I knowed what was the matter now.
"Boom"!
I see the white smoke squirt out of the ferryboat's side.
You see, they was firing cannon over the water, trying to make my carcass come to the top.
I was pretty hungry, but it warn't going to do for me to start a fire, because they might see the smoke.
So I set there and watched the cannon-smoke and listened to the boom.
The river was a mile wide there, and it always looks pretty on a summer morning--so I was having a good enough time seeing them hunt for my remainders if I only had a bite to eat.
Well, then I happened to think how they always put quicksilver in loaves of bread and float them off, because they always go right to the drownded carcass and stop there.
So, says I, I'll keep a lookout, and if any of them's floating around after me I'll give them a show.
I changed to the Illinois edge of the island to see what luck I could have, and I warn't disappointed.
A big double loaf come along, and I most got it with a long stick, but my foot slipped and she floated out further.
Of course I was where the current set in the closest to the shore--I knowed enough for that.
But by and by along comes another one, and this time I won.
I took out the plug and shook out the little dab of quicksilver, and set my teeth in.
It was "baker's bread"--what the quality eat; none of your low-down corn-pone.
I got a good place amongst the leaves, and set there on a log, munching the bread and watching the ferry-boat, and very well satisfied.
And then something struck me.
I says, now I reckon the widow or the parson or somebody prayed that this bread would find me, and here it has gone and done it.
So there ain't no doubt but there is something in that thing--that is, there's something in it when a body like the widow or the parson prays, but it don't work for me, and I reckon it don't work for only just the right kind.
I lit a pipe and had a good long smoke, and went on watching.
The ferryboat was floating with the current, and I allowed I'd have a chance to see who was aboard when she come along, because she would come in close, where the bread did.
When she'd got pretty well along down towards me, I put out my pipe and went to where I fished out the bread, and laid down behind a log on the bank in a little open place.
Where the log forked I could peep through.
By and by she come along, and she drifted in so close that they could a run out a plank and walked ashore.
Most everybody was on the boat.
Pap, and Judge Thatcher, and Bessie Thatcher, and Jo Harper, and Tom Sawyer, and his old Aunt Polly, and Sid and Mary, and plenty more.
Everybody was talking about the murder, but the captain broke in and says: "Look sharp, now; the current sets in the closest here, and maybe he's washed ashore and got tangled amongst the brush at the water's edge.
I hope so, anyway".
I didn't hope so.
They all crowded up and leaned over the rails, nearly in my face, and kept still, watching with all their might.
I could see them first-rate, but they couldn't see me.
Then the captain sung out: "Stand away"!
and the cannon let off such a blast right before me that it made me deef with the noise and pretty near blind with the smoke, and I judged I was gone.
If they'd a had some bullets in, I reckon they'd a got the corpse they was after.
Well, I see I warn't hurt, thanks to goodness.
The boat floated on and went out of sight around the shoulder of the island.
I could hear the booming now and then, further and further off, and by and by, after an hour, I didn't hear it no more.
The island was three mile long.
I judged they had got to the foot, and was giving it up.
But they didn't yet a while.
They turned around the foot of the island and started up the channel on the Missouri side, under steam, and booming once in a while as they went.
I crossed over to that side and watched them.
When they got abreast the head of the island they quit shooting and dropped over to the Missouri shore and went home to the town.
I knowed I was all right now.
Nobody else would come a-hunting after me.
I got my traps out of the canoe and made me a nice camp in the thick woods.
I made a kind of a tent out of my blankets to put my things under so the rain couldn't get at them.
I catched a catfish and haggled him open with my saw, and towards sundown I started my camp fire and had supper.
Then I set out a line to catch some fish for breakfast.
When it was dark I set by my camp fire smoking, and feeling pretty well satisfied; but by and by it got sort of lonesome, and so I went and set on the bank and listened to the current swashing along, and counted the stars and drift logs and rafts that come
And so for three days and nights.
No difference--just the same thing.
But the next day I went exploring around down through the island.
I was boss of it; it all belonged to me, so to say, and I wanted to know all about it; but mainly I wanted to put in the time.
I found plenty strawberries, ripe and prime; and green summer grapes, and green razberries; and the green blackberries was just beginning to show.
They would all come handy by and by, I judged.
Well, I went fooling along in the deep woods till I judged I warn't far from the foot of the island.
I had my gun along, but I hadn't shot nothing; it was for protection; thought I would kill some game nigh home.
About this time I mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake, and it went sliding off through the grass and flowers, and I after it, trying to get a shot at it.
I clipped along, and all of a sudden I bounded right on to the ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking.
My heart jumped up amongst my lungs.
I never waited for to look further, but uncocked my gun and went sneaking back on my tiptoes as fast as ever I could.
Every now and then I stopped a second amongst the thick leaves and listened, but my breath come so hard I couldn't hear nothing else.
I slunk along another piece further, then listened again; and so on, and so on.
If I see a stump, I took it for a man; if I trod on a stick and broke it, it made me feel like a person had cut one of my breaths in two and I only got half, and the short half, too.
When I got to camp I warn't feeling very brash, there warn't much sand in my craw; but I says, this ain't no time to be fooling around.
So I got all my traps into my canoe again so as to have them out of sight, and I put out the fire and scattered the ashes around to look like an old last year's camp, and then clumb a tree.
I reckon I was up in the tree two hours; but I didn't see nothing, I didn't hear nothing--I only _thought_ I heard and seen as much as a thousand things.
Well, I couldn't stay up there forever; so at last I got down, but I kept in the thick woods and on the lookout all the time.
All I could get to eat was berries and what was left over from breakfast.
By the time it was night I was pretty hungry.
So when it was good and dark I slid out from shore before moonrise and paddled over to the Illinois bank--about a quarter of a mile.
I went out in the woods and cooked a supper, and I had about made up my mind I would stay there all night when I hear a _plunkety-plunk, plunkety-plunk_, and says to myself, horses coming; and next I hear people's voices.
I got everything into the canoe as quick as I could, and then went creeping through the woods to see what I could find out.
I hadn't got far when I hear a man say: "We better camp here if we can find a good place; the horses is about beat out.
Let's look around".
I didn't wait, but shoved out and paddled away easy.
I tied up in the old place, and reckoned I would sleep in the canoe.
I didn't sleep much.
I couldn't, somehow, for thinking.
And every time I waked up I thought somebody had me by the neck.
So the sleep didn't do me no good.
By and by I says to myself, I can't live this way; I'm a-going to find out who it is that's here on the island with me; I'll find it out or bust.
Well, I felt better right off.
So I took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or two, and then let the canoe drop along down amongst the shadows.
The moon was shining, and outside of the shadows it made it most as light as day.
I poked along well on to an hour, everything still as rocks and sound asleep.
Well, by this time I was most down to the foot of the island.
A little ripply, cool breeze begun to blow, and that was as good as saying the night was about done.
I give her a turn with the paddle and brung her nose to shore; then I got my gun and slipped out and into the edge of the woods.
I sat down there on a log, and looked out through the leaves.
I see the moon go off watch, and the darkness begin to blanket the river.
But in a little while I see a pale streak over the treetops, and knowed the day was coming.
So I took my gun and slipped off towards where I had run across that camp fire, stopping every minute or two to listen.
But I hadn't no luck somehow; I couldn't seem to find the place.
But by and by, sure enough, I catched a glimpse of fire away through the trees.
I went for it, cautious and slow.
By and by I was close enough to have a look, and there laid a man on the ground.
It most give me the fan-tods.
He had a blanket around his head, and his head was nearly in the fire.
I set there behind a clump of bushes, in about six foot of him, and kept my eyes on him steady.
It was getting gray daylight now.
Pretty soon he gapped and stretched himself and hove off the blanket, and it was Miss Watson's Jim!
I bet I was glad to see him.
I says: "Hello, Jim"!
and skipped out.
He bounced up and stared at me wild.
Then he drops down on his knees, and puts his hands together and says: "Doan' hurt me--don't!
I hain't ever done no harm to a ghos'.
I alwuz liked dead people, en done all I could for 'em.
You go en git in de river agin, whah you b'longs, en doan' do nuffn to Ole Jim, 'at 'uz awluz yo' fren'".
Well, I warn't long making him understand I warn't dead.
I was ever so glad to see Jim.
I warn't lonesome now.
I told him I warn't afraid of _him_ telling the people where I was.
I talked along, but he only set there and looked at me; never said nothing.
Then I says: "It's good daylight.
Le's get breakfast.
Make up your camp fire good".
"What's de use er makin' up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich truck?
But you got a gun, hain't you?
Den we kin git sumfn better den strawbries".
"Strawberries and such truck," I says.
"Is that what you live on"?
"I couldn' git nuffn else," he says.
"Why, how long you been on the island, Jim"?
"I come heah de night arter you's killed".
"What, all that time"?
"Yes--indeedy".
"And ain't you had nothing but that kind of rubbage to eat"?
"No, sah--nuffn else".
"Well, you must be most starved, ain't you"?
"I reck'n I could eat a hoss.
I think I could.
How long you ben on de islan'"?
"Since the night I got killed".
"No!
W'y, what has you lived on?
But you got a gun.
Oh, yes, you got a gun.
Dat's good.
Now you kill sumfn en I'll make up de fire".
So we went over to where the canoe was, and while he built a fire in a grassy open place amongst the trees, I fetched meal and bacon and coffee, and coffee-pot and frying-pan, and sugar and tin cups, and the nigger was set back considerable, because he
I catched a good big catfish, too, and Jim cleaned him with his knife, and fried him.
When breakfast was ready we lolled on the grass and eat it smoking hot.
Jim laid it in with all his might, for he was most about starved.
Then when we had got pretty well stuffed, we laid off and lazied.
By and by Jim says: "But looky here, Huck, who wuz it dat 'uz killed in dat shanty ef it warn't you"?
Then I told him the whole thing, and he said it was smart.
He said Tom Sawyer couldn't get up no better plan than what I had.
Then I says: "How do you come to be here, Jim, and how'd you get here"?
He looked pretty uneasy, and didn't say nothing for a minute.
Then he says: "Maybe I better not tell".
"Why, Jim"?
"Well, dey's reasons.
But you wouldn' tell on me ef I uz to tell you, would you, Huck"?
"Blamed if I would, Jim".
"Well, I b'lieve you, Huck.
I--_I run off_".
"Jim"!
"But mind, you said you wouldn' tell--you know you said you wouldn' tell, Huck".
"Well, I did.
I said I wouldn't, and I'll stick to it.
Honest _injun_, I will.
People would call me a low-down Abolitionist and despise me for keeping mum--but that don't make no difference.
I ain't a-going to tell, and I ain't a-going back there, anyways.
So, now, le's know all about it".
"Well, you see, it 'uz dis way.
Ole missus--dat's Miss Watson--she pecks on me all de time, en treats me pooty rough, but she awluz said she wouldn' sell me down to Orleans.
But I noticed dey wuz a nigger trader roun' de place considable lately, en I begin to git oneasy.
Well, one night I creeps to de do' pooty late, en de do' warn't quite shet, en I hear old missus tell de widder she gwyne to sell me down to Orleans, but she didn' want to, but she could git eight hund'd dollars for me, en it 'uz sich a big stack o'
De widder she try to git her to say she wouldn' do it, but I never waited to hear de res'.
I lit out mighty quick, I tell you.
"I tuck out en shin down de hill, en 'spec to steal a skift 'long de sho' som'ers 'bove de town, but dey wuz people a-stirring yit, so I hid in de ole tumble-down cooper-shop on de bank to wait for everybody to go 'way.
Well, I wuz dah all night.
Dey wuz somebody roun' all de time.
'Long 'bout six in de mawnin' skifts begin to go by, en 'bout eight er nine every skift dat went 'long wuz talkin' 'bout how yo' pap come over to de town en say you's killed.
Dese las' skifts wuz full o' ladies en genlmen a-goin' over for to see de place.
Sometimes dey'd pull up at de sho' en take a res' b'fo' dey started acrost, so by de talk I got to know all 'bout de killin'.
I 'uz powerful sorry you's killed, Huck, but I ain't no mo' now.
"I laid dah under de shavin's all day.
I 'uz hungry, but I warn't afeard; bekase I knowed ole missus en de widder wuz goin' to start to de camp-meet'n' right arter breakfas' en be gone all day, en dey knows I goes off wid de cattle 'bout daylight, so dey wouldn' 'spec to see me roun' de
De yuther servants wouldn' miss me, kase dey'd shin out en take holiday soon as de ole folks 'uz out'n de way.
"Well, when it come dark I tuck out up de river road, en went 'bout two mile er more to whah dey warn't no houses.
I'd made up my mine 'bout what I's agwyne to do.
You see, ef I kep' on tryin' to git away afoot, de dogs 'ud track me; ef I stole a skift to cross over, dey'd miss dat skift, you see, en dey'd know 'bout whah I'd lan' on de yuther side, en whah to pick up my track.
So I says, a raff is what I's arter; it doan' _make_ no track.
"I see a light a-comin' roun' de p'int bymeby, so I wade' in en shove' a log ahead o' me en swum more'n half way acrost de river, en got in 'mongst de drift-wood, en kep' my head down low, en kinder swum agin de current tell de raff come along.
Den I swum to de stern uv it en tuck a-holt.
It clouded up en 'uz pooty dark for a little while.
So I clumb up en laid down on de planks.
De men 'uz all 'way yonder in de middle, whah de lantern wuz.
De river wuz a-risin', en dey wuz a good current; so I reck'n'd 'at by fo' in de mawnin' I'd be twenty-five mile down de river, en den I'd slip in jis b'fo' daylight en swim asho', en take to de woods on de Illinois side.
"But I didn' have no luck.
When we 'uz mos' down to de head er de islan' a man begin to come aft wid de lantern, I see it warn't no use fer to wait, so I slid overboard en struck out fer de islan'.
Well, I had a notion I could lan' mos' anywhers, but I couldn't--bank too bluff.
I 'uz mos' to de foot er de islan' b'fo' I found' a good place.
I went into de woods en jedged I wouldn' fool wid raffs no mo', long as dey move de lantern roun' so.
I had my pipe en a plug er dog-leg, en some matches in my cap, en dey warn't wet, so I 'uz all right".
"And so you ain't had no meat nor bread to eat all this time?
Why didn't you get mud-turkles"?
"How you gwyne to git 'm?
You can't slip up on um en grab um; en how's a body gwyne to hit um wid a rock?
How could a body do it in de night?
En I warn't gwyne to show mysef on de bank in de daytime".
"Well, that's so.
You've had to keep in the woods all the time, of course.
Did you hear 'em shooting the cannon"?
"Oh, yes.
I knowed dey was arter you.
I see um go by heah--watched um thoo de bushes".
Some young birds come along, flying a yard or two at a time and lighting.
Jim said it was a sign it was going to rain.
He said it was a sign when young chickens flew that way, and so he reckoned it was the same way when young birds done it.
I was going to catch some of them, but Jim wouldn't let me.
He said it was death.
He said his father laid mighty sick once, and some of them catched a bird, and his old granny said his father would die, and he did.
And Jim said you mustn't count the things you are going to cook for dinner, because that would bring bad luck.
The same if you shook the table-cloth after sundown.
And he said if a man owned a beehive and that man died, the bees must be told about it before sun-up next morning, or else the bees would all weaken down and quit work and die.
Jim said bees wouldn't sting idiots; but I didn't believe that, because I had tried them lots of times myself, and they wouldn't sting me.
I had heard about some of these things before, but not all of them.
Jim knowed all kinds of signs.
He said he knowed most everything.
I said it looked to me like all the signs was about bad luck, and so I asked him if there warn't any good-luck signs.
He says: "Mighty few--an' _dey_ ain't no use to a body.
What you want to know when good luck's a-comin' for?
Want to keep it off"?
And he said: "Ef you's got hairy arms en a hairy breas', it's a sign dat you's agwyne to be rich.
Well, dey's some use in a sign like dat, 'kase it's so fur ahead.
You see, maybe you's got to be po' a long time fust, en so you might git discourage' en kill yo'sef 'f you didn' know by de sign dat you gwyne to be rich bymeby".
"Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast, Jim"?
"What's de use to ax dat question?
Don't you see I has"?
"Well, are you rich"?
"No, but I ben rich wunst, and gwyne to be rich agin.
Wunst I had foteen dollars, but I tuck to specalat'n', en got busted out".
"What did you speculate in, Jim"?
"Well, fust I tackled stock".
"What kind of stock"?
"Why, live stock--cattle, you know.
I put ten dollars in a cow.
But I ain' gwyne to resk no mo' money in stock.
De cow up 'n' died on my han's".
"So you lost the ten dollars".
"No, I didn't lose it all.
I on'y los' 'bout nine of it.
I sole de hide en taller for a dollar en ten cents".
"You had five dollars and ten cents left.
Did you speculate any more"?
"Yes.
You know that one-laigged nigger dat b'longs to old Misto Bradish?
Well, he sot up a bank, en say anybody dat put in a dollar would git fo' dollars mo' at de en' er de year.
Well, all de niggers went in, but dey didn't have much.
I wuz de on'y one dat had much.
So I stuck out for mo' dan fo' dollars, en I said 'f I didn' git it I'd start a bank mysef.
Well, o' course dat nigger want' to keep me out er de business, bekase he says dey warn't business 'nough for two banks, so he say I could put in my five dollars en he pay me thirty-five at de en' er de year.
"So I done it.
Den I reck'n'd I'd inves' de thirty-five dollars right off en keep things a-movin'.
Dey wuz a nigger name' Bob, dat had ketched a wood-flat, en his marster didn' know it; en I bought it off'n him en told him to take de thirty-five dollars when de en' er de year come; but somebody stole de wood-flat dat night, en nex day de one-laigged
So dey didn' none uv us git no money".
"What did you do with the ten cents, Jim"?
"Well, I 'uz gwyne to spen' it, but I had a dream, en de dream tole me to give it to a nigger name' Balum--Balum's Ass dey call him for short; he's one er dem chuckleheads, you know.
But he's lucky, dey say, en I see I warn't lucky.
De dream say let Balum inves' de ten cents en he'd make a raise for me.
Well, Balum he tuck de money, en when he wuz in church he hear de preacher say dat whoever give to de po' len' to de Lord, en boun' to git his money back a hund'd times.
So Balum he tuck en give de ten cents to de po', en laid low to see what wuz gwyne to come of it".
"Well, what did come of it, Jim"?
"Nuffn never come of it.
I couldn' manage to k'leck dat money no way; en Balum he couldn'.
I ain' gwyne to len' no mo' money 'dout I see de security.
Boun' to git yo' money back a hund'd times, de preacher says!
Ef I could git de ten _cents_ back, I'd call it squah, en be glad er de chanst".
"Well, it's all right anyway, Jim, long as you're going to be rich again some time or other".
"Yes; en I's rich now, come to look at it.
I owns mysef, en I's wuth eight hund'd dollars.
I wisht I had de money, I wouldn' want no mo'".
CHAPTER IX.
I wanted to go and look at a place right about the middle of the island that I'd found when I was exploring; so we started and soon got to it, because the island was only three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide.
This place was a tolerable long, steep hill or ridge about forty foot high.
We had a rough time getting to the top, the sides was so steep and the bushes so thick.
We tramped and clumb around all over it, and by and by found a good big cavern in the rock, most up to the top on the side towards Illinois.
The cavern was as big as two or three rooms bunched together, and Jim could stand up straight in it.
It was cool in there.
Jim was for putting our traps in there right away, but I said we didn't want to be climbing up and down there all the time.
Jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place, and had all the traps in the cavern, we could rush there if anybody was to come to the island, and they would never find us without dogs.
And, besides, he said them little birds had said it was going to rain, and did I want the things to get wet?
So we went back and got the canoe, and paddled up abreast the cavern, and lugged all the traps up there.
Then we hunted up a place close by to hide the canoe in, amongst the thick willows.
We took some fish off of the lines and set them again, and begun to get ready for dinner.
The door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead in, and on one side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit, and was flat and a good place to build a fire on.
So we built it there and cooked dinner.
We spread the blankets inside for a carpet, and eat our dinner in there.
We put all the other things handy at the back of the cavern.
Pretty soon it darkened up, and begun to thunder and lighten; so the birds was right about it.
Directly it begun to rain, and it rained like all fury, too, and I never see the wind blow so.
It was one of these regular summer storms.
It would get so dark that it looked all blue-black outside, and lovely; and the rain would thrash along by so thick that the trees off a little ways looked dim and spider-webby; and here would come a blast of wind that would bend the trees down and turn
it was as bright as glory, and you'd have a little glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away off yonder in the storm, hundreds of yards further than you could see before; dark as sin again in a second, and now you'd hear the thunder let go with an awful
"Jim, this is nice," I says.
"I wouldn't want to be nowhere else but here.
Pass me along another hunk of fish and some hot corn-bread".
"Well, you wouldn't a ben here 'f it hadn't a ben for Jim.
You'd a ben down dah in de woods widout any dinner, en gittn' mos' drownded, too; dat you would, honey.
Chickens knows when it's gwyne to rain, en so do de birds, chile".
The river went on raising and raising for ten or twelve days, till at last it was over the banks.
The water was three or four foot deep on the island in the low places and on the Illinois bottom.
On that side it was a good many miles wide, but on the Missouri side it was the same old distance across--a half a mile--because the Missouri shore was just a wall of high bluffs.
Daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe, It was mighty cool and shady in the deep woods, even if the sun was blazing outside.
We went winding in and out amongst the trees, and sometimes the vines hung so thick we had to back away and go some other way.
Well, on every old broken-down tree you could see rabbits and snakes and such things; and when the island had been overflowed a day or two they got so tame, on account of being hungry, that you could paddle right up and put your hand on them if you
The ridge our cavern was in was full of them.
We could a had pets enough if we'd wanted them.
One night we catched a little section of a lumber raft--nice pine planks.
It was twelve foot wide and about fifteen or sixteen foot long, and the top stood above water six or seven inches--a solid, level floor.
We could see saw-logs go by in the daylight sometimes, but we let them go; we didn't show ourselves in daylight.
Another night when we was up at the head of the island, just before daylight, here comes a frame-house down, on the west side.
She was a two-story, and tilted over considerable.
We paddled out and got aboard--clumb in at an upstairs window.
But it was too dark to see yet, so we made the canoe fast and set in her to wait for daylight.
The light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island.
Then we looked in at the window.
We could make out a bed, and a table, and two old chairs, and lots of things around about on the floor, and there was clothes hanging against the wall.
There was something laying on the floor in the far corner that looked like a man.
So Jim says: "Hello, you"!
But it didn't budge.
So I hollered again, and then Jim says: "De man ain't asleep--he's dead.
You hold still--I'll go en see".
He went, and bent down and looked, and says: "It's a dead man.
Yes, indeedy; naked, too.
He's ben shot in de back.
I reck'n he's ben dead two er three days.
Come in, Huck, but doan' look at his face--it's too gashly".
I didn't look at him at all.
Jim throwed some old rags over him, but he needn't done it; I didn't want to see him.
There was heaps of old greasy cards scattered around over the floor, and old whisky bottles, and a couple of masks made out of black cloth; and all over the walls was the ignorantest kind of words and pictures made with charcoal.
There was two old dirty calico dresses, and a sun-bonnet, and some women's underclothes hanging against the wall, and some men's clothing, too.
We put the lot into the canoe--it might come good.
There was a boy's old speckled straw hat on the floor; I took that, too.
And there was a bottle that had had milk in it, and it had a rag stopper for a baby to suck.
We would a took the bottle, but it was broke.
There was a seedy old chest, and an old hair trunk with the hinges broke.
They stood open, but there warn't nothing left in them that was any account.
The way things was scattered about we reckoned the people left in a hurry, and warn't fixed so as to carry off most of their stuff.
We got an old tin lantern, and a butcher-knife without any handle, and a bran-new Barlow knife worth two bits in any store, and a lot of tallow candles, and a tin candlestick, and a gourd, and a tin cup, and a ratty old bedquilt off the bed, and a reticule
The straps was broke off of it, but, barring that, it was a good enough leg, though it was too long for me and not long enough for Jim, and we couldn't find the other one, though we hunted all around.
And so, take it all around, we made a good haul.
When we was ready to shove off we was a quarter of a mile below the island, and it was pretty broad day; so I made Jim lay down in the canoe and cover up with the quilt, because if he set up people could tell he was a nigger a good ways off.
I paddled over to the Illinois shore, and drifted down most a half a mile doing it.
I crept up the dead water under the bank, and hadn't no accidents and didn't see nobody.
We got home all safe.
CHAPTER X. AFTER breakfast I wanted to talk about the dead man and guess out how he come to be killed, but Jim didn't want to.
He said it would fetch bad luck; and besides, he said, he might come and ha'nt us; he said a man that warn't buried was more likely to go a-ha'nting around than one that was planted and comfortable.
That sounded pretty reasonable, so I didn't say no more; but I couldn't keep from studying over it and wishing I knowed who shot the man, and what they done it for.
We rummaged the clothes we'd got, and found eight dollars in silver sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat.
Jim said he reckoned the people in that house stole the coat, because if they'd a knowed the money was there they wouldn't a left it.
I said I reckoned they killed him, too; but Jim didn't want to talk about that.
I says: "Now you think it's bad luck; but what did you say when I fetched in the snake-skin that I found on the top of the ridge day before yesterday?
You said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a snake-skin with my hands.
Well, here's your bad luck!
We've raked in all this truck and eight dollars besides.
I wish we could have some bad luck like this every day, Jim".
"Never you mind, honey, never you mind.
Don't you git too peart.
It's a-comin'.
Mind I tell you, it's a-comin'".
It did come, too.
It was a Tuesday that we had that talk.
Well, after dinner Friday we was laying around in the grass at the upper end of the ridge, and got out of tobacco.
I went to the cavern to get some, and found a rattlesnake in there.
I killed him, and curled him up on the foot of Jim's blanket, ever so natural, thinking there'd be some fun when Jim found him there.
Well, by night I forgot all about the snake, and when Jim flung himself down on the blanket while I struck a light the snake's mate was there, and bit him.
He jumped up yelling, and the first thing the light showed was the varmint curled up and ready for another spring.
I laid him out in a second with a stick, and Jim grabbed pap's whisky-jug and begun to pour it down.
He was barefooted, and the snake bit him right on the heel.
That all comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that wherever you leave a dead snake its mate always comes there and curls around it.
Jim told me to chop off the snake's head and throw it away, and then skin the body and roast a piece of it.
I done it, and he eat it and said it would help cure him.
He made me take off the rattles and tie them around his wrist, too.
He said that that would help.
Then I slid out quiet and throwed the snakes clear away amongst the bushes; for I warn't going to let Jim find out it was all my fault, not if I could help it.
Jim sucked and sucked at the jug, and now and then he got out of his head and pitched around and yelled; but every time he come to himself he went to sucking at the jug again.
His foot swelled up pretty big, and so did his leg; but by and by the drunk begun to come, and so I judged he was all right; but I'd druther been bit with a snake than pap's whisky.
Jim was laid up for four days and nights.
Then the swelling was all gone and he was around again.
I made up my mind I wouldn't ever take a-holt of a snake-skin again with my hands, now that I see what had come of it.
Jim said he reckoned I would believe him next time.
And he said that handling a snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we hadn't got to the end of it yet.
He said he druther see the new moon over his left shoulder as much as a thousand times than take up a snake-skin in his hand.
Well, I was getting to feel that way myself, though I've always reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left shoulder is one of the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do.
Old Hank Bunker done it once, and bragged about it; and in less than two years he got drunk and fell off of the shot-tower, and spread himself out so that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and they slid him edgeways between two barn doors
Pap told me.
But anyway it all come of looking at the moon that way, like a fool.
Well, the days went along, and the river went down between its banks again; and about the first thing we done was to bait one of the big hooks with a skinned rabbit and set it and catch a catfish that was as big as a man, being six foot two inches long,
We couldn't handle him, of course; he would a flung us into Illinois.
We just set there and watched him rip and tear around till he drownded.
We found a brass button in his stomach and a round ball, and lots of rubbage.
We split the ball open with the hatchet, and there was a spool in it.
Jim said he'd had it there a long time, to coat it over so and make a ball of it.
It was as big a fish as was ever catched in the Mississippi, I reckon.
Jim said he hadn't ever seen a bigger one.
He would a been worth a good deal over at the village.
They peddle out such a fish as that by the pound in the market-house there; everybody buys some of him; his meat's as white as snow and makes a good fry.
Next morning I said it was getting slow and dull, and I wanted to get a stirring up some way.
I said I reckoned I would slip over the river and find out what was going on.
Jim liked that notion; but he said I must go in the dark and look sharp.
Then he studied it over and said, couldn't I put on some of them old things and dress up like a girl?
That was a good notion, too.
So we shortened up one of the calico gowns, and I turned up my trouser-legs to my knees and got into it.
Jim hitched it behind with the hooks, and it was a fair fit.
I put on the sun-bonnet and tied it under my chin, and then for a body to look in and see my face was like looking down a joint of stove-pipe.
Jim said nobody would know me, even in the daytime, hardly.
I practiced around all day to get the hang of the things, and by and by I could do pretty well in them, only Jim said I didn't walk like a girl; and he said I must quit pulling up my gown to get at my britches-pocket.
I took notice, and done better.
I started up the Illinois shore in the canoe just after dark.
I started across to the town from a little below the ferry-landing, and the drift of the current fetched me in at the bottom of the town.
I tied up and started along the bank.
There was a light burning in a little shanty that hadn't been lived in for a long time, and I wondered who had took up quarters there.
I slipped up and peeped in at the window.
There was a woman about forty year old in there knitting by a candle that was on a pine table.
I didn't know her face; she was a stranger, for you couldn't start a face in that town that I didn't know.
Now this was lucky, because I was weakening; I was getting afraid I had come; people might know my voice and find me out.
But if this woman had been in such a little town two days she could tell me all I wanted to know; so I knocked at the door, and made up my mind I wouldn't forget I was a girl.
CHAPTER XI.
"COME in," says the woman, and I did.
She says: "Take a cheer".
I done it.
She looked me all over with her little shiny eyes, and says: "What might your name be"?
"Sarah Williams".
"Where 'bouts do you live?
In this neighborhood?
' "No'm.
In Hookerville, seven mile below.
I've walked all the way and I'm all tired out".
"Hungry, too, I reckon.
I'll find you something".
"No'm, I ain't hungry.
I was so hungry I had to stop two miles below here at a farm; so I ain't hungry no more.
It's what makes me so late.
My mother's down sick, and out of money and everything, and I come to tell my uncle Abner Moore.
He lives at the upper end of the town, she says.
I hain't ever been here before.
Do you know him"?
"No; but I don't know everybody yet.
I haven't lived here quite two weeks.
It's a considerable ways to the upper end of the town.
You better stay here all night.
Take off your bonnet".
"No," I says; "I'll rest a while, I reckon, and go on.
I ain't afeared of the dark".
She said she wouldn't let me go by myself, but her husband would be in by and by, maybe in a hour and a half, and she'd send him along with me.
Then she got to talking about her husband, and about her relations up the river, and her relations down the river, and about how much better off they used to was, and how they didn't know but they'd made a mistake coming to our town, instead of letting
She told about me and Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand dollars (only she got it ten) and all about pap and what a hard lot he was, and what a hard lot I was, and at last she got down to where I was murdered.
I says: "Who done it?
We've heard considerable about these goings on down in Hookerville, but we don't know who 'twas that killed Huck Finn".
"Well, I reckon there's a right smart chance of people _here_ that'd like to know who killed him.
Some think old Finn done it himself".
"No--is that so"?
"Most everybody thought it at first.
He'll never know how nigh he come to getting lynched.
But before night they changed around and judged it was done by a runaway nigger named Jim".
"Why _he_--" I stopped.
I reckoned I better keep still.
She run on, and never noticed I had put in at all: "The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed.
So there's a reward out for him--three hundred dollars.
And there's a reward out for old Finn, too--two hundred dollars.
You see, he come to town the morning after the murder, and told about it, and was out with 'em on the ferryboat hunt, and right away after he up and left.
Before night they wanted to lynch him, but he was gone, you see.
Well, next day they found out the nigger was gone; they found out he hadn't ben seen sence ten o'clock the night the murder was done.
So then they put it on him, you see; and while they was full of it, next day, back comes old Finn, and went boo-hooing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for the nigger all over Illinois with.
The judge gave him some, and that evening he got drunk, and was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty hard-looking strangers, and then went off with them.
Well, he hain't come back sence, and they ain't looking for him back till this thing blows over a little, for people thinks now that he killed his boy and fixed things so folks would think robbers done it, and then he'd get Huck's money without having to
People do say he warn't any too good to do it.
Oh, he's sly, I reckon.
If he don't come back for a year he'll be all right.
You can't prove anything on him, you know; everything will be quieted down then, and he'll walk in Huck's money as easy as nothing".
"Yes, I reckon so, 'm.
I don't see nothing in the way of it.
Has everybody quit thinking the nigger done it"?
"Oh, no, not everybody.
A good many thinks he done it.
But they'll get the nigger pretty soon now, and maybe they can scare it out of him".
"Why, are they after him yet"?
"Well, you're innocent, ain't you!
Does three hundred dollars lay around every day for people to pick up?
Some folks think the nigger ain't far from here.
I'm one of them--but I hain't talked it around.
A few days ago I was talking with an old couple that lives next door in the log shanty, and they happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to that island over yonder that they call Jackson's Island.
Don't anybody live there?
says I. No, nobody, says they.
I didn't say any more, but I done some thinking.
I was pretty near certain I'd seen smoke over there, about the head of the island, a day or two before that, so I says to myself, like as not that nigger's hiding over there; anyway, says I, it's worth the trouble to give the place a hunt.
I hain't seen any smoke sence, so I reckon maybe he's gone, if it was him; but husband's going over to see--him and another man.
He was gone up the river; but he got back to-day, and I told him as soon as he got here two hours ago".
I had got so uneasy I couldn't set still.
I had to do something with my hands; so I took up a needle off of the table and went to threading it.
My hands shook, and I was making a bad job of it.
When the woman stopped talking I looked up, and she was looking at me pretty curious and smiling a little.
I put down the needle and thread, and let on to be interested--and I was, too--and says: "Three hundred dollars is a power of money.
I wish my mother could get it.
Is your husband going over there to-night"?
"Oh, yes.
He went up-town with the man I was telling you of, to get a boat and see if they could borrow another gun.
They'll go over after midnight".
"Couldn't they see better if they was to wait till daytime"?
"Yes.
And couldn't the nigger see better, too?
After midnight he'll likely be asleep, and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up his camp fire all the better for the dark, if he's got one".
"I didn't think of that".
The woman kept looking at me pretty curious, and I didn't feel a bit comfortable.
Pretty soon she says, "What did you say your name was, honey"?
"M--Mary Williams".
Somehow it didn't seem to me that I said it was Mary before, so I didn't look up--seemed to me I said it was Sarah; so I felt sort of cornered, and was afeared maybe I was looking it, too.
I wished the woman would say something more; the longer she set still the uneasier I was.
But now she says: "Honey, I thought you said it was Sarah when you first come in"?
"Oh, yes'm, I did.
Sarah Mary Williams.
Sarah's my first name.
Some calls me Sarah, some calls me Mary".
"Oh, that's the way of it"?
"Yes'm".
I was feeling better then, but I wished I was out of there, anyway.
I couldn't look up yet.
Well, the woman fell to talking about how hard times was, and how poor they had to live, and how the rats was as free as if they owned the place, and so forth and so on, and then I got easy again.
She was right about the rats.
You'd see one stick his nose out of a hole in the corner every little while.
She said she had to have things handy to throw at them when she was alone, or they wouldn't give her no peace.
She showed me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot, and said she was a good shot with it generly, but she'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago, and didn't know whether she could throw true now.
But she watched for a chance, and directly banged away at a rat; but she missed him wide, and said "Ouch"!
it hurt her arm so.
Then she told me to try for the next one.
I wanted to be getting away before the old man got back, but of course I didn't let on.
I got the thing, and the first rat that showed his nose I let drive, and if he'd a stayed where he was he'd a been a tolerable sick rat.
She said that was first-rate, and she reckoned I would hive the next one.
She went and got the lump of lead and fetched it back, and brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help her with.
I held up my two hands and she put the hank over them, and went on talking about her and her husband's matters.
But she broke off to say: "Keep your eye on the rats.
You better have the lead in your lap, handy".
So she dropped the lump into my lap just at that moment, and I clapped my legs together on it and she went on talking.
But only about a minute.
Then she took off the hank and looked me straight in the face, and very pleasant, and says: "Come, now, what's your real name"?
"Wh--what, mum"?
"What's your real name?
Is it Bill, or Tom, or Bob?
--or what is it"?
I reckon I shook like a leaf, and I didn't know hardly what to do.
But I says: "Please to don't poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum.
If I'm in the way here, I'll--" "No, you won't.
Set down and stay where you are.
I ain't going to hurt you, and I ain't going to tell on you, nuther.
You just tell me your secret, and trust me.
I'll keep it; and, what's more, I'll help you.
So'll my old man if you want him to.
You see, you're a runaway 'prentice, that's all.
It ain't anything.
There ain't no harm in it.
You've been treated bad, and you made up your mind to cut.
Bless you, child, I wouldn't tell on you.
Tell me all about it now, that's a good boy".
So I said it wouldn't be no use to try to play it any longer, and I would just make a clean breast and tell her everything, but she musn't go back on her promise.
Then I told her my father and mother was dead, and the law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the country thirty mile back from the river, and he treated me so bad I couldn't stand it no longer; he went away to be gone a couple of days, and so I
I traveled nights, and hid daytimes and slept, and the bag of bread and meat I carried from home lasted me all the way, and I had a-plenty.
I said I believed my uncle Abner Moore would take care of me, and so that was why I struck out for this town of Goshen.
"Goshen, child?
This ain't Goshen.
This is St. Petersburg.
Goshen's ten mile further up the river.
Who told you this was Goshen"?
"Why, a man I met at daybreak this morning, just as I was going to turn into the woods for my regular sleep.
He told me when the roads forked I must take the right hand, and five mile would fetch me to Goshen".
"He was drunk, I reckon.
He told you just exactly wrong".
"Well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain't no matter now.
I got to be moving along.
I'll fetch Goshen before daylight".
"Hold on a minute.
I'll put you up a snack to eat.
You might want it".
So she put me up a snack, and says: "Say, when a cow's laying down, which end of her gets up first?
Answer up prompt now--don't stop to study over it.
Which end gets up first"?
"The hind end, mum".
"Well, then, a horse"?
"The for'rard end, mum".
"Which side of a tree does the moss grow on"?
"North side".
"If fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside, how many of them eats with their heads pointed the same direction"?
"The whole fifteen, mum".
"Well, I reckon you _have_ lived in the country.
I thought maybe you was trying to hocus me again.
What's your real name, now"?
"George Peters, mum".
"Well, try to remember it, George.
Don't forget and tell me it's Elexander before you go, and then get out by saying it's George Elexander when I catch you.
And don't go about women in that old calico.
You do a girl tolerable poor, but you might fool men, maybe.
Bless you, child, when you set out to thread a needle don't hold the thread still and fetch the needle up to it; hold the needle still and poke the thread at it; that's the way a woman most always does, but a man always does t'other way.
And when you throw at a rat or anything, hitch yourself up a tiptoe and fetch your hand up over your head as awkward as you can, and miss your rat about six or seven foot.
Throw stiff-armed from the shoulder, like there was a pivot there for it to turn on, like a girl; not from the wrist and elbow, with your arm out to one side, like a boy.
And, mind you, when a girl tries to catch anything in her lap she throws her knees apart; she don't clap them together, the way you did when you catched the lump of lead.
Why, I spotted you for a boy when you was threading the needle; and I contrived the other things just to make certain.
Now trot along to your uncle, Sarah Mary Williams George Elexander Peters, and if you get into trouble you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus, which is me, and I'll do what I can to get you out of it.
Keep the river road all the way, and next time you tramp take shoes and socks with you.
The river road's a rocky one, and your feet'll be in a condition when you get to Goshen, I reckon".
I went up the bank about fifty yards, and then I doubled on my tracks and slipped back to where my canoe was, a good piece below the house.
I jumped in, and was off in a hurry.
I went up-stream far enough to make the head of the island, and then started across.
I took off the sun-bonnet, for I didn't want no blinders on then.
When I was about the middle I heard the clock begin to strike, so I stops and listens; the sound come faint over the water but clear--eleven.
When I struck the head of the island I never waited to blow, though I was most winded, but I shoved right into the timber where my old camp used to be, and started a good fire there on a high and dry spot.
Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place, a mile and a half below, as hard as I could go.
I landed, and slopped through the timber and up the ridge and into the cavern.
There Jim laid, sound asleep on the ground.
I roused him out and says: "Git up and hump yourself, Jim!
There ain't a minute to lose.
They're after us"!
Jim never asked no questions, he never said a word; but the way he worked for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared.
By that time everything we had in the world was on our raft, and she was ready to be shoved out from the willow cove where she was hid.
We put out the camp fire at the cavern the first thing, and didn't show a candle outside after that.
I took the canoe out from the shore a little piece, and took a look; but if there was a boat around I couldn't see it, for stars and shadows ain't good to see by.
Then we got out the raft and slipped along down in the shade, past the foot of the island dead still--never saying a word.
CHAPTER XII.
IT must a been close on to one o'clock when we got below the island at last, and the raft did seem to go mighty slow.
If a boat was to come along we was going to take to the canoe and break for the Illinois shore; and it was well a boat didn't come, for we hadn't ever thought to put the gun in the canoe, or a fishing-line, or anything to eat.
We was in ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things.
It warn't good judgment to put _everything_ on the raft.
If the men went to the island I just expect they found the camp fire I built, and watched it all night for Jim to come.
Anyways, they stayed away from us, and if my building the fire never fooled them it warn't no fault of mine.
I played it as low down on them as I could.
When the first streak of day began to show we tied up to a towhead in a big bend on the Illinois side, and hacked off cottonwood branches with the hatchet, and covered up the raft with them so she looked like there had been a cave-in in the bank there.
A tow-head is a sandbar that has cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth.
We had mountains on the Missouri shore and heavy timber on the Illinois side, and the channel was down the Missouri shore at that place, so we warn't afraid of anybody running across us.
We laid there all day, and watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the Missouri shore, and up-bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle.
I told Jim all about the time I had jabbering with that woman; and Jim said she was a smart one, and if she was to start after us herself she wouldn't set down and watch a camp fire--no, sir, she'd fetch a dog.
Well, then, I said, why couldn't she tell her husband to fetch a dog?
Jim said he bet she did think of it by the time the men was ready to start, and he believed they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that time, or else we wouldn't be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile below the village--no,
So I said I didn't care what was the reason they didn't get us as long as they didn't.
When it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the cottonwood thicket, and looked up and down and across; nothing in sight; so Jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug wigwam to get under in blazing weather and
Jim made a floor for the wigwam, and raised it a foot or more above the level of the raft, so now the blankets and all the traps was out of reach of steamboat waves.
Right in the middle of the wigwam we made a layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for to hold it to its place; this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather or chilly; the wigwam would keep it from being seen.
We made an extra steering-oar, too, because one of the others might get broke on a snag or something.
We fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lantern on, because we must always light the lantern whenever we see a steamboat coming down-stream, to keep from getting run over; but we wouldn't have to light it for up-stream boats unless we see we was
This second night we run between seven and eight hours, with a current that was making over four mile an hour.
We catched fish and talked, and we took a swim now and then to keep off sleepiness.
It was kind of solemn, drifting down the big, still river, laying on our backs looking up at the stars, and we didn't ever feel like talking loud, and it warn't often that we laughed--only a little kind of a low chuckle.
We had mighty good weather as a general thing, and nothing ever happened to us at all--that night, nor the next, nor the next.
Every night we passed towns, some of them away up on black hillsides, nothing but just a shiny bed of lights; not a house could you see.
The fifth night we passed St. Louis, and it was like the whole world lit up.
In St. Petersburg they used to say there was twenty or thirty thousand people in St. Louis, but I never believed it till I see that wonderful spread of lights at two o'clock that still night.
There warn't a sound there; everybody was asleep.
Every night now I used to slip ashore towards ten o'clock at some little village, and buy ten or fifteen cents' worth of meal or bacon or other stuff to eat; and sometimes I lifted a chicken that warn't roosting comfortable, and took him along.
Pap always said, take a chicken when you get a chance, because if you don't want him yourself you can easy find somebody that does, and a good deed ain't ever forgot.
I never see pap when he didn't want the chicken himself, but that is what he used to say, anyway.
Mornings before daylight I slipped into cornfields and borrowed a watermelon, or a mushmelon, or a punkin, or some new corn, or things of that kind.
Pap always said it warn't no harm to borrow things if you was meaning to pay them back some time; but the widow said it warn't anything but a soft name for stealing, and no decent body would do it.
Jim said he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly right; so the best way would be for us to pick out two or three things from the list and say we wouldn't borrow them any more--then he reckoned it wouldn't be no harm to borrow the
So we talked it over all one night, drifting along down the river, trying to make up our minds whether to drop the watermelons, or the cantelopes, or the mushmelons, or what.
But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory, and concluded to drop crabapples and p'simmons.
We warn't feeling just right before that, but it was all comfortable now.
I was glad the way it come out, too, because crabapples ain't ever good, and the p'simmons wouldn't be ripe for two or three months yet.
We shot a water-fowl now and then that got up too early in the morning or didn't go to bed early enough in the evening.
Take it all round, we lived pretty high.
The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after midnight, with a power of thunder and lightning, and the rain poured down in a solid sheet.
We stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself.
When the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead, and high, rocky bluffs on both sides.
By and by says I, "Hel-_lo_, Jim, looky yonder"!
It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock.
We was drifting straight down for her.
The lightning showed her very distinct.
She was leaning over, with part of her upper deck above water, and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear, and a chair by the big bell, with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it, when the flashes come.
Well, it being away in the night and stormy, and all so mysterious-like, I felt just the way any other boy would a felt when I see that wreck laying there so mournful and lonesome in the middle of the river.
I wanted to get aboard of her and slink around a little, and see what there was there.
So I says: "Le's land on her, Jim".
But Jim was dead against it at first.
He says: "I doan' want to go fool'n 'long er no wrack.
We's doin' blame' well, en we better let blame' well alone, as de good book says.
Like as not dey's a watchman on dat wrack".
"Watchman your grandmother," I says; "there ain't nothing to watch but the texas and the pilot-house; and do you reckon anybody's going to resk his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this, when it's likely to break up and wash off down the
Jim couldn't say nothing to that, so he didn't try.
"And besides," I says, "we might borrow something worth having out of the captain's stateroom.
Seegars, I bet you--and cost five cents apiece, solid cash.
Steamboat captains is always rich, and get sixty dollars a month, and _they_ don't care a cent what a thing costs, you know, long as they want it.
Stick a candle in your pocket; I can't rest, Jim, till we give her a rummaging.
Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing?
Not for pie, he wouldn't.
He'd call it an adventure--that's what he'd call it; and he'd land on that wreck if it was his last act.
And wouldn't he throw style into it?
--wouldn't he spread himself, nor nothing?
Why, you'd think it was Christopher C'lumbus discovering Kingdom-Come.
I wish Tom Sawyer _was_ here".
Jim he grumbled a little, but give in.
He said we mustn't talk any more than we could help, and then talk mighty low.
The lightning showed us the wreck again just in time, and we fetched the stabboard derrick, and made fast there.
The deck was high out here.
We went sneaking down the slope of it to labboard, in the dark, towards the texas, feeling our way slow with our feet, and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys, for it was so dark we couldn't see no sign of them.
Pretty soon we struck the forward end of the skylight, and clumb on to it; and the next step fetched us in front of the captain's door, which was open, and by Jimminy, away down through the texas-hall we see a light!
and all in the same second we seem to hear low voices in yonder!
Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick, and told me to come along.
I says, all right, and was going to start for the raft; but just then I heard a voice wail out and say: "Oh, please don't, boys; I swear I won't ever tell"!
Another voice said, pretty loud: "It's a lie, Jim Turner.
You've acted this way before.
You always want more'n your share of the truck, and you've always got it, too, because you've swore 't if you didn't you'd tell.
But this time you've said it jest one time too many.
You're the meanest, treacherousest hound in this country".
By this time Jim was gone for the raft.
I was just a-biling with curiosity; and I says to myself, Tom Sawyer wouldn't back out now, and so I won't either; I'm a-going to see what's going on here.
So I dropped on my hands and knees in the little passage, and crept aft in the dark till there warn't but one stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the texas.
Then in there I see a man stretched on the floor and tied hand and foot, and two men standing over him, and one of them had a dim lantern in his hand, and the other one had a pistol.
This one kept pointing the pistol at the man's head on the floor, and saying: "I'd _like_ to!
And I orter, too--a mean skunk"!
The man on the floor would shrivel up and say, "Oh, please don't, Bill; I hain't ever goin' to tell".
And every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and say: "'Deed you _ain't!
_ You never said no truer thing 'n that, you bet you".
And once he said: "Hear him beg!
and yit if we hadn't got the best of him and tied him he'd a killed us both.
And what _for_?
Jist for noth'n.
Jist because we stood on our _rights_--that's what for.
But I lay you ain't a-goin' to threaten nobody any more, Jim Turner.
Put _up_ that pistol, Bill".
Bill says: "I don't want to, Jake Packard.
I'm for killin' him--and didn't he kill old Hatfield jist the same way--and don't he deserve it"?
"But I don't _want_ him killed, and I've got my reasons for it".
"Bless yo' heart for them words, Jake Packard!
I'll never forgit you long's I live"!
says the man on the floor, sort of blubbering.
Packard didn't take no notice of that, but hung up his lantern on a nail and started towards where I was there in the dark, and motioned Bill to come.
I crawfished as fast as I could about two yards, but the boat slanted so that I couldn't make very good time; so to keep from getting run over and catched I crawled into a stateroom on the upper side.
The man came a-pawing along in the dark, and when Packard got to my stateroom, he says: "Here--come in here".
And in he come, and Bill after him.
But before they got in I was up in the upper berth, cornered, and sorry I come.
Then they stood there, with their hands on the ledge of the berth, and talked.
I couldn't see them, but I could tell where they was by the whisky they'd been having.
I was glad I didn't drink whisky; but it wouldn't made much difference anyway, because most of the time they couldn't a treed me because I didn't breathe.
I was too scared.
And, besides, a body _couldn't_ breathe and hear such talk.
They talked low and earnest.
Bill wanted to kill Turner.
He says: "He's said he'll tell, and he will.
If we was to give both our shares to him _now_ it wouldn't make no difference after the row and the way we've served him.
Shore's you're born, he'll turn State's evidence; now you hear _me_.
I'm for putting him out of his troubles".
"So'm I," says Packard, very quiet.
"Blame it, I'd sorter begun to think you wasn't.
Well, then, that's all right.
Le's go and do it".
"Hold on a minute; I hain't had my say yit.
You listen to me.
Shooting's good, but there's quieter ways if the thing's _got_ to be done.
But what I say is this: it ain't good sense to go court'n around after a halter if you can git at what you're up to in some way that's jist as good and at the same time don't bring you into no resks.
Ain't that so"?
"You bet it is.
But how you goin' to manage it this time"?
"Well, my idea is this: we'll rustle around and gather up whatever pickins we've overlooked in the staterooms, and shove for shore and hide the truck.
Then we'll wait.
Now I say it ain't a-goin' to be more'n two hours befo' this wrack breaks up and washes off down the river.
See?
He'll be drownded, and won't have nobody to blame for it but his own self.
I reckon that's a considerble sight better 'n killin' of him.
I'm unfavorable to killin' a man as long as you can git aroun' it; it ain't good sense, it ain't good morals.
Ain't I right"?
"Yes, I reck'n you are.
But s'pose she _don't_ break up and wash off"?
"Well, we can wait the two hours anyway and see, can't we"?
"All right, then; come along".
So they started, and I lit out, all in a cold sweat, and scrambled forward.
It was dark as pitch there; but I said, in a kind of a coarse whisper, "Jim"!
and he answered up, right at my elbow, with a sort of a moan, and I says: "Quick, Jim, it ain't no time for fooling around and moaning; there's a gang of murderers in yonder, and if we don't hunt up their boat and set her drifting down the river so these
But if we find their boat we can put _all_ of 'em in a bad fix--for the sheriff 'll get 'em.
Quick--hurry!
I'll hunt the labboard side, you hunt the stabboard.
You start at the raft, and--" "Oh, my lordy, lordy!
_raf'_?
Dey ain' no raf' no mo'; she done broke loose en gone I--en here we is"!
CHAPTER XIII.
WELL, I catched my breath and most fainted.
Shut up on a wreck with such a gang as that!
But it warn't no time to be sentimentering.
We'd _got_ to find that boat now--had to have it for ourselves.
So we went a-quaking and shaking down the stabboard side, and slow work it was, too--seemed a week before we got to the stern.
No sign of a boat.
Jim said he didn't believe he could go any further--so scared he hadn't hardly any strength left, he said.
But I said, come on, if we get left on this wreck we are in a fix, sure.
So on we prowled again.
We struck for the stern of the texas, and found it, and then scrabbled along forwards on the skylight, hanging on from shutter to shutter, for the edge of the skylight was in the water.
When we got pretty close to the cross-hall door there was the skiff, sure enough!
I could just barely see her.
I felt ever so thankful.
In another second I would a been aboard of her, but just then the door opened.
One of the men stuck his head out only about a couple of foot from me, and I thought I was gone; but he jerked it in again, and says: "Heave that blame lantern out o' sight, Bill"!
He flung a bag of something into the boat, and then got in himself and set down.
It was Packard.
Then Bill _he_ come out and got in.
Packard says, in a low voice: "All ready--shove off"!
I couldn't hardly hang on to the shutters, I was so weak.
But Bill says: "Hold on--'d you go through him"?
"No.
Didn't you"?
"No.
So he's got his share o' the cash yet".
"Well, then, come along; no use to take truck and leave money".
"Say, won't he suspicion what we're up to"?
"Maybe he won't.
But we got to have it anyway.
Come along".
So they got out and went in.
The door slammed to because it was on the careened side; and in a half second I was in the boat, and Jim come tumbling after me.
I out with my knife and cut the rope, and away we went!
We didn't touch an oar, and we didn't speak nor whisper, nor hardly even breathe.
We went gliding swift along, dead silent, past the tip of the paddle-box, and past the stern; then in a second or two more we was a hundred yards below the wreck, and the darkness soaked her up, every last sign of her, and we was safe, and knowed it.
When we was three or four hundred yards down-stream we see the lantern show like a little spark at the texas door for a second, and we knowed by that that the rascals had missed their boat, and was beginning to understand that they was in just as much
Then Jim manned the oars, and we took out after our raft.
Now was the first time that I begun to worry about the men--I reckon I hadn't had time to before.
I begun to think how dreadful it was, even for murderers, to be in such a fix.
I says to myself, there ain't no telling but I might come to be a murderer myself yet, and then how would I like it?
So says I to Jim: "The first light we see we'll land a hundred yards below it or above it, in a place where it's a good hiding-place for you and the skiff, and then I'll go and fix up some kind of a yarn, and get somebody to go for that gang and get them
But that idea was a failure; for pretty soon it begun to storm again, and this time worse than ever.
The rain poured down, and never a light showed; everybody in bed, I reckon.
We boomed along down the river, watching for lights and watching for our raft.
After a long time the rain let up, but the clouds stayed, and the lightning kept whimpering, and by and by a flash showed us a black thing ahead, floating, and we made for it.
It was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again.
We seen a light now away down to the right, on shore.
So I said I would go for it.
The skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole there on the wreck.
We hustled it on to the raft in a pile, and I told Jim to float along down, and show a light when he judged he had gone about two mile, and keep it burning till I come; then I manned my oars and shoved for the light.
As I got down towards it three or four more showed--up on a hillside.
It was a village.
I closed in above the shore light, and laid on my oars and floated.
As I went by I see it was a lantern hanging on the jackstaff of a double-hull ferryboat.
I skimmed around for the watchman, a-wondering whereabouts he slept; and by and by I found him roosting on the bitts forward, with his head down between his knees.
I gave his shoulder two or three little shoves, and begun to cry.
He stirred up in a kind of a startlish way; but when he see it was only me he took a good gap and stretch, and then he says: "Hello, what's up?
Don't cry, bub.
What's the trouble"?
I says: "Pap, and mam, and sis, and--" Then I broke down.
He says: "Oh, dang it now, _don't_ take on so; we all has to have our troubles, and this 'n 'll come out all right.
What's the matter with 'em"?
"They're--they're--are you the watchman of the boat"?
"Yes," he says, kind of pretty-well-satisfied like.
"I'm the captain and the owner and the mate and the pilot and watchman and head deck-hand; and sometimes I'm the freight and passengers.
I ain't as rich as old Jim Hornback, and I can't be so blame' generous and good to Tom, Dick, and Harry as what he is, and slam around money the way he does; but I've told him a many a time 't I wouldn't trade places with him; for, says I, a sailor's
Says I--" I broke in and says: "They're in an awful peck of trouble, and--" "_Who_ is"?
"Why, pap and mam and sis and Miss Hooker; and if you'd take your ferryboat and go up there--" "Up where?
Where are they"?
"On the wreck".
"What wreck"?
"Why, there ain't but one".
"What, you don't mean the Walter Scott"?
"Yes".
"Good land!
what are they doin' _there_, for gracious sakes"?
"Well, they didn't go there a-purpose".
"I bet they didn't!
Why, great goodness, there ain't no chance for 'em if they don't git off mighty quick!
Why, how in the nation did they ever git into such a scrape"?
"Easy enough.
Miss Hooker was a-visiting up there to the town--" "Yes, Booth's Landing--go on".
"She was a-visiting there at Booth's Landing, and just in the edge of the evening she started over with her nigger woman in the horse-ferry to stay all night at her friend's house, Miss What-you-may-call-her I disremember her name--and they lost their
Well, about an hour after dark we come along down in our trading-scow, and it was so dark we didn't notice the wreck till we was right on it; and so _we_ saddle-baggsed; but all of us was saved but Bill Whipple--and oh, he _was_ the best cretur!
--I most wish 't it had been me, I do".
"My George!
It's the beatenest thing I ever struck.
And _then_ what did you all do"?
"Well, we hollered and took on, but it's so wide there we couldn't make nobody hear.
So pap said somebody got to get ashore and get help somehow.
I was the only one that could swim, so I made a dash for it, and Miss Hooker she said if I didn't strike help sooner, come here and hunt up her uncle, and he'd fix the thing.
I made the land about a mile below, and been fooling along ever since, trying to get people to do something, but they said, 'What, in such a night and such a current?
There ain't no sense in it; go for the steam ferry.
' Now if you'll go and--" "By Jackson, I'd _like_ to, and, blame it, I don't know but I will; but who in the dingnation's a-going' to _pay_ for it?
Do you reckon your pap--" "Why _that's_ all right.
Miss Hooker she tole me, _particular_, that her uncle Hornback--" "Great guns!
is _he_ her uncle?
Looky here, you break for that light over yonder-way, and turn out west when you git there, and about a quarter of a mile out you'll come to the tavern; tell 'em to dart you out to Jim Hornback's, and he'll foot the bill.
And don't you fool around any, because he'll want to know the news.
Tell him I'll have his niece all safe before he can get to town.
Hump yourself, now; I'm a-going up around the corner here to roust out my engineer".
I struck for the light, but as soon as he turned the corner I went back and got into my skiff and bailed her out, and then pulled up shore in the easy water about six hundred yards, and tucked myself in among some woodboats; for I couldn't rest easy till I
But take it all around, I was feeling ruther comfortable on accounts of taking all this trouble for that gang, for not many would a done it.
I wished the widow knowed about it.
I judged she would be proud of me for helping these rapscallions, because rapscallions and dead beats is the kind the widow and good people takes the most interest in.
Well, before long here comes the wreck, dim and dusky, sliding along down!
A kind of cold shiver went through me, and then I struck out for her.
She was very deep, and I see in a minute there warn't much chance for anybody being alive in her.
I pulled all around her and hollered a little, but there wasn't any answer; all dead still.
I felt a little bit heavy-hearted about the gang, but not much, for I reckoned if they could stand it I could.
Then here comes the ferryboat; so I shoved for the middle of the river on a long down-stream slant; and when I judged I was out of eye-reach I laid on my oars, and looked back and see her go and smell around the wreck for Miss Hooker's remainders, because
It did seem a powerful long time before Jim's light showed up; and when it did show it looked like it was a thousand mile off.
By the time I got there the sky was beginning to get a little gray in the east; so we struck for an island, and hid the raft, and sunk the skiff, and turned in and slept like dead people.
CHAPTER XIV.
BY and by, when we got up, we turned over the truck the gang had stole off of the wreck, and found boots, and blankets, and clothes, and all sorts of other things, and a lot of books, and a spyglass, and three boxes of seegars.
We hadn't ever been this rich before in neither of our lives.
The seegars was prime.
We laid off all the afternoon in the woods talking, and me reading the books, and having a general good time.
I told Jim all about what happened inside the wreck and at the ferryboat, and I said these kinds of things was adventures; but he said he didn't want no more adventures.
He said that when I went in the texas and he crawled back to get on the raft and found her gone he nearly died, because he judged it was all up with _him_ anyway it could be fixed; for if he didn't get saved he would get drownded; and if he did get
Well, he was right; he was most always right; he had an uncommon level head for a nigger.
I read considerable to Jim about kings and dukes and earls and such, and how gaudy they dressed, and how much style they put on, and called each other your majesty, and your grace, and your lordship, and so on, 'stead of mister; and Jim's eyes bugged out,
He says: "I didn' know dey was so many un um.
I hain't hearn 'bout none un um, skasely, but ole King Sollermun, onless you counts dem kings dat's in a pack er k'yards.
How much do a king git"?
"Get"?
I says; "why, they get a thousand dollars a month if they want it; they can have just as much as they want; everything belongs to them".
"_Ain'_ dat gay?
En what dey got to do, Huck"?
"_They_ don't do nothing!
Why, how you talk!
They just set around".
"No; is dat so"?
"Of course it is.
They just set around--except, maybe, when there's a war; then they go to the war.
But other times they just lazy around; or go hawking--just hawking and sp--Sh!
--d' you hear a noise"?
We skipped out and looked; but it warn't nothing but the flutter of a steamboat's wheel away down, coming around the point; so we come back.
"Yes," says I, "and other times, when things is dull, they fuss with the parlyment; and if everybody don't go just so he whacks their heads off.
But mostly they hang round the harem".
"Roun' de which"?
"Harem".
"What's de harem"?
"The place where he keeps his wives.
Don't you know about the harem?
Solomon had one; he had about a million wives".
"Why, yes, dat's so; I--I'd done forgot it.
A harem's a bo'd'n-house, I reck'n.
Mos' likely dey has rackety times in de nussery.
En I reck'n de wives quarrels considable; en dat 'crease de racket.
Yit dey say Sollermun de wises' man dat ever live'.
I doan' take no stock in dat.
Bekase why: would a wise man want to live in de mids' er sich a blim-blammin' all de time?
No--'deed he wouldn't.
A wise man 'ud take en buil' a biler-factry; en den he could shet _down_ de biler-factry when he want to res'".
"Well, but he _was_ the wisest man, anyway; because the widow she told me so, her own self".
"I doan k'yer what de widder say, he _warn't_ no wise man nuther.
He had some er de dad-fetchedes' ways I ever see.
Does you know 'bout dat chile dat he 'uz gwyne to chop in two"?
"Yes, the widow told me all about it".
"_Well_, den!
Warn' dat de beatenes' notion in de worl'?
You jes' take en look at it a minute.
Dah's de stump, dah--dat's one er de women; heah's you--dat's de yuther one; I's Sollermun; en dish yer dollar bill's de chile.
Bofe un you claims it.
What does I do?
Does I shin aroun' mongs' de neighbors en fine out which un you de bill _do_ b'long to, en han' it over to de right one, all safe en soun', de way dat anybody dat had any gumption would?
No; I take en whack de bill in _two_, en give half un it to you, en de yuther half to de yuther woman.
Dat's de way Sollermun was gwyne to do wid de chile.
Now I want to ast you: what's de use er dat half a bill?
--can't buy noth'n wid it.
En what use is a half a chile?
I wouldn' give a dern for a million un um".
"But hang it, Jim, you've clean missed the point--blame it, you've missed it a thousand mile".
"Who?
Me?
Go 'long.
Doan' talk to me 'bout yo' pints.
I reck'n I knows sense when I sees it; en dey ain' no sense in sich doin's as dat.
De 'spute warn't 'bout a half a chile, de 'spute was 'bout a whole chile; en de man dat think he kin settle a 'spute 'bout a whole chile wid a half a chile doan' know enough to come in out'n de rain.
Doan' talk to me 'bout Sollermun, Huck, I knows him by de back".
"But I tell you you don't get the point".
"Blame de point!
I reck'n I knows what I knows.
En mine you, de _real_ pint is down furder--it's down deeper.
It lays in de way Sollermun was raised.
You take a man dat's got on'y one or two chillen; is dat man gwyne to be waseful o' chillen?
No, he ain't; he can't 'ford it.
_He_ know how to value 'em.
But you take a man dat's got 'bout five million chillen runnin' roun' de house, en it's diffunt.
_He_ as soon chop a chile in two as a cat.
Dey's plenty mo'.
A chile er two, mo' er less, warn't no consekens to Sollermun, dad fatch him"!
I never see such a nigger.
If he got a notion in his head once, there warn't no getting it out again.
He was the most down on Solomon of any nigger I ever see.
So I went to talking about other kings, and let Solomon slide.
I told about Louis Sixteenth that got his head cut off in France long time ago; and about his little boy the dolphin, that would a been a king, but they took and shut him up in jail, and some say he died there.
"Po' little chap".
"But some says he got out and got away, and come to America".
"Dat's good!
But he'll be pooty lonesome--dey ain' no kings here, is dey, Huck"?
"No".
"Den he cain't git no situation.
What he gwyne to do"?
"Well, I don't know.
Some of them gets on the police, and some of them learns people how to talk French".
"Why, Huck, doan' de French people talk de same way we does"?
"_No_, Jim; you couldn't understand a word they said--not a single word".
"Well, now, I be ding-busted!
How do dat come"?
"I don't know; but it's so.
I got some of their jabber out of a book.
S'pose a man was to come to you and say Polly-voo-franzy--what would you think"?
"I wouldn' think nuff'n; I'd take en bust him over de head--dat is, if he warn't white.
I wouldn't 'low no nigger to call me dat".
"Shucks, it ain't calling you anything.
It's only saying, do you know how to talk French"?
"Well, den, why couldn't he _say_ it"?
"Why, he _is_ a-saying it.
That's a Frenchman's _way_ of saying it".
"Well, it's a blame ridicklous way, en I doan' want to hear no mo' 'bout it.
Dey ain' no sense in it".
"Looky here, Jim; does a cat talk like we do"?
"No, a cat don't".
"Well, does a cow"?
"No, a cow don't, nuther".
"Does a cat talk like a cow, or a cow talk like a cat"?
"No, dey don't".
"It's natural and right for 'em to talk different from each other, ain't it"?
"Course".
"And ain't it natural and right for a cat and a cow to talk different from _us_"?
"Why, mos' sholy it is".
"Well, then, why ain't it natural and right for a _Frenchman_ to talk different from us?
You answer me that".
"Is a cat a man, Huck"?
"No".
"Well, den, dey ain't no sense in a cat talkin' like a man.
Is a cow a man?
--er is a cow a cat"?
"No, she ain't either of them".
"Well, den, she ain't got no business to talk like either one er the yuther of 'em.
Is a Frenchman a man"?
"Yes".
"_Well_, den!
Dad blame it, why doan' he _talk_ like a man?
You answer me _dat_"!
I see it warn't no use wasting words--you can't learn a nigger to argue.
So I quit.
CHAPTER XV.
WE judged that three nights more would fetch us to Cairo, at the bottom of Illinois, where the Ohio River comes in, and that was what we was after.
We would sell the raft and get on a steamboat and go way up the Ohio amongst the free States, and then be out of trouble.
Well, the second night a fog begun to come on, and we made for a towhead to tie to, for it wouldn't do to try to run in a fog; but when I paddled ahead in the canoe, with the line to make fast, there warn't anything but little saplings to tie to.
I passed the line around one of them right on the edge of the cut bank, but there was a stiff current, and the raft come booming down so lively she tore it out by the roots and away she went.
I see the fog closing down, and it made me so sick and scared I couldn't budge for most a half a minute it seemed to me--and then there warn't no raft in sight; you couldn't see twenty yards.
I jumped into the canoe and run back to the stern, and grabbed the paddle and set her back a stroke.
But she didn't come.
I was in such a hurry I hadn't untied her.
I got up and tried to untie her, but I was so excited my hands shook so I couldn't hardly do anything with them.
As soon as I got started I took out after the raft, hot and heavy, right down the towhead.
That was all right as far as it went, but the towhead warn't sixty yards long, and the minute I flew by the foot of it I shot out into the solid white fog, and hadn't no more idea which way I was going than a dead man.
Thinks I, it won't do to paddle; first I know I'll run into the bank or a towhead or something; I got to set still and float, and yet it's mighty fidgety business to have to hold your hands still at such a time.
I whooped and listened.
Away down there somewheres I hears a small whoop, and up comes my spirits.
I went tearing after it, listening sharp to hear it again.
The next time it come I see I warn't heading for it, but heading away to the right of it.
And the next time I was heading away to the left of it--and not gaining on it much either, for I was flying around, this way and that and t'other, but it was going straight ahead all the time.
I did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan, and beat it all the time, but he never did, and it was the still places between the whoops that was making the trouble for me.
Well, I fought along, and directly I hears the whoop _behind_ me.
I was tangled good now.
That was somebody else's whoop, or else I was turned around.
I throwed the paddle down.
I heard the whoop again; it was behind me yet, but in a different place; it kept coming, and kept changing its place, and I kept answering, till by and by it was in front of me again, and I knowed the current had swung the canoe's head down-stream, and I
I couldn't tell nothing about voices in a fog, for nothing don't look natural nor sound natural in a fog.
The whooping went on, and in about a minute I come a-booming down on a cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees on it, and the current throwed me off to the left and shot by, amongst a lot of snags that fairly roared, the currrent was tearing by them so
In another second or two it was solid white and still again.
I set perfectly still then, listening to my heart thump, and I reckon I didn't draw a breath while it thumped a hundred.
I just give up then.
I knowed what the matter was.
That cut bank was an island, and Jim had gone down t'other side of it.
It warn't no towhead that you could float by in ten minutes.
It had the big timber of a regular island; it might be five or six miles long and more than half a mile wide.
I kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fifteen minutes, I reckon.
I was floating along, of course, four or five miles an hour; but you don't ever think of that.
No, you _feel_ like you are laying dead still on the water; and if a little glimpse of a snag slips by you don't think to yourself how fast _you're_ going, but you catch your breath and think, my!
how that snag's tearing along.
If you think it ain't dismal and lonesome out in a fog that way by yourself in the night, you try it once--you'll see.
Next, for about a half an hour, I whoops now and then; at last I hears the answer a long ways off, and tries to follow it, but I couldn't do it, and directly I judged I'd got into a nest of towheads, for I had little dim glimpses of them on both sides of
Well, I warn't long loosing the whoops down amongst the towheads; and I only tried to chase them a little while, anyway, because it was worse than chasing a Jack-o'-lantern.
You never knowed a sound dodge around so, and swap places so quick and so much.
I had to claw away from the bank pretty lively four or five times, to keep from knocking the islands out of the river; and so I judged the raft must be butting into the bank every now and then, or else it would get further ahead and clear out of
Well, I seemed to be in the open river again by and by, but I couldn't hear no sign of a whoop nowheres.
I reckoned Jim had fetched up on a snag, maybe, and it was all up with him.
I was good and tired, so I laid down in the canoe and said I wouldn't bother no more.
I didn't want to go to sleep, of course; but I was so sleepy I couldn't help it; so I thought I would take jest one little cat-nap.
But I reckon it was more than a cat-nap, for when I waked up the stars was shining bright, the fog was all gone, and I was spinning down a big bend stern first.
First I didn't know where I was; I thought I was dreaming; and when things began to come back to me they seemed to come up dim out of last week.
It was a monstrous big river here, with the tallest and the thickest kind of timber on both banks; just a solid wall, as well as I could see by the stars.
I looked away down-stream, and seen a black speck on the water.
I took after it; but when I got to it it warn't nothing but a couple of sawlogs made fast together.
Then I see another speck, and chased that; then another, and this time I was right.
It was the raft.
When I got to it Jim was setting there with his head down between his knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the steering-oar.
The other oar was smashed off, and the raft was littered up with leaves and branches and dirt.
So she'd had a rough time.
I made fast and laid down under Jim's nose on the raft, and began to gap, and stretch my fists out against Jim, and says: "Hello, Jim, have I been asleep?
Why didn't you stir me up"?
"Goodness gracious, is dat you, Huck?
En you ain' dead--you ain' drownded--you's back agin?
It's too good for true, honey, it's too good for true.
Lemme look at you chile, lemme feel o' you.
No, you ain' dead!
you's back agin, 'live en soun', jis de same ole Huck--de same ole Huck, thanks to goodness"!
"What's the matter with you, Jim?
You been a-drinking"?
"Drinkin'?
Has I ben a-drinkin'?
Has I had a chance to be a-drinkin'"?
"Well, then, what makes you talk so wild"?
"How does I talk wild"?
"_How_?
Why, hain't you been talking about my coming back, and all that stuff, as if I'd been gone away"?
"Huck--Huck Finn, you look me in de eye; look me in de eye.
_Hain't_ you ben gone away"?
"Gone away?
Why, what in the nation do you mean?
I hain't been gone anywheres.
Where would I go to"?
"Well, looky here, boss, dey's sumf'n wrong, dey is.
Is I _me_, or who _is_ I?
Is I heah, or whah _is_ I?
Now dat's what I wants to know".
"Well, I think you're here, plain enough, but I think you're a tangle-headed old fool, Jim".
"I is, is I?
Well, you answer me dis: Didn't you tote out de line in de canoe fer to make fas' to de tow-head"?
"No, I didn't.
What tow-head?
I hain't see no tow-head".
"You hain't seen no towhead?
Looky here, didn't de line pull loose en de raf' go a-hummin' down de river, en leave you en de canoe behine in de fog"?
"What fog"?
"Why, de fog!
--de fog dat's been aroun' all night.
En didn't you whoop, en didn't I whoop, tell we got mix' up in de islands en one un us got los' en t'other one was jis' as good as los', 'kase he didn' know whah he wuz?
En didn't I bust up agin a lot er dem islands en have a turrible time en mos' git drownded?
Now ain' dat so, boss--ain't it so?
You answer me dat".
"Well, this is too many for me, Jim.
I hain't seen no fog, nor no islands, nor no troubles, nor nothing.
I been setting here talking with you all night till you went to sleep about ten minutes ago, and I reckon I done the same.
You couldn't a got drunk in that time, so of course you've been dreaming".
"Dad fetch it, how is I gwyne to dream all dat in ten minutes"?
"Well, hang it all, you did dream it, because there didn't any of it happen".
"But, Huck, it's all jis' as plain to me as--" "It don't make no difference how plain it is; there ain't nothing in it.
I know, because I've been here all the time".
Jim didn't say nothing for about five minutes, but set there studying over it.
Then he says: "Well, den, I reck'n I did dream it, Huck; but dog my cats ef it ain't de powerfullest dream I ever see.
En I hain't ever had no dream b'fo' dat's tired me like dis one".
"Oh, well, that's all right, because a dream does tire a body like everything sometimes.
But this one was a staving dream; tell me all about it, Jim".
So Jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through, just as it happened, only he painted it up considerable.
Then he said he must start in and "'terpret" it, because it was sent for a warning.
He said the first towhead stood for a man that would try to do us some good, but the current was another man that would get us away from him.
The whoops was warnings that would come to us every now and then, and if we didn't try hard to make out to understand them they'd just take us into bad luck, 'stead of keeping us out of it.
The lot of towheads was troubles we was going to get into with quarrelsome people and all kinds of mean folks, but if we minded our business and didn't talk back and aggravate them, we would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big clear
It had clouded up pretty dark just after I got on to the raft, but it was clearing up again now.
"Oh, well, that's all interpreted well enough as far as it goes, Jim," I says; "but what does _these_ things stand for"?
It was the leaves and rubbish on the raft and the smashed oar.
You could see them first-rate now.
Jim looked at the trash, and then looked at me, and back at the trash again.
He had got the dream fixed so strong in his head that he couldn't seem to shake it loose and get the facts back into its place again right away.
But when he did get the thing straightened around he looked at me steady without ever smiling, and says: "What do dey stan' for?
I'se gwyne to tell you.
When I got all wore out wid work, en wid de callin' for you, en went to sleep, my heart wuz mos' broke bekase you wuz los', en I didn' k'yer no' mo' what become er me en de raf'.
En when I wake up en fine you back agin, all safe en soun', de tears come, en I could a got down on my knees en kiss yo' foot, I's so thankful.
En all you wuz thinkin' 'bout wuz how you could make a fool uv ole Jim wid a lie.
Dat truck dah is _trash_; en trash is what people is dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren's en makes 'em ashamed".
Then he got up slow and walked to the wigwam, and went in there without saying anything but that.
But that was enough.
It made me feel so mean I could almost kissed _his_ foot to get him to take it back.
It was fifteen minutes before I could work myself up to go and humble myself to a nigger; but I done it, and I warn't ever sorry for it afterwards, neither.
I didn't do him no more mean tricks, and I wouldn't done that one if I'd a knowed it would make him feel that way.
CHAPTER XVI.
WE slept most all day, and started out at night, a little ways behind a monstrous long raft that was as long going by as a procession.
She had four long sweeps at each end, so we judged she carried as many as thirty men, likely.
She had five big wigwams aboard, wide apart, and an open camp fire in the middle, and a tall flag-pole at each end.
There was a power of style about her.
It _amounted_ to something being a raftsman on such a craft as that.
We went drifting down into a big bend, and the night clouded up and got hot.
The river was very wide, and was walled with solid timber on both sides; you couldn't see a break in it hardly ever, or a light.
We talked about Cairo, and wondered whether we would know it when we got to it.
I said likely we wouldn't, because I had heard say there warn't but about a dozen houses there, and if they didn't happen to have them lit up, how was we going to know we was passing a town?
Jim said if the two big rivers joined together there, that would show.
But I said maybe we might think we was passing the foot of an island and coming into the same old river again.
That disturbed Jim--and me too.
So the question was, what to do?
I said, paddle ashore the first time a light showed, and tell them pap was behind, coming along with a trading-scow, and was a green hand at the business, and wanted to know how far it was to Cairo.
Jim thought it was a good idea, so we took a smoke on it and waited.
There warn't nothing to do now but to look out sharp for the town, and not pass it without seeing it.
He said he'd be mighty sure to see it, because he'd be a free man the minute he seen it, but if he missed it he'd be in a slave country again and no more show for freedom.
Every little while he jumps up and says: "Dah she is"?
But it warn't.
It was Jack-o'-lanterns, or lightning bugs; so he set down again, and went to watching, same as before.
Jim said it made him all over trembly and feverish to be so close to freedom.
Well, I can tell you it made me all over trembly and feverish, too, to hear him, because I begun to get it through my head that he _was_ most free--and who was to blame for it?
Why, _me_.
I couldn't get that out of my conscience, no how nor no way.
It got to troubling me so I couldn't rest; I couldn't stay still in one place.
It hadn't ever come home to me before, what this thing was that I was doing.
But now it did; and it stayed with me, and scorched me more and more.
I tried to make out to myself that I warn't to blame, because I didn't run Jim off from his rightful owner; but it warn't no use, conscience up and says, every time, "But you knowed he was running for his freedom, and you could a paddled ashore and told
That was so--I couldn't get around that noway.
That was where it pinched.
Conscience says to me, "What had poor Miss Watson done to you that you could see her nigger go off right under your eyes and never say one single word?
What did that poor old woman do to you that you could treat her so mean?
Why, she tried to learn you your book, she tried to learn you your manners, she tried to be good to you every way she knowed how.
_That's_ what she done".
I got to feeling so mean and so miserable I most wished I was dead.
I fidgeted up and down the raft, abusing myself to myself, and Jim was fidgeting up and down past me.
We neither of us could keep still.
Every time he danced around and says, "Dah's Cairo"!
it went through me like a shot, and I thought if it _was_ Cairo I reckoned I would die of miserableness.
Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talking to myself.
He was saying how the first thing he would do when he got to a free State he would go to saving up money and never spend a single cent, and when he got enough he would buy his wife, which was owned on a farm close to where Miss Watson lived; and then
It most froze me to hear such talk.
He wouldn't ever dared to talk such talk in his life before.
Just see what a difference it made in him the minute he judged he was about free.
It was according to the old saying, "Give a nigger an inch and he'll take an ell".
Thinks I, this is what comes of my not thinking.
Here was this nigger, which I had as good as helped to run away, coming right out flat-footed and saying he would steal his children--children that belonged to a man I didn't even know; a man that hadn't ever done me no harm.
I was sorry to hear Jim say that, it was such a lowering of him.
My conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever, until at last I says to it, "Let up on me--it ain't too late yet--I'll paddle ashore at the first light and tell".
I felt easy and happy and light as a feather right off.
All my troubles was gone.
I went to looking out sharp for a light, and sort of singing to myself.
By and by one showed.
Jim sings out: "We's safe, Huck, we's safe!
Jump up and crack yo' heels!
Dat's de good ole Cairo at las', I jis knows it"!
I says: "I'll take the canoe and go and see, Jim.
It mightn't be, you know".
He jumped and got the canoe ready, and put his old coat in the bottom for me to set on, and give me the paddle; and as I shoved off, he says: "Pooty soon I'll be a-shout'n' for joy, en I'll say, it's all on accounts o' Huck; I's a free man, en I couldn't
Jim won't ever forgit you, Huck; you's de bes' fren' Jim's ever had; en you's de _only_ fren' ole Jim's got now".
I was paddling off, all in a sweat to tell on him; but when he says this, it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me.
I went along slow then, and I warn't right down certain whether I was glad I started or whether I warn't.
When I was fifty yards off, Jim says: "Dah you goes, de ole true Huck; de on'y white genlman dat ever kep' his promise to ole Jim".
Well, I just felt sick.
But I says, I _got_ to do it--I can't get _out_ of it.
Right then along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns, and they stopped and I stopped.
One of them says: "What's that yonder"?
"A piece of a raft," I says.
"Do you belong on it"?
"Yes, sir".
"Any men on it"?
"Only one, sir".
"Well, there's five niggers run off to-night up yonder, above the head of the bend.
Is your man white or black"?
I didn't answer up prompt.
I tried to, but the words wouldn't come.
I tried for a second or two to brace up and out with it, but I warn't man enough--hadn't the spunk of a rabbit.
I see I was weakening; so I just give up trying, and up and says: "He's white".
"I reckon we'll go and see for ourselves".
"I wish you would," says I, "because it's pap that's there, and maybe you'd help me tow the raft ashore where the light is.
He's sick--and so is mam and Mary Ann".
"Oh, the devil!
we're in a hurry, boy.
But I s'pose we've got to.
Come, buckle to your paddle, and let's get along".
I buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars.
When we had made a stroke or two, I says: "Pap'll be mighty much obleeged to you, I can tell you.
Everybody goes away when I want them to help me tow the raft ashore, and I can't do it by myself".
"Well, that's infernal mean.
Odd, too.
Say, boy, what's the matter with your father"?
"It's the--a--the--well, it ain't anything much".
They stopped pulling.
It warn't but a mighty little ways to the raft now.
One says: "Boy, that's a lie.
What _is_ the matter with your pap?
Answer up square now, and it'll be the better for you".
"I will, sir, I will, honest--but don't leave us, please.
It's the--the--Gentlemen, if you'll only pull ahead, and let me heave you the headline, you won't have to come a-near the raft--please do".
"Set her back, John, set her back"!
says one.
They backed water.
"Keep away, boy--keep to looard.
Confound it, I just expect the wind has blowed it to us.
Your pap's got the small-pox, and you know it precious well.
Why didn't you come out and say so?
Do you want to spread it all over"?
"Well," says I, a-blubbering, "I've told everybody before, and they just went away and left us".
"Poor devil, there's something in that.
We are right down sorry for you, but we--well, hang it, we don't want the small-pox, you see.
Look here, I'll tell you what to do.
Don't you try to land by yourself, or you'll smash everything to pieces.
You float along down about twenty miles, and you'll come to a town on the left-hand side of the river.
It will be long after sun-up then, and when you ask for help you tell them your folks are all down with chills and fever.
Don't be a fool again, and let people guess what is the matter.
Now we're trying to do you a kindness; so you just put twenty miles between us, that's a good boy.
It wouldn't do any good to land yonder where the light is--it's only a wood-yard.
Say, I reckon your father's poor, and I'm bound to say he's in pretty hard luck.
Here, I'll put a twenty-dollar gold piece on this board, and you get it when it floats by.
I feel mighty mean to leave you; but my kingdom!
it won't do to fool with small-pox, don't you see"?
"Hold on, Parker," says the other man, "here's a twenty to put on the board for me.
Good-bye, boy; you do as Mr. Parker told you, and you'll be all right".
"That's so, my boy--good-bye, good-bye.
If you see any runaway niggers you get help and nab them, and you can make some money by it".
"Good-bye, sir," says I; "I won't let no runaway niggers get by me if I can help it".
They went off and I got aboard the raft, feeling bad and low, because I knowed very well I had done wrong, and I see it warn't no use for me to try to learn to do right; a body that don't get _started_ right when he's little ain't got no show--when the
Then I thought a minute, and says to myself, hold on; s'pose you'd a done right and give Jim up, would you felt better than what you do now?
No, says I, I'd feel bad--I'd feel just the same way I do now.
Well, then, says I, what's the use you learning to do right when it's troublesome to do right and ain't no trouble to do wrong, and the wages is just the same?
I was stuck.
I couldn't answer that.
So I reckoned I wouldn't bother no more about it, but after this always do whichever come handiest at the time.
I went into the wigwam; Jim warn't there.
I looked all around; he warn't anywhere.
I says: "Jim"!
"Here I is, Huck.
Is dey out o' sight yit?
Don't talk loud".
He was in the river under the stern oar, with just his nose out.
I told him they were out of sight, so he come aboard.
He says: "I was a-listenin' to all de talk, en I slips into de river en was gwyne to shove for sho' if dey come aboard.
Den I was gwyne to swim to de raf' agin when dey was gone.
But lawsy, how you did fool 'em, Huck!
Dat _wuz_ de smartes' dodge!
I tell you, chile, I'spec it save' ole Jim--ole Jim ain't going to forgit you for dat, honey".
Then we talked about the money.
It was a pretty good raise--twenty dollars apiece.
Jim said we could take deck passage on a steamboat now, and the money would last us as far as we wanted to go in the free States.
He said twenty mile more warn't far for the raft to go, but he wished we was already there.
Towards daybreak we tied up, and Jim was mighty particular about hiding the raft good.
Then he worked all day fixing things in bundles, and getting all ready to quit rafting.
That night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a town away down in a left-hand bend.
I went off in the canoe to ask about it.
Pretty soon I found a man out in the river with a skiff, setting a trot-line.
I ranged up and says: "Mister, is that town Cairo"?
"Cairo?
no.
You must be a blame' fool".
"What town is it, mister"?
"If you want to know, go and find out.
If you stay here botherin' around me for about a half a minute longer you'll get something you won't want".
I paddled to the raft.
Jim was awful disappointed, but I said never mind, Cairo would be the next place, I reckoned.
We passed another town before daylight, and I was going out again; but it was high ground, so I didn't go.
No high ground about Cairo, Jim said.
I had forgot it.
We laid up for the day on a towhead tolerable close to the left-hand bank.
I begun to suspicion something.
So did Jim.
I says: "Maybe we went by Cairo in the fog that night".
He says: "Doan' le's talk about it, Huck.
Po' niggers can't have no luck.
I awluz 'spected dat rattlesnake-skin warn't done wid its work".
"I wish I'd never seen that snake-skin, Jim--I do wish I'd never laid eyes on it".
"It ain't yo' fault, Huck; you didn' know.
Don't you blame yo'self 'bout it".
When it was daylight, here was the clear Ohio water inshore, sure enough, and outside was the old regular Muddy!
So it was all up with Cairo.
We talked it all over.
It wouldn't do to take to the shore; we couldn't take the raft up the stream, of course.
There warn't no way but to wait for dark, and start back in the canoe and take the chances.
So we slept all day amongst the cottonwood thicket, so as to be fresh for the work, and when we went back to the raft about dark the canoe was gone!
We didn't say a word for a good while.
There warn't anything to say.
We both knowed well enough it was some more work of the rattlesnake-skin; so what was the use to talk about it?
It would only look like we was finding fault, and that would be bound to fetch more bad luck--and keep on fetching it, too, till we knowed enough to keep still.
By and by we talked about what we better do, and found there warn't no way but just to go along down with the raft till we got a chance to buy a canoe to go back in.
We warn't going to borrow it when there warn't anybody around, the way pap would do, for that might set people after us.
So we shoved out after dark on the raft.
Anybody that don't believe yet that it's foolishness to handle a snake-skin, after all that that snake-skin done for us, will believe it now if they read on and see what more it done for us.
The place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore.
But we didn't see no rafts laying up; so we went along during three hours and more.
Well, the night got gray and ruther thick, which is the next meanest thing to fog.
You can't tell the shape of the river, and you can't see no distance.
It got to be very late and still, and then along comes a steamboat up the river.
We lit the lantern, and judged she would see it.
Up-stream boats didn't generly come close to us; they go out and follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs; but nights like this they bull right up the channel against the whole river.
We could hear her pounding along, but we didn't see her good till she was close.
She aimed right for us.
Often they do that and try to see how close they can come without touching; sometimes the wheel bites off a sweep, and then the pilot sticks his head out and laughs, and thinks he's mighty smart.
Well, here she comes, and we said she was going to try and shave us; but she didn't seem to be sheering off a bit.
She was a big one, and she was coming in a hurry, too, looking like a black cloud with rows of glow-worms around it; but all of a sudden she bulged out, big and scary, with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining like red-hot teeth, and her
There was a yell at us, and a jingling of bells to stop the engines, a powwow of cussing, and whistling of steam--and as Jim went overboard on one side and I on the other, she come smashing straight through the raft.
I dived--and I aimed to find the bottom, too, for a thirty-foot wheel had got to go over me, and I wanted it to have plenty of room.
I could always stay under water a minute; this time I reckon I stayed under a minute and a half.
Then I bounced for the top in a hurry, for I was nearly busting.
I popped out to my armpits and blowed the water out of my nose, and puffed a bit.
Of course there was a booming current; and of course that boat started her engines again ten seconds after she stopped them, for they never cared much for raftsmen; so now she was churning along up the river, out of sight in the thick weather, though I
I sung out for Jim about a dozen times, but I didn't get any answer; so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was "treading water," and struck out for shore, shoving it ahead of me.
But I made out to see that the drift of the current was towards the left-hand shore, which meant that I was in a crossing; so I changed off and went that way.
It was one of these long, slanting, two-mile crossings; so I was a good long time in getting over.
I made a safe landing, and clumb up the bank.
I couldn't see but a little ways, but I went poking along over rough ground for a quarter of a mile or more, and then I run across a big old-fashioned double log-house before I noticed it.
I was going to rush by and get away, but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howling and barking at me, and I knowed better than to move another peg.
CHAPTER XVII.
IN about a minute somebody spoke out of a window without putting his head out, and says: "Be done, boys!
Who's there"?
I says: "It's me".
"Who's me"?
"George Jackson, sir".
"What do you want"?
"I don't want nothing, sir.
I only want to go along by, but the dogs won't let me".
"What are you prowling around here this time of night for--hey"?
"I warn't prowling around, sir, I fell overboard off of the steamboat".
"Oh, you did, did you?
Strike a light there, somebody.
What did you say your name was"?
"George Jackson, sir.
I'm only a boy".
"Look here, if you're telling the truth you needn't be afraid--nobody'll hurt you.
But don't try to budge; stand right where you are.
Rouse out Bob and Tom, some of you, and fetch the guns.
George Jackson, is there anybody with you"?
"No, sir, nobody".
I heard the people stirring around in the house now, and see a light.
The man sung out: "Snatch that light away, Betsy, you old fool--ain't you got any sense?
Put it on the floor behind the front door.
Bob, if you and Tom are ready, take your places".
"All ready".
"Now, George Jackson, do you know the Shepherdsons"?
"No, sir; I never heard of them".
"Well, that may be so, and it mayn't.
Now, all ready.
Step forward, George Jackson.
And mind, don't you hurry--come mighty slow.
If there's anybody with you, let him keep back--if he shows himself he'll be shot.
Come along now.
Come slow; push the door open yourself--just enough to squeeze in, d' you hear"?
I didn't hurry; I couldn't if I'd a wanted to.
I took one slow step at a time and there warn't a sound, only I thought I could hear my heart.
The dogs were as still as the humans, but they followed a little behind me.
When I got to the three log doorsteps I heard them unlocking and unbarring and unbolting.
I put my hand on the door and pushed it a little and a little more till somebody said, "There, that's enough--put your head in".
I done it, but I judged they would take it off.
The candle was on the floor, and there they all was, looking at me, and me at them, for about a quarter of a minute: Three big men with guns pointed at me, which made me wince, I tell you; the oldest, gray and about sixty, the other two thirty or
The old gentleman says: "There; I reckon it's all right.
Come in".
As soon as I was in the old gentleman he locked the door and barred it and bolted it, and told the young men to come in with their guns, and they all went in a big parlor that had a new rag carpet on the floor, and got together in a corner that was out of
They held the candle, and took a good look at me, and all said, "Why, _he_ ain't a Shepherdson--no, there ain't any Shepherdson about him".
Then the old man said he hoped I wouldn't mind being searched for arms, because he didn't mean no harm by it--it was only to make sure.
So he didn't pry into my pockets, but only felt outside with his hands, and said it was all right.
He told me to make myself easy and at home, and tell all about myself; but the old lady says: "Why, bless you, Saul, the poor thing's as wet as he can be; and don't you reckon it may be he's hungry"?
"True for you, Rachel--I forgot".
So the old lady says: "Betsy" (this was a nigger woman), "you fly around and get him something to eat as quick as you can, poor thing; and one of you girls go and wake up Buck and tell him--oh, here he is himself.
Buck, take this little stranger and get the wet clothes off from him and dress him up in some of yours that's dry".
Buck looked about as old as me--thirteen or fourteen or along there, though he was a little bigger than me.
He hadn't on anything but a shirt, and he was very frowzy-headed.
He came in gaping and digging one fist into his eyes, and he was dragging a gun along with the other one.
He says: "Ain't they no Shepherdsons around"?
They said, no, 'twas a false alarm.
"Well," he says, "if they'd a ben some, I reckon I'd a got one".
They all laughed, and Bob says: "Why, Buck, they might have scalped us all, you've been so slow in coming".
"Well, nobody come after me, and it ain't right I'm always kept down; I don't get no show".
"Never mind, Buck, my boy," says the old man, "you'll have show enough, all in good time, don't you fret about that.
Go 'long with you now, and do as your mother told you".
When we got up-stairs to his room he got me a coarse shirt and a roundabout and pants of his, and I put them on.
While I was at it he asked me what my name was, but before I could tell him he started to tell me about a bluejay and a young rabbit he had catched in the woods day before yesterday, and he asked me where Moses was when the candle went out.
I said I didn't know; I hadn't heard about it before, no way.
"Well, guess," he says.
"How'm I going to guess," says I, "when I never heard tell of it before"?
"But you can guess, can't you?
It's just as easy".
"_Which_ candle"?
I says.
"Why, any candle," he says.
"I don't know where he was," says I; "where was he"?
"Why, he was in the _dark_!
That's where he was"!
"Well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me for"?
"Why, blame it, it's a riddle, don't you see?
Say, how long are you going to stay here?
You got to stay always.
We can just have booming times--they don't have no school now.
Do you own a dog?
I've got a dog--and he'll go in the river and bring out chips that you throw in.
Do you like to comb up Sundays, and all that kind of foolishness?
You bet I don't, but ma she makes me.
Confound these ole britches!
I reckon I'd better put 'em on, but I'd ruther not, it's so warm.
Are you all ready?
All right.
Come along, old hoss".
Cold corn-pone, cold corn-beef, butter and buttermilk--that is what they had for me down there, and there ain't nothing better that ever I've come across yet.
Buck and his ma and all of them smoked cob pipes, except the nigger woman, which was gone, and the two young women.
They all smoked and talked, and I eat and talked.
The young women had quilts around them, and their hair down their backs.
They all asked me questions, and I told them how pap and me and all the family was living on a little farm down at the bottom of Arkansaw, and my sister Mary Ann run off and got married and never was heard of no more, and Bill went to hunt them and he
So they said I could have a home there as long as I wanted it.
Then it was most daylight and everybody went to bed, and I went to bed with Buck, and when I waked up in the morning, drat it all, I had forgot what my name was.
So I laid there about an hour trying to think, and when Buck waked up I says: "Can you spell, Buck"?
"Yes," he says.
"I bet you can't spell my name," says I. "I bet you what you dare I can," says he.
"All right," says I, "go ahead".
"G-e-o-r-g-e J-a-x-o-n--there now," he says.
"Well," says I, "you done it, but I didn't think you could.
It ain't no slouch of a name to spell--right off without studying".
I set it down, private, because somebody might want _me_ to spell it next, and so I wanted to be handy with it and rattle it off like I was used to it.
It was a mighty nice family, and a mighty nice house, too.
I hadn't seen no house out in the country before that was so nice and had so much style.
It didn't have an iron latch on the front door, nor a wooden one with a buckskin string, but a brass knob to turn, the same as houses in town.
There warn't no bed in the parlor, nor a sign of a bed; but heaps of parlors in towns has beds in them.
There was a big fireplace that was bricked on the bottom, and the bricks was kept clean and red by pouring water on them and scrubbing them with another brick; sometimes they wash them over with red water-paint that they call Spanish-brown, same as they
They had big brass dog-irons that could hold up a saw-log.
There was a clock on the middle of the mantelpiece, with a picture of a town painted on the bottom half of the glass front, and a round place in the middle of it for the sun, and you could see the pendulum swinging behind it.
It was beautiful to hear that clock tick; and sometimes when one of these peddlers had been along and scoured her up and got her in good shape, she would start in and strike a hundred and fifty before she got tuckered out.
They wouldn't took any money for her.
Well, there was a big outlandish parrot on each side of the clock, made out of something like chalk, and painted up gaudy.
By one of the parrots was a cat made of crockery, and a crockery dog by the other; and when you pressed down on them they squeaked, but didn't open their mouths nor look different nor interested.
They squeaked through underneath.
There was a couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out behind those things.
On the table in the middle of the room was a kind of a lovely crockery basket that had apples and oranges and peaches and grapes piled up in it, which was much redder and yellower and prettier than real ones is, but they warn't real because you could see
This table had a cover made out of beautiful oilcloth, with a red and blue spread-eagle painted on it, and a painted border all around.
It come all the way from Philadelphia, they said.
There was some books, too, piled up perfectly exact, on each corner of the table.
One was a big family Bible full of pictures.
One was Pilgrim's Progress, about a man that left his family, it didn't say why.
I read considerable in it now and then.
The statements was interesting, but tough.
Another was Friendship's Offering, full of beautiful stuff and poetry; but I didn't read the poetry.
Another was Henry Clay's Speeches, and another was Dr. Gunn's Family Medicine, which told you all about what to do if a body was sick or dead.
There was a hymn book, and a lot of other books.
And there was nice split-bottom chairs, and perfectly sound, too--not bagged down in the middle and busted, like an old basket.
They had pictures hung on the walls--mainly Washingtons and Lafayettes, and battles, and Highland Marys, and one called "Signing the Declaration".
There was some that they called crayons, which one of the daughters which was dead made her own self when she was only fifteen years old.
They was different from any pictures I ever see before--blacker, mostly, than is common.
One was a woman in a slim black dress, belted small under the armpits, with bulges like a cabbage in the middle of the sleeves, and a large black scoop-shovel bonnet with a black veil, and white slim ankles crossed about with black tape, and very wee
Another one was a young lady with her hair all combed up straight to the top of her head, and knotted there in front of a comb like a chair-back, and she was crying into a handkerchief and had a dead bird laying on its back in her other hand with its
There was one where a young lady was at a window looking up at the moon, and tears running down her cheeks; and she had an open letter in one hand with black sealing wax showing on one edge of it, and she was mashing a locket with a chain to it against
These was all nice pictures, I reckon, but I didn't somehow seem to take to them, because if ever I was down a little they always give me the fan-tods.
Everybody was sorry she died, because she had laid out a lot more of these pictures to do, and a body could see by what she had done what they had lost.
But I reckoned that with her disposition she was having a better time in the graveyard.
She was at work on what they said was her greatest picture when she took sick, and every day and every night it was her prayer to be allowed to live till she got it done, but she never got the chance.
It was a picture of a young woman in a long white gown, standing on the rail of a bridge all ready to jump off, with her hair all down her back, and looking up to the moon, with the tears running down her face, and she had two arms folded across her
Other times it was hid with a little curtain.
The young woman in the picture had a kind of a nice sweet face, but there was so many arms it made her look too spidery, seemed to me.
This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive, and used to paste obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suffering in it out of the Presbyterian Observer, and write poetry after them out of her own head.
It was very good poetry.
This is what she wrote about a boy by the name of Stephen Dowling Bots that fell down a well and was drownded: ODE TO STEPHEN DOWLING BOTS, DEC'D And did young Stephen sicken,  And did young Stephen die?
And did the sad hearts thicken,  And did the mourners cry?
No; such was not the fate of  Young Stephen Dowling Bots; Though sad hearts round him thickened,  'Twas not from sickness' shots.
No whooping-cough did rack his frame,  Nor measles drear with spots; Not these impaired the sacred name  Of Stephen Dowling Bots.
Despised love struck not with woe  That head of curly knots, Nor stomach troubles laid him low,  Young Stephen Dowling Bots.
O no.
Then list with tearful eye,  Whilst I his fate do tell.
His soul did from this cold world fly  By falling down a well.
They got him out and emptied him;  Alas it was too late; His spirit was gone for to sport aloft  In the realms of the good and great.
If Emmeline Grangerford could make poetry like that before she was fourteen, there ain't no telling what she could a done by and by.
Buck said she could rattle off poetry like nothing.
She didn't ever have to stop to think.
He said she would slap down a line, and if she couldn't find anything to rhyme with it would just scratch it out and slap down another one, and go ahead.
She warn't particular; she could write about anything you choose to give her to write about just so it was sadful.
Every time a man died, or a woman died, or a child died, she would be on hand with her "tribute" before he was cold.
She called them tributes.
The neighbors said it was the doctor first, then Emmeline, then the undertaker--the undertaker never got in ahead of Emmeline but once, and then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead person's name, which was Whistler.
She warn't ever the same after that; she never complained, but she kinder pined away and did not live long.
Poor thing, many's the time I made myself go up to the little room that used to be hers and get out her poor old scrap-book and read in it when her pictures had been aggravating me and I had soured on her a little.
I liked all that family, dead ones and all, and warn't going to let anything come between us.
Poor Emmeline made poetry about all the dead people when she was alive, and it didn't seem right that there warn't nobody to make some about her now she was gone; so I tried to sweat out a verse or two myself, but I couldn't seem to make it go somehow.
They kept Emmeline's room trim and nice, and all the things fixed in it just the way she liked to have them when she was alive, and nobody ever slept there.
The old lady took care of the room herself, though there was plenty of niggers, and she sewed there a good deal and read her Bible there mostly.
Well, as I was saying about the parlor, there was beautiful curtains on the windows: white, with pictures painted on them of castles with vines all down the walls, and cattle coming down to drink.
There was a little old piano, too, that had tin pans in it, I reckon, and nothing was ever so lovely as to hear the young ladies sing "The Last Link is Broken" and play "The Battle of Prague" on it.
The walls of all the rooms was plastered, and most had carpets on the floors, and the whole house was whitewashed on the outside.
It was a double house, and the big open place betwixt them was roofed and floored, and sometimes the table was set there in the middle of the day, and it was a cool, comfortable place.
Nothing couldn't be better.
And warn't the cooking good, and just bushels of it too!
CHAPTER XVIII.
COL.
Grangerford was a gentleman, you see.
He was a gentleman all over; and so was his family.
He was well born, as the saying is, and that's worth as much in a man as it is in a horse, so the Widow Douglas said, and nobody ever denied that she was of the first aristocracy in our town; and pap he always said it, too, though he warn't no more
Col.
Grangerford was very tall and very slim, and had a darkish-paly complexion, not a sign of red in it anywheres; he was clean shaved every morning all over his thin face, and he had the thinnest kind of lips, and the thinnest kind of nostrils, and a high
His forehead was high, and his hair was black and straight and hung to his shoulders.
His hands was long and thin, and every day of his life he put on a clean shirt and a full suit from head to foot made out of linen so white it hurt your eyes to look at it; and on Sundays he wore a blue tail-coat with brass buttons on it.
He carried a mahogany cane with a silver head to it.
There warn't no frivolishness about him, not a bit, and he warn't ever loud.
He was as kind as he could be--you could feel that, you know, and so you had confidence.
Sometimes he smiled, and it was good to see; but when he straightened himself up like a liberty-pole, and the lightning begun to flicker out from under his eyebrows, you wanted to climb a tree first, and find out what the matter was afterwards.
He didn't ever have to tell anybody to mind their manners--everybody was always good-mannered where he was.
Everybody loved to have him around, too; he was sunshine most always--I mean he made it seem like good weather.
When he turned into a cloudbank it was awful dark for half a minute, and that was enough; there wouldn't nothing go wrong again for a week.
When him and the old lady come down in the morning all the family got up out of their chairs and give them good-day, and didn't set down again till they had set down.
Then Tom and Bob went to the sideboard where the decanter was, and mixed a glass of bitters and handed it to him, and he held it in his hand and waited till Tom's and Bob's was mixed, and then they bowed and said, "Our duty to you, sir, and madam;" and
Bob was the oldest and Tom next--tall, beautiful men with very broad shoulders and brown faces, and long black hair and black eyes.
They dressed in white linen from head to foot, like the old gentleman, and wore broad Panama hats.
Then there was Miss Charlotte; she was twenty-five, and tall and proud and grand, but as good as she could be when she warn't stirred up; but when she was she had a look that would make you wilt in your tracks, like her father.
She was beautiful.
So was her sister, Miss Sophia, but it was a different kind.
She was gentle and sweet like a dove, and she was only twenty.
Each person had their own nigger to wait on them--Buck too.
My nigger had a monstrous easy time, because I warn't used to having anybody do anything for me, but Buck's was on the jump most of the time.
This was all there was of the family now, but there used to be more--three sons; they got killed; and Emmeline that died.
The old gentleman owned a lot of farms and over a hundred niggers.
Sometimes a stack of people would come there, horseback, from ten or fifteen mile around, and stay five or six days, and have such junketings round about and on the river, and dances and picnics in the woods daytimes, and balls at the house nights.
These people was mostly kinfolks of the family.
The men brought their guns with them.
It was a handsome lot of quality, I tell you.
There was another clan of aristocracy around there--five or six families--mostly of the name of Shepherdson.
They was as high-toned and well born and rich and grand as the tribe of Grangerfords.
The Shepherdsons and Grangerfords used the same steamboat landing, which was about two mile above our house; so sometimes when I went up there with a lot of our folks I used to see a lot of the Shepherdsons there on their fine horses.
One day Buck and me was away out in the woods hunting, and heard a horse coming.
We was crossing the road.
Buck says: "Quick!
Jump for the woods"!
We done it, and then peeped down the woods through the leaves.
Pretty soon a splendid young man come galloping down the road, setting his horse easy and looking like a soldier.
He had his gun across his pommel.
I had seen him before.
It was young Harney Shepherdson.
I heard Buck's gun go off at my ear, and Harney's hat tumbled off from his head.
He grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where we was hid.
But we didn't wait.
We started through the woods on a run.
The woods warn't thick, so I looked over my shoulder to dodge the bullet, and twice I seen Harney cover Buck with his gun; and then he rode away the way he come--to get his hat, I reckon, but I couldn't see.
We never stopped running till we got home.
The old gentleman's eyes blazed a minute--'twas pleasure, mainly, I judged--then his face sort of smoothed down, and he says, kind of gentle: "I don't like that shooting from behind a bush.
Why didn't you step into the road, my boy"?
"The Shepherdsons don't, father.
They always take advantage".
Miss Charlotte she held her head up like a queen while Buck was telling his tale, and her nostrils spread and her eyes snapped.
The two young men looked dark, but never said nothing.
Miss Sophia she turned pale, but the color come back when she found the man warn't hurt.
Soon as I could get Buck down by the corn-cribs under the trees by ourselves, I says: "Did you want to kill him, Buck"?
"Well, I bet I did".
"What did he do to you"?
"Him?
He never done nothing to me".
"Well, then, what did you want to kill him for"?
"Why, nothing--only it's on account of the feud".
"What's a feud"?
"Why, where was you raised?
Don't you know what a feud is"?
"Never heard of it before--tell me about it".
"Well," says Buck, "a feud is this way: A man has a quarrel with another man, and kills him; then that other man's brother kills _him_; then the other brothers, on both sides, goes for one another; then the _cousins_ chip in--and by and by everybody's
But it's kind of slow, and takes a long time".
"Has this one been going on long, Buck"?
"Well, I should _reckon_!
It started thirty year ago, or som'ers along there.
There was trouble 'bout something, and then a lawsuit to settle it; and the suit went agin one of the men, and so he up and shot the man that won the suit--which he would naturally do, of course.
Anybody would".
"What was the trouble about, Buck?
--land"?
"I reckon maybe--I don't know".
"Well, who done the shooting?
Was it a Grangerford or a Shepherdson"?
"Laws, how do I know?
It was so long ago".
"Don't anybody know"?
"Oh, yes, pa knows, I reckon, and some of the other old people; but they don't know now what the row was about in the first place".
"Has there been many killed, Buck"?
"Yes; right smart chance of funerals.
But they don't always kill.
Pa's got a few buckshot in him; but he don't mind it 'cuz he don't weigh much, anyway.
Bob's been carved up some with a bowie, and Tom's been hurt once or twice".
"Has anybody been killed this year, Buck"?
"Yes; we got one and they got one.
'Bout three months ago my cousin Bud, fourteen year old, was riding through the woods on t'other side of the river, and didn't have no weapon with him, which was blame' foolishness, and in a lonesome place he hears a horse a-coming behind him, and sees
But he didn't git much chance to enjoy his luck, for inside of a week our folks laid _him_ out".
"I reckon that old man was a coward, Buck".
"I reckon he _warn't_ a coward.
Not by a blame' sight.
There ain't a coward amongst them Shepherdsons--not a one.
And there ain't no cowards amongst the Grangerfords either.
Why, that old man kep' up his end in a fight one day for half an hour against three Grangerfords, and come out winner.
They was all a-horseback; he lit off of his horse and got behind a little woodpile, and kep' his horse before him to stop the bullets; but the Grangerfords stayed on their horses and capered around the old man, and peppered away at him, and he peppered
Him and his horse both went home pretty leaky and crippled, but the Grangerfords had to be _fetched_ home--and one of 'em was dead, and another died the next day.
No, sir; if a body's out hunting for cowards he don't want to fool away any time amongst them Shepherdsons, becuz they don't breed any of that _kind_".
Next Sunday we all went to church, about three mile, everybody a-horseback.
The men took their guns along, so did Buck, and kept them between their knees or stood them handy against the wall.
The Shepherdsons done the same.
It was pretty ornery preaching--all about brotherly love, and such-like tiresomeness; but everybody said it was a good sermon, and they all talked it over going home, and had such a powerful lot to say about faith and good works and free grace and
About an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around, some in their chairs and some in their rooms, and it got to be pretty dull.
Buck and a dog was stretched out on the grass in the sun sound asleep.
I went up to our room, and judged I would take a nap myself.
I found that sweet Miss Sophia standing in her door, which was next to ours, and she took me in her room and shut the door very soft, and asked me if I liked her, and I said I did; and she asked me if I would do something for her and not tell anybody,
Then she said she'd forgot her Testament, and left it in the seat at church between two other books, and would I slip out quiet and go there and fetch it to her, and not say nothing to nobody.
I said I would.
So I slid out and slipped off up the road, and there warn't anybody at the church, except maybe a hog or two, for there warn't any lock on the door, and hogs likes a puncheon floor in summer-time because it's cool.
If you notice, most folks don't go to church only when they've got to; but a hog is different.
Says I to myself, something's up; it ain't natural for a girl to be in such a sweat about a Testament.
So I give it a shake, and out drops a little piece of paper with "HALF-PAST TWO" wrote on it with a pencil.
I ransacked it, but couldn't find anything else.
I couldn't make anything out of that, so I put the paper in the book again, and when I got home and upstairs there was Miss Sophia in her door waiting for me.
She pulled me in and shut the door; then she looked in the Testament till she found the paper, and as soon as she read it she looked glad; and before a body could think she grabbed me and give me a squeeze, and said I was the best boy in the world, and
She was mighty red in the face for a minute, and her eyes lighted up, and it made her powerful pretty.
I was a good deal astonished, but when I got my breath I asked her what the paper was about, and she asked me if I had read it, and I said no, and she asked me if I could read writing, and I told her "no, only coarse-hand," and then she said the paper
I went off down to the river, studying over this thing, and pretty soon I noticed that my nigger was following along behind.
When we was out of sight of the house he looked back and around a second, and then comes a-running, and says: "Mars Jawge, if you'll come down into de swamp I'll show you a whole stack o' water-moccasins".
Thinks I, that's mighty curious; he said that yesterday.
He oughter know a body don't love water-moccasins enough to go around hunting for them.
What is he up to, anyway?
So I says: "All right; trot ahead".
I followed a half a mile; then he struck out over the swamp, and waded ankle deep as much as another half-mile.
We come to a little flat piece of land which was dry and very thick with trees and bushes and vines, and he says: "You shove right in dah jist a few steps, Mars Jawge; dah's whah dey is.
I's seed 'm befo'; I don't k'yer to see 'em no mo'".
Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty soon the trees hid him.
I poked into the place a-ways and come to a little open patch as big as a bedroom all hung around with vines, and found a man laying there asleep--and, by jings, it was my old Jim!
I waked him up, and I reckoned it was going to be a grand surprise to him to see me again, but it warn't.
He nearly cried he was so glad, but he warn't surprised.
Said he swum along behind me that night, and heard me yell every time, but dasn't answer, because he didn't want nobody to pick _him_ up and take him into slavery again.
Says he: "I got hurt a little, en couldn't swim fas', so I wuz a considable ways behine you towards de las'; when you landed I reck'ned I could ketch up wid you on de lan' 'dout havin' to shout at you, but when I see dat house I begin to go slow.
I 'uz off too fur to hear what dey say to you--I wuz 'fraid o' de dogs; but when it 'uz all quiet agin I knowed you's in de house, so I struck out for de woods to wait for day.
Early in de mawnin' some er de niggers come along, gwyne to de fields, en dey tuk me en showed me dis place, whah de dogs can't track me on accounts o' de water, en dey brings me truck to eat every night, en tells me how you's a-gitt'n along".
"Why didn't you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner, Jim"?
"Well, 'twarn't no use to 'sturb you, Huck, tell we could do sumfn--but we's all right now.
I ben a-buyin' pots en pans en vittles, as I got a chanst, en a-patchin' up de raf' nights when--" "_What_ raft, Jim"?
"Our ole raf'".
"You mean to say our old raft warn't smashed all to flinders"?
"No, she warn't.
She was tore up a good deal--one en' of her was; but dey warn't no great harm done, on'y our traps was mos' all los'.
Ef we hadn' dive' so deep en swum so fur under water, en de night hadn' ben so dark, en we warn't so sk'yerd, en ben sich punkin-heads, as de sayin' is, we'd a seed de raf'.
But it's jis' as well we didn't, 'kase now she's all fixed up agin mos' as good as new, en we's got a new lot o' stuff, in de place o' what 'uz los'".
"Why, how did you get hold of the raft again, Jim--did you catch her"?
"How I gwyne to ketch her en I out in de woods?
No; some er de niggers foun' her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben', en dey hid her in a crick 'mongst de willows, en dey wuz so much jawin' 'bout which un 'um she b'long to de mos' dat I come to heah 'bout it pooty soon, so I ups en settles de
Den I gin 'm ten cents apiece, en dey 'uz mighty well satisfied, en wisht some mo' raf's 'ud come along en make 'm rich agin.
Dey's mighty good to me, dese niggers is, en whatever I wants 'm to do fur me I doan' have to ast 'm twice, honey.
Dat Jack's a good nigger, en pooty smart".
"Yes, he is.
He ain't ever told me you was here; told me to come, and he'd show me a lot of water-moccasins.
If anything happens _he_ ain't mixed up in it.
He can say he never seen us together, and it 'll be the truth".
I don't want to talk much about the next day.
I reckon I'll cut it pretty short.
I waked up about dawn, and was a-going to turn over and go to sleep again when I noticed how still it was--didn't seem to be anybody stirring.
That warn't usual.
Next I noticed that Buck was up and gone.
Well, I gets up, a-wondering, and goes down stairs--nobody around; everything as still as a mouse.
Just the same outside.
Thinks I, what does it mean?
Down by the wood-pile I comes across my Jack, and says: "What's it all about"?
Says he: "Don't you know, Mars Jawge"?
"No," says I, "I don't".
"Well, den, Miss Sophia's run off!
'deed she has.
She run off in de night some time--nobody don't know jis' when; run off to get married to dat young Harney Shepherdson, you know--leastways, so dey 'spec.
De fambly foun' it out 'bout half an hour ago--maybe a little mo'--en' I _tell_ you dey warn't no time los'.
Sich another hurryin' up guns en hosses _you_ never see!
De women folks has gone for to stir up de relations, en ole Mars Saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de river road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him 'fo' he kin git acrost de river wid Miss Sophia.
I reck'n dey's gwyne to be mighty rough times".
"Buck went off 'thout waking me up".
"Well, I reck'n he _did_!
Dey warn't gwyne to mix you up in it.
Mars Buck he loaded up his gun en 'lowed he's gwyne to fetch home a Shepherdson or bust.
Well, dey'll be plenty un 'm dah, I reck'n, en you bet you he'll fetch one ef he gits a chanst".
I took up the river road as hard as I could put.
By and by I begin to hear guns a good ways off.
When I come in sight of the log store and the woodpile where the steamboats lands I worked along under the trees and brush till I got to a good place, and then I clumb up into the forks of a cottonwood that was out of reach, and watched.
There was a wood-rank four foot high a little ways in front of the tree, and first I was going to hide behind that; but maybe it was luckier I didn't.
There was four or five men cavorting around on their horses in the open place before the log store, cussing and yelling, and trying to get at a couple of young chaps that was behind the wood-rank alongside of the steamboat landing; but they couldn't come
Every time one of them showed himself on the river side of the woodpile he got shot at.
The two boys was squatting back to back behind the pile, so they could watch both ways.
By and by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling.
They started riding towards the store; then up gets one of the boys, draws a steady bead over the wood-rank, and drops one of them out of his saddle.
All the men jumped off of their horses and grabbed the hurt one and started to carry him to the store; and that minute the two boys started on the run.
They got half way to the tree I was in before the men noticed.
Then the men see them, and jumped on their horses and took out after them.
They gained on the boys, but it didn't do no good, the boys had too good a start; they got to the woodpile that was in front of my tree, and slipped in behind it, and so they had the bulge on the men again.
One of the boys was Buck, and the other was a slim young chap about nineteen years old.
The men ripped around awhile, and then rode away.
As soon as they was out of sight I sung out to Buck and told him.
He didn't know what to make of my voice coming out of the tree at first.
He was awful surprised.
He told me to watch out sharp and let him know when the men come in sight again; said they was up to some devilment or other--wouldn't be gone long.
I wished I was out of that tree, but I dasn't come down.
Buck begun to cry and rip, and 'lowed that him and his cousin Joe (that was the other young chap) would make up for this day yet.
He said his father and his two brothers was killed, and two or three of the enemy.
Said the Shepherdsons laid for them in ambush.
Buck said his father and brothers ought to waited for their relations--the Shepherdsons was too strong for them.
I asked him what was become of young Harney and Miss Sophia.
He said they'd got across the river and was safe.
I was glad of that; but the way Buck did take on because he didn't manage to kill Harney that day he shot at him--I hain't ever heard anything like it.
All of a sudden, bang!
bang!
bang!
goes three or four guns--the men had slipped around through the woods and come in from behind without their horses!
The boys jumped for the river--both of them hurt--and as they swum down the current the men run along the bank shooting at them and singing out, "Kill them, kill them"!
It made me so sick I most fell out of the tree.
I ain't a-going to tell _all_ that happened--it would make me sick again if I was to do that.
I wished I hadn't ever come ashore that night to see such things.
I ain't ever going to get shut of them--lots of times I dream about them.
I stayed in the tree till it begun to get dark, afraid to come down.
Sometimes I heard guns away off in the woods; and twice I seen little gangs of men gallop past the log store with guns; so I reckoned the trouble was still a-going on.
I was mighty downhearted; so I made up my mind I wouldn't ever go anear that house again, because I reckoned I was to blame, somehow.
I judged that that piece of paper meant that Miss Sophia was to meet Harney somewheres at half-past two and run off; and I judged I ought to told her father about that paper and the curious way she acted, and then maybe he would a locked her up, and this
When I got down out of the tree I crept along down the river bank a piece, and found the two bodies laying in the edge of the water, and tugged at them till I got them ashore; then I covered up their faces, and got away as quick as I could.
I cried a little when I was covering up Buck's face, for he was mighty good to me.
It was just dark now.
I never went near the house, but struck through the woods and made for the swamp.
Jim warn't on his island, so I tramped off in a hurry for the crick, and crowded through the willows, red-hot to jump aboard and get out of that awful country.
The raft was gone!
My souls, but I was scared!
I couldn't get my breath for most a minute.
Then I raised a yell.
A voice not twenty-five foot from me says: "Good lan'!
is dat you, honey?
Doan' make no noise".
It was Jim's voice--nothing ever sounded so good before.
I run along the bank a piece and got aboard, and Jim he grabbed me and hugged me, he was so glad to see me.
He says: "Laws bless you, chile, I 'uz right down sho' you's dead agin.
Jack's been heah; he say he reck'n you's ben shot, kase you didn' come home no mo'; so I's jes' dis minute a startin' de raf' down towards de mouf er de crick, so's to be all ready for to shove out en leave soon as Jack comes agin en tells me for certain
Lawsy, I's mighty glad to git you back again, honey".
I says: "All right--that's mighty good; they won't find me, and they'll think I've been killed, and floated down the river--there's something up there that 'll help them think so--so don't you lose no time, Jim, but just shove off for the big water as fast
I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and out in the middle of the Mississippi.
Then we hung up our signal lantern, and judged that we was free and safe once more.
I hadn't had a bite to eat since yesterday, so Jim he got out some corn-dodgers and buttermilk, and pork and cabbage and greens--there ain't nothing in the world so good when it's cooked right--and whilst I eat my supper we talked and had a good time.
I was powerful glad to get away from the feuds, and so was Jim to get away from the swamp.
We said there warn't no home like a raft, after all.
Other places do seem so cramped up and smothery, but a raft don't.
You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft.
CHAPTER XIX.
TWO or three days and nights went by; I reckon I might say they swum by, they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely.
Here is the way we put in the time.
It was a monstrous big river down there--sometimes a mile and a half wide; we run nights, and laid up and hid daytimes; soon as night was most gone we stopped navigating and tied up--nearly always in the dead water under a towhead; and then cut young
Then we set out the lines.
Next we slid into the river and had a swim, so as to freshen up and cool off; then we set down on the sandy bottom where the water was about knee deep, and watched the daylight come.
Not a sound anywheres--perfectly still--just like the whole world was asleep, only sometimes the bullfrogs a-cluttering, maybe.
The first thing to see, looking away over the water, was a kind of dull line--that was the woods on t'other side; you couldn't make nothing else out; then a pale place in the sky; then more paleness spreading around; then the river softened up away off,
A little smoke couldn't be noticed now, so we would take some fish off of the lines and cook up a hot breakfast.
And afterwards we would watch the lonesomeness of the river, and kind of lazy along, and by and by lazy off to sleep.
Wake up by and by, and look to see what done it, and maybe see a steamboat coughing along up-stream, so far off towards the other side you couldn't tell nothing about her only whether she was a stern-wheel or side-wheel; then for about an hour there
Next you'd see a raft sliding by, away off yonder, and maybe a galoot on it chopping, because they're most always doing it on a raft; you'd see the axe flash and come down--you don't hear nothing; you see that axe go up again, and by the time it's above
--it had took all that time to come over the water.
So we would put in the day, lazying around, listening to the stillness.
Once there was a thick fog, and the rafts and things that went by was beating tin pans so the steamboats wouldn't run over them.
A scow or a raft went by so close we could hear them talking and cussing and laughing--heard them plain; but we couldn't see no sign of them; it made you feel crawly; it was like spirits carrying on that way in the air.
Jim said he believed it was spirits; but I says: "No; spirits wouldn't say, 'Dern the dern fog.
'" Soon as it was night out we shoved; when we got her out to about the middle we let her alone, and let her float wherever the current wanted her to; then we lit the pipes, and dangled our legs in the water, and talked about all kinds of things--we was
Sometimes we'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest time.
Yonder was the banks and the islands, across the water; and maybe a spark--which was a candle in a cabin window; and sometimes on the water you could see a spark or two--on a raft or a scow, you know; and maybe you could hear a fiddle or a song coming over
It's lovely to live on a raft.
We had the sky up there, all speckled with stars, and we used to lay on our backs and look up at them, and discuss about whether they was made or only just happened.
Jim he allowed they was made, but I allowed they happened; I judged it would have took too long to _make_ so many.
Jim said the moon could a _laid_ them; well, that looked kind of reasonable, so I didn't say nothing against it, because I've seen a frog lay most as many, so of course it could be done.
We used to watch the stars that fell, too, and see them streak down.
Jim allowed they'd got spoiled and was hove out of the nest.
Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in the dark, and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out of her chimbleys, and they would rain down in the river and look awful pretty; then she would turn a corner and
After midnight the people on shore went to bed, and then for two or three hours the shores was black--no more sparks in the cabin windows.
These sparks was our clock--the first one that showed again meant morning was coming, so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away.
One morning about daybreak I found a canoe and crossed over a chute to the main shore--it was only two hundred yards--and paddled about a mile up a crick amongst the cypress woods, to see if I couldn't get some berries.
Just as I was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed the crick, here comes a couple of men tearing up the path as tight as they could foot it.
I thought I was a goner, for whenever anybody was after anybody I judged it was _me_--or maybe Jim.
I was about to dig out from there in a hurry, but they was pretty close to me then, and sung out and begged me to save their lives--said they hadn't been doing nothing, and was being chased for it--said there was men and dogs a-coming.
They wanted to jump right in, but I says: "Don't you do it.
I don't hear the dogs and horses yet; you've got time to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways; then you take to the water and wade down to me and get in--that'll throw the dogs off the scent".
They done it, and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our towhead, and in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and the men away off, shouting.
We heard them come along towards the crick, but couldn't see them; they seemed to stop and fool around a while; then, as we got further and further away all the time, we couldn't hardly hear them at all; by the time we had left a mile of woods behind us
One of these fellows was about seventy or upwards, and had a bald head and very gray whiskers.
He had an old battered-up slouch hat on, and a greasy blue woollen shirt, and ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed into his boot-tops, and home-knit galluses--no, he only had one.
He had an old long-tailed blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons flung over his arm, and both of them had big, fat, ratty-looking carpet-bags.
The other fellow was about thirty, and dressed about as ornery.
After breakfast we all laid off and talked, and the first thing that come out was that these chaps didn't know one another.
"What got you into trouble"?
says the baldhead to t'other chap.
"Well, I'd been selling an article to take the tartar off the teeth--and it does take it off, too, and generly the enamel along with it--but I stayed about one night longer than I ought to, and was just in the act of sliding out when I ran across you on
So I told you I was expecting trouble myself, and would scatter out _with_ you.
That's the whole yarn--what's yourn?
"Well, I'd ben a-running' a little temperance revival thar 'bout a week, and was the pet of the women folks, big and little, for I was makin' it mighty warm for the rummies, I _tell_ you, and takin' as much as five or six dollars a night--ten cents a head,
A nigger rousted me out this mornin', and told me the people was getherin' on the quiet with their dogs and horses, and they'd be along pretty soon and give me 'bout half an hour's start, and then run me down if they could; and if they got me they'd tar
I didn't wait for no breakfast--I warn't hungry".
"Old man," said the young one, "I reckon we might double-team it together; what do you think"?
"I ain't undisposed.
What's your line--mainly"?
"Jour printer by trade; do a little in patent medicines; theater-actor--tragedy, you know; take a turn to mesmerism and phrenology when there's a chance; teach singing-geography school for a change; sling a lecture sometimes--oh, I do lots of things--most
What's your lay"?
"I've done considerble in the doctoring way in my time.
Layin' on o' hands is my best holt--for cancer and paralysis, and sich things; and I k'n tell a fortune pretty good when I've got somebody along to find out the facts for me.
Preachin's my line, too, and workin' camp-meetin's, and missionaryin' around".
Nobody never said anything for a while; then the young man hove a sigh and says: "Alas"!
"What 're you alassin' about"?
says the bald-head.
"To think I should have lived to be leading such a life, and be degraded down into such company".
And he begun to wipe the corner of his eye with a rag.
"Dern your skin, ain't the company good enough for you"?
says the baldhead, pretty pert and uppish.
"Yes, it _is_ good enough for me; it's as good as I deserve; for who fetched me so low when I was so high?
I did myself.
I don't blame _you_, gentlemen--far from it; I don't blame anybody.
I deserve it all.
Let the cold world do its worst; one thing I know--there's a grave somewhere for me.
The world may go on just as it's always done, and take everything from me--loved ones, property, everything; but it can't take that.
Some day I'll lie down in it and forget it all, and my poor broken heart will be at rest".
He went on a-wiping.
"Drot your pore broken heart," says the baldhead; "what are you heaving your pore broken heart at _us_ f'r?
_we_ hain't done nothing".
"No, I know you haven't.
I ain't blaming you, gentlemen.
I brought myself down--yes, I did it myself.
It's right I should suffer--perfectly right--I don't make any moan".
"Brought you down from whar?
Whar was you brought down from"?
"Ah, you would not believe me; the world never believes--let it pass--'tis no matter.
The secret of my birth--" "The secret of your birth!
Do you mean to say--" "Gentlemen," says the young man, very solemn, "I will reveal it to you, for I feel I may have confidence in you.
By rights I am a duke"!
Jim's eyes bugged out when he heard that; and I reckon mine did, too.
Then the baldhead says: "No!
you can't mean it"?
"Yes.
My great-grandfather, eldest son of the Duke of Bridgewater, fled to this country about the end of the last century, to breathe the pure air of freedom; married here, and died, leaving a son, his own father dying about the same time.
The second son of the late duke seized the titles and estates--the infant real duke was ignored.
I am the lineal descendant of that infant--I am the rightful Duke of Bridgewater; and here am I, forlorn, torn from my high estate, hunted of men, despised by the cold world, ragged, worn, heart-broken, and degraded to the companionship of felons on a
Jim pitied him ever so much, and so did I. We tried to comfort him, but he said it warn't much use, he couldn't be much comforted; said if we was a mind to acknowledge him, that would do him more good than most anything else; so we said we would, if he
He said we ought to bow when we spoke to him, and say "Your Grace," or "My Lord," or "Your Lordship"--and he wouldn't mind it if we called him plain "Bridgewater," which, he said, was a title anyway, and not a name; and one of us ought to wait on him at
Well, that was all easy, so we done it.
All through dinner Jim stood around and waited on him, and says, "Will yo' Grace have some o' dis or some o' dat"?
and so on, and a body could see it was mighty pleasing to him.
But the old man got pretty silent by and by--didn't have much to say, and didn't look pretty comfortable over all that petting that was going on around that duke.
He seemed to have something on his mind.
So, along in the afternoon, he says: "Looky here, Bilgewater," he says, "I'm nation sorry for you, but you ain't the only person that's had troubles like that".
"No"?
"No you ain't.
You ain't the only person that's ben snaked down wrongfully out'n a high place".
"Alas"!
"No, you ain't the only person that's had a secret of his birth".
And, by jings, _he_ begins to cry.
"Hold!
What do you mean"?
"Bilgewater, kin I trust you"?
says the old man, still sort of sobbing.
"To the bitter death"!
He took the old man by the hand and squeezed it, and says, "That secret of your being: speak"!
"Bilgewater, I am the late Dauphin"!
You bet you, Jim and me stared this time.
Then the duke says: "You are what"?
"Yes, my friend, it is too true--your eyes is lookin' at this very moment on the pore disappeared Dauphin, Looy the Seventeen, son of Looy the Sixteen and Marry Antonette".
"You!
At your age!
No!
You mean you're the late Charlemagne; you must be six or seven hundred years old, at the very least".
"Trouble has done it, Bilgewater, trouble has done it; trouble has brung these gray hairs and this premature balditude.
Yes, gentlemen, you see before you, in blue jeans and misery, the wanderin', exiled, trampled-on, and sufferin' rightful King of France".
Well, he cried and took on so that me and Jim didn't know hardly what to do, we was so sorry--and so glad and proud we'd got him with us, too.
So we set in, like we done before with the duke, and tried to comfort _him_.
But he said it warn't no use, nothing but to be dead and done with it all could do him any good; though he said it often made him feel easier and better for a while if people treated him according to his rights, and got down on one knee to speak to him,
So Jim and me set to majestying him, and doing this and that and t'other for him, and standing up till he told us we might set down.
This done him heaps of good, and so he got cheerful and comfortable.
But the duke kind of soured on him, and didn't look a bit satisfied with the way things was going; still, the king acted real friendly towards him, and said the duke's great-grandfather and all the other Dukes of Bilgewater was a good deal thought of by
It 'll only make things oncomfortable.
It ain't my fault I warn't born a duke, it ain't your fault you warn't born a king--so what's the use to worry?
Make the best o' things the way you find 'em, says I--that's my motto.
This ain't no bad thing that we've struck here--plenty grub and an easy life--come, give us your hand, duke, and le's all be friends".
The duke done it, and Jim and me was pretty glad to see it.
It took away all the uncomfortableness and we felt mighty good over it, because it would a been a miserable business to have any unfriendliness on the raft; for what you want, above all things, on a raft, is for everybody to be satisfied, and feel right
It didn't take me long to make up my mind that these liars warn't no kings nor dukes at all, but just low-down humbugs and frauds.
But I never said nothing, never let on; kept it to myself; it's the best way; then you don't have no quarrels, and don't get into no trouble.
If they wanted us to call them kings and dukes, I hadn't no objections, 'long as it would keep peace in the family; and it warn't no use to tell Jim, so I didn't tell him.
If I never learnt nothing else out of pap, I learnt that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let them have their own way.
CHAPTER XX.
THEY asked us considerable many questions; wanted to know what we covered up the raft that way for, and laid by in the daytime instead of running--was Jim a runaway nigger?
Says I: "Goodness sakes!
would a runaway nigger run _south_"?
No, they allowed he wouldn't.
I had to account for things some way, so I says: "My folks was living in Pike County, in Missouri, where I was born, and they all died off but me and pa and my brother Ike.
Pa, he 'lowed he'd break up and go down and live with Uncle Ben, who's got a little one-horse place on the river, forty-four mile below Orleans.
Pa was pretty poor, and had some debts; so when he'd squared up there warn't nothing left but sixteen dollars and our nigger, Jim.
That warn't enough to take us fourteen hundred mile, deck passage nor no other way.
Well, when the river rose pa had a streak of luck one day; he ketched this piece of a raft; so we reckoned we'd go down to Orleans on it.
Pa's luck didn't hold out; a steamboat run over the forrard corner of the raft one night, and we all went overboard and dove under the wheel; Jim and me come up all right, but pa was drunk, and Ike was only four years old, so they never come up no more.
Well, for the next day or two we had considerable trouble, because people was always coming out in skiffs and trying to take Jim away from me, saying they believed he was a runaway nigger.
We don't run daytimes no more now; nights they don't bother us".
The duke says: "Leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the daytime if we want to.
I'll think the thing over--I'll invent a plan that'll fix it.
We'll let it alone for to-day, because of course we don't want to go by that town yonder in daylight--it mightn't be healthy".
Towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain; the heat lightning was squirting around low down in the sky, and the leaves was beginning to shiver--it was going to be pretty ugly, it was easy to see that.
So the duke and the king went to overhauling our wigwam, to see what the beds was like.
My bed was a straw tick better than Jim's, which was a corn-shuck tick; there's always cobs around about in a shuck tick, and they poke into you and hurt; and when you roll over the dry shucks sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves; it
Well, the duke allowed he would take my bed; but the king allowed he wouldn't.
He says: "I should a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested to you that a corn-shuck bed warn't just fitten for me to sleep on.
Your Grace 'll take the shuck bed yourself".
Jim and me was in a sweat again for a minute, being afraid there was going to be some more trouble amongst them; so we was pretty glad when the duke says: "'Tis my fate to be always ground into the mire under the iron heel of oppression.
Misfortune has broken my once haughty spirit; I yield, I submit; 'tis my fate.
I am alone in the world--let me suffer; can bear it".
We got away as soon as it was good and dark.
The king told us to stand well out towards the middle of the river, and not show a light till we got a long ways below the town.
We come in sight of the little bunch of lights by and by--that was the town, you know--and slid by, about a half a mile out, all right.
When we was three-quarters of a mile below we hoisted up our signal lantern; and about ten o'clock it come on to rain and blow and thunder and lighten like everything; so the king told us to both stay on watch till the weather got better; then him and
It was my watch below till twelve, but I wouldn't a turned in anyway if I'd had a bed, because a body don't see such a storm as that every day in the week, not by a long sight.
My souls, how the wind did scream along!
And every second or two there'd come a glare that lit up the white-caps for a half a mile around, and you'd see the islands looking dusty through the rain, and the trees thrashing around in the wind; then comes a H-WHACK!
--bum!
bum!
bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum--and the thunder would go rumbling and grumbling away, and quit--and then RIP comes another flash and another sockdolager.
The waves most washed me off the raft sometimes, but I hadn't any clothes on, and didn't mind.
We didn't have no trouble about snags; the lightning was glaring and flittering around so constant that we could see them plenty soon enough to throw her head this way or that and miss them.
I had the middle watch, you know, but I was pretty sleepy by that time, so Jim he said he would stand the first half of it for me; he was always mighty good that way, Jim was.
I crawled into the wigwam, but the king and the duke had their legs sprawled around so there warn't no show for me; so I laid outside--I didn't mind the rain, because it was warm, and the waves warn't running so high now.
About two they come up again, though, and Jim was going to call me; but he changed his mind, because he reckoned they warn't high enough yet to do any harm; but he was mistaken about that, for pretty soon all of a sudden along comes a regular ripper and
It most killed Jim a-laughing.
He was the easiest nigger to laugh that ever was, anyway.
I took the watch, and Jim he laid down and snored away; and by and by the storm let up for good and all; and the first cabin-light that showed I rousted him out, and we slid the raft into hiding quarters for the day.
The king got out an old ratty deck of cards after breakfast, and him and the duke played seven-up a while, five cents a game.
Then they got tired of it, and allowed they would "lay out a campaign," as they called it.
The duke went down into his carpet-bag, and fetched up a lot of little printed bills and read them out loud.
One bill said, "The celebrated Dr. Armand de Montalban, of Paris," would "lecture on the Science of Phrenology" at such and such a place, on the blank day of blank, at ten cents admission, and "furnish charts of character at twenty-five cents apiece".
The duke said that was _him_.
In another bill he was the "world-renowned Shakespearian tragedian, Garrick the Younger, of Drury Lane, London".
In other bills he had a lot of other names and done other wonderful things, like finding water and gold with a "divining-rod," "dissipating witch spells," and so on.
By and by he says: "But the histrionic muse is the darling.
Have you ever trod the boards, Royalty"?
"No," says the king.
"You shall, then, before you're three days older, Fallen Grandeur," says the duke.
"The first good town we come to we'll hire a hall and do the sword fight in Richard III.
and the balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet.
How does that strike you"?
"I'm in, up to the hub, for anything that will pay, Bilgewater; but, you see, I don't know nothing about play-actin', and hain't ever seen much of it.
I was too small when pap used to have 'em at the palace.
Do you reckon you can learn me"?
"Easy"!
"All right.
I'm jist a-freezn' for something fresh, anyway.
Le's commence right away".
So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was and who Juliet was, and said he was used to being Romeo, so the king could be Juliet.
"But if Juliet's such a young gal, duke, my peeled head and my white whiskers is goin' to look oncommon odd on her, maybe".
"No, don't you worry; these country jakes won't ever think of that.
Besides, you know, you'll be in costume, and that makes all the difference in the world; Juliet's in a balcony, enjoying the moonlight before she goes to bed, and she's got on her night-gown and her ruffled nightcap.
Here are the costumes for the parts".
He got out two or three curtain-calico suits, which he said was meedyevil armor for Richard III.
and t'other chap, and a long white cotton nightshirt and a ruffled nightcap to match.
The king was satisfied; so the duke got out his book and read the parts over in the most splendid spread-eagle way, prancing around and acting at the same time, to show how it had got to be done; then he give the book to the king and told him to get his
There was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend, and after dinner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run in daylight without it being dangersome for Jim; so he allowed he would go down to the town and fix that thing.
The king allowed he would go, too, and see if he couldn't strike something.
We was out of coffee, so Jim said I better go along with them in the canoe and get some.
When we got there there warn't nobody stirring; streets empty, and perfectly dead and still, like Sunday.
We found a sick nigger sunning himself in a back yard, and he said everybody that warn't too young or too sick or too old was gone to camp-meeting, about two mile back in the woods.
The king got the directions, and allowed he'd go and work that camp-meeting for all it was worth, and I might go, too.
The duke said what he was after was a printing-office.
We found it; a little bit of a concern, up over a carpenter shop--carpenters and printers all gone to the meeting, and no doors locked.
It was a dirty, littered-up place, and had ink marks, and handbills with pictures of horses and runaway niggers on them, all over the walls.
The duke shed his coat and said he was all right now.
So me and the king lit out for the camp-meeting.
We got there in about a half an hour fairly dripping, for it was a most awful hot day.
There was as much as a thousand people there from twenty mile around.
The woods was full of teams and wagons, hitched everywheres, feeding out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep off the flies.
There was sheds made out of poles and roofed over with branches, where they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell, and piles of watermelons and green corn and such-like truck.
The preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds, only they was bigger and held crowds of people.
The benches was made out of outside slabs of logs, with holes bored in the round side to drive sticks into for legs.
They didn't have no backs.
The preachers had high platforms to stand on at one end of the sheds.
The women had on sun-bonnets; and some had linsey-woolsey frocks, some gingham ones, and a few of the young ones had on calico.
Some of the young men was barefooted, and some of the children didn't have on any clothes but just a tow-linen shirt.
Some of the old women was knitting, and some of the young folks was courting on the sly.
The first shed we come to the preacher was lining out a hymn.
He lined out two lines, everybody sung it, and it was kind of grand to hear it, there was so many of them and they done it in such a rousing way; then he lined out two more for them to sing--and so on.
The people woke up more and more, and sung louder and louder; and towards the end some begun to groan, and some begun to shout.
Then the preacher begun to preach, and begun in earnest, too; and went weaving first to one side of the platform and then the other, and then a-leaning down over the front of it, with his arms and his body going all the time, and shouting his words out
Look upon it and live"!
And people would shout out, "Glory!
--A-a-_men_"!
And so he went on, and the people groaning and crying and saying amen: "Oh, come to the mourners' bench!
come, black with sin!
(_Amen_!
) come, sick and sore!
(_Amen_!
) come, lame and halt and blind!
(_Amen_!
) come, pore and needy, sunk in shame!
(_A-A-Men_!
) come, all that's worn and soiled and suffering!
--come with a broken spirit!
come with a contrite heart!
come in your rags and sin and dirt!
the waters that cleanse is free, the door of heaven stands open--oh, enter in and be at rest"!
(_A-A-Men_!
_Glory, Glory Hallelujah!
_) And so on.
You couldn't make out what the preacher said any more, on account of the shouting and crying.
Folks got up everywheres in the crowd, and worked their way just by main strength to the mourners' bench, with the tears running down their faces; and when all the mourners had got up there to the front benches in a crowd, they sung and shouted and flung
Well, the first I knowed the king got a-going, and you could hear him over everybody; and next he went a-charging up on to the platform, and the preacher he begged him to speak to the people, and he done it.
He told them he was a pirate--been a pirate for thirty years out in the Indian Ocean--and his crew was thinned out considerable last spring in a fight, and he was home now to take out some fresh men, and thanks to goodness he'd been robbed last night and
And then he busted into tears, and so did everybody.
Then somebody sings out, "Take up a collection for him, take up a collection"!
Well, a half a dozen made a jump to do it, but somebody sings out, "Let _him_ pass the hat around"!
Then everybody said it, the preacher too.
So the king went all through the crowd with his hat swabbing his eyes, and blessing the people and praising them and thanking them for being so good to the poor pirates away off there; and every little while the prettiest kind of girls, with the tears
When we got back to the raft and he come to count up he found he had collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents.
And then he had fetched away a three-gallon jug of whisky, too, that he found under a wagon when he was starting home through the woods.
The king said, take it all around, it laid over any day he'd ever put in in the missionarying line.
He said it warn't no use talking, heathens don't amount to shucks alongside of pirates to work a camp-meeting with.
The duke was thinking _he'd_ been doing pretty well till the king come to show up, but after that he didn't think so so much.
He had set up and printed off two little jobs for farmers in that printing-office--horse bills--and took the money, four dollars.
And he had got in ten dollars' worth of advertisements for the paper, which he said he would put in for four dollars if they would pay in advance--so they done it.
The price of the paper was two dollars a year, but he took in three subscriptions for half a dollar apiece on condition of them paying him in advance; they were going to pay in cordwood and onions as usual, but he said he had just bought the concern and
He set up a little piece of poetry, which he made, himself, out of his own head--three verses--kind of sweet and saddish--the name of it was, "Yes, crush, cold world, this breaking heart"--and he left that all set up and ready to print in the paper, and
Well, he took in nine dollars and a half, and said he'd done a pretty square day's work for it.
Then he showed us another little job he'd printed and hadn't charged for, because it was for us.
It had a picture of a runaway nigger with a bundle on a stick over his shoulder, and "$200 reward" under it.
The reading was all about Jim, and just described him to a dot.
It said he run away from St. Jacques' plantation, forty mile below New Orleans, last winter, and likely went north, and whoever would catch him and send him back he could have the reward and expenses.
"Now," says the duke, "after to-night we can run in the daytime if we want to.
Whenever we see anybody coming we can tie Jim hand and foot with a rope, and lay him in the wigwam and show this handbill and say we captured him up the river, and were too poor to travel on a steamboat, so we got this little raft on credit from our
Handcuffs and chains would look still better on Jim, but it wouldn't go well with the story of us being so poor.
Too much like jewelry.
Ropes are the correct thing--we must preserve the unities, as we say on the boards".
We all said the duke was pretty smart, and there couldn't be no trouble about running daytimes.
We judged we could make miles enough that night to get out of the reach of the powwow we reckoned the duke's work in the printing office was going to make in that little town; then we could boom right along if we wanted to.
We laid low and kept still, and never shoved out till nearly ten o'clock; then we slid by, pretty wide away from the town, and didn't hoist our lantern till we was clear out of sight of it.
When Jim called me to take the watch at four in the morning, he says: "Huck, does you reck'n we gwyne to run acrost any mo' kings on dis trip"?
"No," I says, "I reckon not".
"Well," says he, "dat's all right, den.
I doan' mine one er two kings, but dat's enough.
Dis one's powerful drunk, en de duke ain' much better".
I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French, so he could hear what it was like; but he said he had been in this country so long, and had so much trouble, he'd forgot it.
CHAPTER XXI.
IT was after sun-up now, but we went right on and didn't tie up.
The king and the duke turned out by and by looking pretty rusty; but after they'd jumped overboard and took a swim it chippered them up a good deal.
After breakfast the king he took a seat on the corner of the raft, and pulled off his boots and rolled up his britches, and let his legs dangle in the water, so as to be comfortable, and lit his pipe, and went to getting his Romeo and Juliet by heart.
When he had got it pretty good him and the duke begun to practice it together.
The duke had to learn him over and over again how to say every speech; and he made him sigh, and put his hand on his heart, and after a while he said he done it pretty well; "only," he says, "you mustn't bellow out _Romeo_!
that way, like a bull--you must say it soft and sick and languishy, so--R-o-o-meo!
that is the idea; for Juliet's a dear sweet mere child of a girl, you know, and she doesn't bray like a jackass".
Well, next they got out a couple of long swords that the duke made out of oak laths, and begun to practice the sword fight--the duke called himself Richard III.
; and the way they laid on and pranced around the raft was grand to see.
But by and by the king tripped and fell overboard, and after that they took a rest, and had a talk about all kinds of adventures they'd had in other times along the river.
After dinner the duke says: "Well, Capet, we'll want to make this a first-class show, you know, so I guess we'll add a little more to it.
We want a little something to answer encores with, anyway".
"What's onkores, Bilgewater"?
The duke told him, and then says: "I'll answer by doing the Highland fling or the sailor's hornpipe; and you--well, let me see--oh, I've got it--you can do Hamlet's soliloquy".
"Hamlet's which"?
"Hamlet's soliloquy, you know; the most celebrated thing in Shakespeare.
Ah, it's sublime, sublime!
Always fetches the house.
I haven't got it in the book--I've only got one volume--but I reckon I can piece it out from memory.
I'll just walk up and down a minute, and see if I can call it back from recollection's vaults".
So he went to marching up and down, thinking, and frowning horrible every now and then; then he would hoist up his eyebrows; next he would squeeze his hand on his forehead and stagger back and kind of moan; next he would sigh, and next he'd let on to drop
It was beautiful to see him.
By and by he got it.
He told us to give attention.
Then he strikes a most noble attitude, with one leg shoved forwards, and his arms stretched away up, and his head tilted back, looking up at the sky; and then he begins to rip and rave and grit his teeth; and after that, all through his speech, he
This is the speech--I learned it, easy enough, while he was learning it to the king: To be, or not to be; that is the bare bodkin That makes calamity of so long life; For who would fardels bear, till Birnam Wood do come to Dunsinane, But that the fear of
There's the respect must give us pause: Wake Duncan with thy knocking!
I would thou couldst; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, The law's delay, and the quietus which his pangs might take.
In the dead waste and middle of the night, when churchyards yawn In customary suits of solemn black, But that the undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler returns, Breathes forth contagion on the world, And thus the native hue of resolution, like
And all the clouds that lowered o'er our housetops, With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.
'Tis a consummation devoutly to be wished.
But soft you, the fair Ophelia: Ope not thy ponderous and marble jaws.
But get thee to a nunnery&mdash;go!
Well, the old man he liked that speech, and he mighty soon got it so he could do it first rate.
It seemed like he was just born for it; and when he had his hand in and was excited, it was perfectly lovely the way he would rip and tear and rair up behind when he was getting it off.
The first chance we got, the duke he had some show bills printed; and after that, for two or three days as we floated along, the raft was a most uncommon lively place, for there warn't nothing but sword-fighting and rehearsing--as the duke called it--going
One morning, when we was pretty well down the State of Arkansaw, we come in sight of a little one-horse town in a big bend; so we tied up about three-quarters of a mile above it, in the mouth of a crick which was shut in like a tunnel by the cypress trees,
We struck it mighty lucky; there was going to be a circus there that afternoon, and the country people was already beginning to come in, in all kinds of old shackly wagons, and on horses.
The circus would leave before night, so our show would have a pretty good chance.
The duke he hired the court house, and we went around and stuck up our bills.
They read like this: Shaksperean Revival!
!
!
Wonderful Attraction!
For One Night Only!
The world renowned tragedians, David Garrick the younger, of Drury Lane Theatre, London, and Edmund Kean the elder, of the Royal Haymarket Theatre, Whitechapel, Pudding Lane, Piccadilly, London, and the Royal Continental Theatres, in their sublime
!
!
Romeo...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
.
.
Mr. Garrick.
Juliet...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
.
Mr. Kean.
Assisted by the whole strength of the company!
New costumes, new scenery, new appointments!
Also: The thrilling, masterly, and blood-curdling Broad-sword conflict In Richard III.
!
!
!
Richard III...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
.
.
Mr. Garrick.
Richmond...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
.
.
Mr. Kean.
also: (by special request,) Hamlet's Immortal Soliloquy!
!
By the Illustrious Kean!
Done by him 300 consecutive nights in Paris!
For One Night Only, On account of imperative European engagements!
Admission 25 cents; children and servants, 10 cents.
Then we went loafing around the town.
The stores and houses was most all old shackly dried-up frame concerns that hadn't ever been painted; they was set up three or four foot above ground on stilts, so as to be out of reach of the water when the river was overflowed.
The houses had little gardens around them, but they didn't seem to raise hardly anything in them but jimpson weeds, and sunflowers, and ash-piles, and old curled-up boots and shoes, and pieces of bottles, and rags, and played-out tin-ware.
The fences was made of different kinds of boards, nailed on at different times; and they leaned every which-way, and had gates that didn't generly have but one hinge--a leather one.
Some of the fences had been whitewashed, some time or another, but the duke said it was in Clumbus's time, like enough.
There was generly hogs in the garden, and people driving them out.
All the stores was along one street.
They had white domestic awnings in front, and the country people hitched their horses to the awning-posts.
There was empty drygoods boxes under the awnings, and loafers roosting on them all day long, whittling them with their Barlow knives; and chawing tobacco, and gaping and yawning and stretching--a mighty ornery lot.
They generly had on yellow straw hats most as wide as an umbrella, but didn't wear no coats nor waistcoats, they called one another Bill, and Buck, and Hank, and Joe, and Andy, and talked lazy and drawly, and used considerable many cuss words.
There was as many as one loafer leaning up against every awning-post, and he most always had his hands in his britches-pockets, except when he fetched them out to lend a chaw of tobacco or scratch.
What a body was hearing amongst them all the time was: "Gimme a chaw 'v tobacker, Hank".
"Cain't; I hain't got but one chaw left.
Ask Bill".
Maybe Bill he gives him a chaw; maybe he lies and says he ain't got none.
Some of them kinds of loafers never has a cent in the world, nor a chaw of tobacco of their own.
They get all their chawing by borrowing; they say to a fellow, "I wisht you'd len' me a chaw, Jack, I jist this minute give Ben Thompson the last chaw I had"--which is a lie pretty much everytime; it don't fool nobody but a stranger; but Jack ain't no
So did your sister's cat's grandmother.
You pay me back the chaws you've awready borry'd off'n me, Lafe Buckner, then I'll loan you one or two ton of it, and won't charge you no back intrust, nuther".
"Well, I _did_ pay you back some of it wunst".
"Yes, you did--'bout six chaws.
You borry'd store tobacker and paid back nigger-head".
Store tobacco is flat black plug, but these fellows mostly chaws the natural leaf twisted.
When they borrow a chaw they don't generly cut it off with a knife, but set the plug in between their teeth, and gnaw with their teeth and tug at the plug with their hands till they get it in two; then sometimes the one that owns the tobacco looks
All the streets and lanes was just mud; they warn't nothing else _but_ mud--mud as black as tar and nigh about a foot deep in some places, and two or three inches deep in _all_ the places.
The hogs loafed and grunted around everywheres.
You'd see a muddy sow and a litter of pigs come lazying along the street and whollop herself right down in the way, where folks had to walk around her, and she'd stretch out and shut her eyes and wave her ears whilst the pigs was milking her, and look as
And pretty soon you'd hear a loafer sing out, "Hi!
_so_ boy!
sick him, Tige"!
and away the sow would go, squealing most horrible, with a dog or two swinging to each ear, and three or four dozen more a-coming; and then you would see all the loafers get up and watch the thing out of sight, and laugh at the fun and look grateful for
Then they'd settle back again till there was a dog fight.
There couldn't anything wake them up all over, and make them happy all over, like a dog fight--unless it might be putting turpentine on a stray dog and setting fire to him, or tying a tin pan to his tail and see him run himself to death.
On the river front some of the houses was sticking out over the bank, and they was bowed and bent, and about ready to tumble in.
The people had moved out of them.
The bank was caved away under one corner of some others, and that corner was hanging over.
People lived in them yet, but it was dangersome, because sometimes a strip of land as wide as a house caves in at a time.
Sometimes a belt of land a quarter of a mile deep will start in and cave along and cave along till it all caves into the river in one summer.
Such a town as that has to be always moving back, and back, and back, because the river's always gnawing at it.
The nearer it got to noon that day the thicker and thicker was the wagons and horses in the streets, and more coming all the time.
Families fetched their dinners with them from the country, and eat them in the wagons.
There was considerable whisky drinking going on, and I seen three fights.
By and by somebody sings out: "Here comes old Boggs!
--in from the country for his little old monthly drunk; here he comes, boys"!
All the loafers looked glad; I reckoned they was used to having fun out of Boggs.
One of them says: "Wonder who he's a-gwyne to chaw up this time.
If he'd a-chawed up all the men he's ben a-gwyne to chaw up in the last twenty year he'd have considerable ruputation now".
Another one says, "I wisht old Boggs 'd threaten me, 'cuz then I'd know I warn't gwyne to die for a thousan' year".
Boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse, whooping and yelling like an Injun, and singing out: "Cler the track, thar.
I'm on the waw-path, and the price uv coffins is a-gwyne to raise".
He was drunk, and weaving about in his saddle; he was over fifty year old, and had a very red face.
Everybody yelled at him and laughed at him and sassed him, and he sassed back, and said he'd attend to them and lay them out in their regular turns, but he couldn't wait now because he'd come to town to kill old Colonel Sherburn, and his motto was, "Meat
He see me, and rode up and says: "Whar'd you come f'm, boy?
You prepared to die"?
Then he rode on.
I was scared, but a man says: "He don't mean nothing; he's always a-carryin' on like that when he's drunk.
He's the best naturedest old fool in Arkansaw--never hurt nobody, drunk nor sober".
Boggs rode up before the biggest store in town, and bent his head down so he could see under the curtain of the awning and yells: "Come out here, Sherburn!
Come out and meet the man you've swindled.
You're the houn' I'm after, and I'm a-gwyne to have you, too"!
And so he went on, calling Sherburn everything he could lay his tongue to, and the whole street packed with people listening and laughing and going on.
By and by a proud-looking man about fifty-five--and he was a heap the best dressed man in that town, too--steps out of the store, and the crowd drops back on each side to let him come.
He says to Boggs, mighty ca'm and slow--he says: "I'm tired of this, but I'll endure it till one o'clock.
Till one o'clock, mind--no longer.
If you open your mouth against me only once after that time you can't travel so far but I will find you".
Then he turns and goes in.
The crowd looked mighty sober; nobody stirred, and there warn't no more laughing.
Boggs rode off blackguarding Sherburn as loud as he could yell, all down the street; and pretty soon back he comes and stops before the store, still keeping it up.
Some men crowded around him and tried to get him to shut up, but he wouldn't; they told him it would be one o'clock in about fifteen minutes, and so he _must_ go home--he must go right away.
But it didn't do no good.
He cussed away with all his might, and throwed his hat down in the mud and rode over it, and pretty soon away he went a-raging down the street again, with his gray hair a-flying.
Everybody that could get a chance at him tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they could lock him up and get him sober; but it warn't no use--up the street he would tear again, and give Sherburn another cussing.
By and by somebody says: "Go for his daughter!
--quick, go for his daughter; sometimes he'll listen to her.
If anybody can persuade him, she can".
So somebody started on a run.
I walked down street a ways and stopped.
In about five or ten minutes here comes Boggs again, but not on his horse.
He was a-reeling across the street towards me, bare-headed, with a friend on both sides of him a-holt of his arms and hurrying him along.
He was quiet, and looked uneasy; and he warn't hanging back any, but was doing some of the hurrying himself.
Somebody sings out: "Boggs"!
I looked over there to see who said it, and it was that Colonel Sherburn.
He was standing perfectly still in the street, and had a pistol raised in his right hand--not aiming it, but holding it out with the barrel tilted up towards the sky.
The same second I see a young girl coming on the run, and two men with her.
Boggs and the men turned round to see who called him, and when they see the pistol the men jumped to one side, and the pistol-barrel come down slow and steady to a level--both barrels cocked.
Boggs throws up both of his hands and says, "O Lord, don't shoot"!
Bang!
goes the first shot, and he staggers back, clawing at the air--bang!
goes the second one, and he tumbles backwards on to the ground, heavy and solid, with his arms spread out.
That young girl screamed out and comes rushing, and down she throws herself on her father, crying, and saying, "Oh, he's killed him, he's killed him"!
The crowd closed up around them, and shouldered and jammed one another, with their necks stretched, trying to see, and people on the inside trying to shove them back and shouting, "Back, back!
give him air, give him air"!
Colonel Sherburn he tossed his pistol on to the ground, and turned around on his heels and walked off.
They took Boggs to a little drug store, the crowd pressing around just the same, and the whole town following, and I rushed and got a good place at the window, where I was close to him and could see in.
They laid him on the floor and put one large Bible under his head, and opened another one and spread it on his breast; but they tore open his shirt first, and I seen where one of the bullets went in.
He made about a dozen long gasps, his breast lifting the Bible up when he drawed in his breath, and letting it down again when he breathed it out--and after that he laid still; he was dead.
Then they pulled his daughter away from him, screaming and crying, and took her off.
She was about sixteen, and very sweet and gentle looking, but awful pale and scared.
Well, pretty soon the whole town was there, squirming and scrouging and pushing and shoving to get at the window and have a look, but people that had the places wouldn't give them up, and folks behind them was saying all the time, "Say, now, you've looked
There was considerable jawing back, so I slid out, thinking maybe there was going to be trouble.
The streets was full, and everybody was excited.
Everybody that seen the shooting was telling how it happened, and there was a big crowd packed around each one of these fellows, stretching their necks and listening.
One long, lanky man, with long hair and a big white fur stovepipe hat on the back of his head, and a crooked-handled cane, marked out the places on the ground where Boggs stood and where Sherburn stood, and the people following him around from one place
and then fetched his cane down slow to a level, and says "Bang"!
staggered backwards, says "Bang"!
again, and fell down flat on his back.
The people that had seen the thing said he done it perfect; said it was just exactly the way it all happened.
Then as much as a dozen people got out their bottles and treated him.
Well, by and by somebody said Sherburn ought to be lynched.
In about a minute everybody was saying it; so away they went, mad and yelling, and snatching down every clothes-line they come to to do the hanging with.
CHAPTER XXII.
THEY swarmed up towards Sherburn's house, a-whooping and raging like Injuns, and everything had to clear the way or get run over and tromped to mush, and it was awful to see.
Children was heeling it ahead of the mob, screaming and trying to get out of the way; and every window along the road was full of women's heads, and there was nigger boys in every tree, and bucks and wenches looking over every fence; and as soon as the
Lots of the women and girls was crying and taking on, scared most to death.
They swarmed up in front of Sherburn's palings as thick as they could jam together, and you couldn't hear yourself think for the noise.
It was a little twenty-foot yard.
Some sung out "Tear down the fence!
tear down the fence"!
Then there was a racket of ripping and tearing and smashing, and down she goes, and the front wall of the crowd begins to roll in like a wave.
Just then Sherburn steps out on to the roof of his little front porch, with a double-barrel gun in his hand, and takes his stand, perfectly ca'm and deliberate, not saying a word.
The racket stopped, and the wave sucked back.
Sherburn never said a word--just stood there, looking down.
The stillness was awful creepy and uncomfortable.
Sherburn run his eye slow along the crowd; and wherever it struck the people tried a little to out-gaze him, but they couldn't; they dropped their eyes and looked sneaky.
Then pretty soon Sherburn sort of laughed; not the pleasant kind, but the kind that makes you feel like when you are eating bread that's got sand in it.
Then he says, slow and scornful: "The idea of _you_ lynching anybody!
It's amusing.
The idea of you thinking you had pluck enough to lynch a _man_!
Because you're brave enough to tar and feather poor friendless cast-out women that come along here, did that make you think you had grit enough to lay your hands on a _man_?
Why, a _man's_ safe in the hands of ten thousand of your kind--as long as it's daytime and you're not behind him.
"Do I know you?
I know you clear through.
I was born and raised in the South, and I've lived in the North; so I know the average all around.
The average man's a coward.
In the North he lets anybody walk over him that wants to, and goes home and prays for a humble spirit to bear it.
In the South one man all by himself, has stopped a stage full of men in the daytime, and robbed the lot.
Your newspapers call you a brave people so much that you think you are braver than any other people--whereas you're just _as_ brave, and no braver.
Why don't your juries hang murderers?
Because they're afraid the man's friends will shoot them in the back, in the dark--and it's just what they _would_ do.
"So they always acquit; and then a _man_ goes in the night, with a hundred masked cowards at his back and lynches the rascal.
Your mistake is, that you didn't bring a man with you; that's one mistake, and the other is that you didn't come in the dark and fetch your masks.
You brought _part_ of a man--Buck Harkness, there--and if you hadn't had him to start you, you'd a taken it out in blowing.
"You didn't want to come.
The average man don't like trouble and danger.
_You_ don't like trouble and danger.
But if only _half_ a man--like Buck Harkness, there--shouts 'Lynch him!
lynch him!
' you're afraid to back down--afraid you'll be found out to be what you are--_cowards_--and so you raise a yell, and hang yourselves on to that half-a-man's coat-tail, and come raging up here, swearing what big things you're going to do.
The pitifulest thing out is a mob; that's what an army is--a mob; they don't fight with courage that's born in them, but with courage that's borrowed from their mass, and from their officers.
But a mob without any _man_ at the head of it is _beneath_ pitifulness.
Now the thing for _you_ to do is to droop your tails and go home and crawl in a hole.
If any real lynching's going to be done it will be done in the dark, Southern fashion; and when they come they'll bring their masks, and fetch a _man_ along.
Now _leave_--and take your half-a-man with you"--tossing his gun up across his left arm and cocking it when he says this.
The crowd washed back sudden, and then broke all apart, and went tearing off every which way, and Buck Harkness he heeled it after them, looking tolerable cheap.
I could a stayed if I wanted to, but I didn't want to.
I went to the circus and loafed around the back side till the watchman went by, and then dived in under the tent.
I had my twenty-dollar gold piece and some other money, but I reckoned I better save it, because there ain't no telling how soon you are going to need it, away from home and amongst strangers that way.
You can't be too careful.
I ain't opposed to spending money on circuses when there ain't no other way, but there ain't no use in _wasting_ it on them.
It was a real bully circus.
It was the splendidest sight that ever was when they all come riding in, two and two, a gentleman and lady, side by side, the men just in their drawers and undershirts, and no shoes nor stirrups, and resting their hands on their thighs easy and
It was a powerful fine sight; I never see anything so lovely.
And then one by one they got up and stood, and went a-weaving around the ring so gentle and wavy and graceful, the men looking ever so tall and airy and straight, with their heads bobbing and skimming along, away up there under the tent-roof, and every
And then faster and faster they went, all of them dancing, first one foot out in the air and then the other, the horses leaning more and more, and the ringmaster going round and round the center-pole, cracking his whip and shouting "Hi!
--hi"!
and the clown cracking jokes behind him; and by and by all hands dropped the reins, and every lady put her knuckles on her hips and every gentleman folded his arms, and then how the horses did lean over and hump themselves!
And so one after the other they all skipped off into the ring, and made the sweetest bow I ever see, and then scampered out, and everybody clapped their hands and went just about wild.
Well, all through the circus they done the most astonishing things; and all the time that clown carried on so it most killed the people.
The ringmaster couldn't ever say a word to him but he was back at him quick as a wink with the funniest things a body ever said; and how he ever _could_ think of so many of them, and so sudden and so pat, was what I couldn't noway understand.
Why, I couldn't a thought of them in a year.
And by and by a drunk man tried to get into the ring--said he wanted to ride; said he could ride as well as anybody that ever was.
They argued and tried to keep him out, but he wouldn't listen, and the whole show come to a standstill.
Then the people begun to holler at him and make fun of him, and that made him mad, and he begun to rip and tear; so that stirred up the people, and a lot of men begun to pile down off of the benches and swarm towards the ring, saying, "Knock him down!
throw him out"!
and one or two women begun to scream.
So, then, the ringmaster he made a little speech, and said he hoped there wouldn't be no disturbance, and if the man would promise he wouldn't make no more trouble he would let him ride if he thought he could stay on the horse.
So everybody laughed and said all right, and the man got on.
The minute he was on, the horse begun to rip and tear and jump and cavort around, with two circus men hanging on to his bridle trying to hold him, and the drunk man hanging on to his neck, and his heels flying in the air every jump, and the whole crowd of
And at last, sure enough, all the circus men could do, the horse broke loose, and away he went like the very nation, round and round the ring, with that sot laying down on him and hanging to his neck, with first one leg hanging most to the ground on one
It warn't funny to me, though; I was all of a tremble to see his danger.
But pretty soon he struggled up astraddle and grabbed the bridle, a-reeling this way and that; and the next minute he sprung up and dropped the bridle and stood!
and the horse a-going like a house afire too.
He just stood up there, a-sailing around as easy and comfortable as if he warn't ever drunk in his life--and then he begun to pull off his clothes and sling them.
He shed them so thick they kind of clogged up the air, and altogether he shed seventeen suits.
And, then, there he was, slim and handsome, and dressed the gaudiest and prettiest you ever saw, and he lit into that horse with his whip and made him fairly hum--and finally skipped off, and made his bow and danced off to the dressing-room, and everybody
Then the ringmaster he see how he had been fooled, and he _was_ the sickest ringmaster you ever see, I reckon.
Why, it was one of his own men!
He had got up that joke all out of his own head, and never let on to nobody.
Well, I felt sheepish enough to be took in so, but I wouldn't a been in that ringmaster's place, not for a thousand dollars.
I don't know; there may be bullier circuses than what that one was, but I never struck them yet.
Anyways, it was plenty good enough for _me_; and wherever I run across it, it can have all of _my_ custom every time.
Well, that night we had _our_ show; but there warn't only about twelve people there--just enough to pay expenses.
And they laughed all the time, and that made the duke mad; and everybody left, anyway, before the show was over, but one boy which was asleep.
So the duke said these Arkansaw lunkheads couldn't come up to Shakespeare; what they wanted was low comedy--and maybe something ruther worse than low comedy, he reckoned.
He said he could size their style.
So next morning he got some big sheets of wrapping paper and some black paint, and drawed off some handbills, and stuck them up all over the village.
The bills said: CHAPTER XXIII.
WELL, all day him and the king was hard at it, rigging up a stage and a curtain and a row of candles for footlights; and that night the house was jam full of men in no time.
When the place couldn't hold no more, the duke he quit tending door and went around the back way and come on to the stage and stood up before the curtain and made a little speech, and praised up this tragedy, and said it was the most thrillingest one
And--but never mind the rest of his outfit; it was just wild, but it was awful funny.
The people most killed themselves laughing; and when the king got done capering and capered off behind the scenes, they roared and clapped and stormed and haw-hawed till he come back and done it over again, and after that they made him do it another time.
Well, it would make a cow laugh to see the shines that old idiot cut.
Then the duke he lets the curtain down, and bows to the people, and says the great tragedy will be performed only two nights more, on accounts of pressing London engagements, where the seats is all sold already for it in Drury Lane; and then he makes them
Twenty people sings out: "What, is it over?
Is that _all_"?
The duke says yes.
Then there was a fine time.
Everybody sings out, "Sold"!
and rose up mad, and was a-going for that stage and them tragedians.
But a big, fine looking man jumps up on a bench and shouts: "Hold on!
Just a word, gentlemen".
They stopped to listen.
"We are sold--mighty badly sold.
But we don't want to be the laughing stock of this whole town, I reckon, and never hear the last of this thing as long as we live.
_No_.
What we want is to go out of here quiet, and talk this show up, and sell the _rest_ of the town!
Then we'll all be in the same boat.
Ain't that sensible"?
("You bet it is!
--the jedge is right"!
everybody sings out.
) "All right, then--not a word about any sell.
Go along home, and advise everybody to come and see the tragedy".
Next day you couldn't hear nothing around that town but how splendid that show was.
House was jammed again that night, and we sold this crowd the same way.
When me and the king and the duke got home to the raft we all had a supper; and by and by, about midnight, they made Jim and me back her out and float her down the middle of the river, and fetch her in and hide her about two mile below town.
The third night the house was crammed again--and they warn't new-comers this time, but people that was at the show the other two nights.
I stood by the duke at the door, and I see that every man that went in had his pockets bulging, or something muffled up under his coat--and I see it warn't no perfumery, neither, not by a long sight.
I smelt sickly eggs by the barrel, and rotten cabbages, and such things; and if I know the signs of a dead cat being around, and I bet I do, there was sixty-four of them went in.
I shoved in there for a minute, but it was too various for me; I couldn't stand it.
Well, when the place couldn't hold no more people the duke he give a fellow a quarter and told him to tend door for him a minute, and then he started around for the stage door, I after him; but the minute we turned the corner and was in the dark he says:
I done it, and he done the same.
We struck the raft at the same time, and in less than two seconds we was gliding down stream, all dark and still, and edging towards the middle of the river, nobody saying a word.
I reckoned the poor king was in for a gaudy time of it with the audience, but nothing of the sort; pretty soon he crawls out from under the wigwam, and says: "Well, how'd the old thing pan out this time, duke"?
He hadn't been up-town at all.
We never showed a light till we was about ten mile below the village.
Then we lit up and had a supper, and the king and the duke fairly laughed their bones loose over the way they'd served them people.
The duke says: "Greenhorns, flatheads!
I knew the first house would keep mum and let the rest of the town get roped in; and I knew they'd lay for us the third night, and consider it was _their_ turn now.
Well, it _is_ their turn, and I'd give something to know how much they'd take for it.
I _would_ just like to know how they're putting in their opportunity.
They can turn it into a picnic if they want to--they brought plenty provisions".
Them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixty-five dollars in that three nights.
I never see money hauled in by the wagon-load like that before.
By and by, when they was asleep and snoring, Jim says: "Don't it s'prise you de way dem kings carries on, Huck"?
"No," I says, "it don't".
"Why don't it, Huck"?
"Well, it don't, because it's in the breed.
I reckon they're all alike".
"But, Huck, dese kings o' ourn is reglar rapscallions; dat's jist what dey is; dey's reglar rapscallions".
"Well, that's what I'm a-saying; all kings is mostly rapscallions, as fur as I can make out".
"Is dat so"?
"You read about them once--you'll see.
Look at Henry the Eight; this 'n 's a Sunday-school Superintendent to _him_.
And look at Charles Second, and Louis Fourteen, and Louis Fifteen, and James Second, and Edward Second, and Richard Third, and forty more; besides all them Saxon heptarchies that used to rip around so in old times and raise Cain.
My, you ought to seen old Henry the Eight when he was in bloom.
He _was_ a blossom.
He used to marry a new wife every day, and chop off her head next morning.
And he would do it just as indifferent as if he was ordering up eggs.
'Fetch up Nell Gwynn,' he says.
They fetch her up.
Next morning, 'Chop off her head!
' And they chop it off.
'Fetch up Jane Shore,' he says; and up she comes, Next morning, 'Chop off her head'--and they chop it off.
'Ring up Fair Rosamun.
' Fair Rosamun answers the bell.
Next morning, 'Chop off her head.
' And he made every one of them tell him a tale every night; and he kept that up till he had hogged a thousand and one tales that way, and then he put them all in a book, and called it Domesday Book--which was a good name and stated the case.
You don't know kings, Jim, but I know them; and this old rip of ourn is one of the cleanest I've struck in history.
Well, Henry he takes a notion he wants to get up some trouble with this country.
How does he go at it--give notice?
--give the country a show?
No.
All of a sudden he heaves all the tea in Boston Harbor overboard, and whacks out a declaration of independence, and dares them to come on.
That was _his_ style--he never give anybody a chance.
He had suspicions of his father, the Duke of Wellington.
Well, what did he do?
Ask him to show up?
No--drownded him in a butt of mamsey, like a cat.
S'pose people left money laying around where he was--what did he do?
He collared it.
S'pose he contracted to do a thing, and you paid him, and didn't set down there and see that he done it--what did he do?
He always done the other thing.
S'pose he opened his mouth--what then?
If he didn't shut it up powerful quick he'd lose a lie every time.
That's the kind of a bug Henry was; and if we'd a had him along 'stead of our kings he'd a fooled that town a heap worse than ourn done.
I don't say that ourn is lambs, because they ain't, when you come right down to the cold facts; but they ain't nothing to _that_ old ram, anyway.
All I say is, kings is kings, and you got to make allowances.
Take them all around, they're a mighty ornery lot.
It's the way they're raised".
"But dis one do _smell_ so like de nation, Huck".
"Well, they all do, Jim.
We can't help the way a king smells; history don't tell no way".
"Now de duke, he's a tolerble likely man in some ways".
"Yes, a duke's different.
But not very different.
This one's a middling hard lot for a duke.
When he's drunk there ain't no near-sighted man could tell him from a king".
"Well, anyways, I doan' hanker for no mo' un um, Huck.
Dese is all I kin stan'".
"It's the way I feel, too, Jim.
But we've got them on our hands, and we got to remember what they are, and make allowances.
Sometimes I wish we could hear of a country that's out of kings".
What was the use to tell Jim these warn't real kings and dukes?
It wouldn't a done no good; and, besides, it was just as I said: you couldn't tell them from the real kind.
I went to sleep, and Jim didn't call me when it was my turn.
He often done that.
When I waked up just at daybreak he was sitting there with his head down betwixt his knees, moaning and mourning to himself.
I didn't take notice nor let on.
I knowed what it was about.
He was thinking about his wife and his children, away up yonder, and he was low and homesick; because he hadn't ever been away from home before in his life; and I do believe he cared just as much for his people as white folks does for their'n.
It don't seem natural, but I reckon it's so.
He was often moaning and mourning that way nights, when he judged I was asleep, and saying, "Po' little 'Lizabeth!
po' little Johnny!
it's mighty hard; I spec' I ain't ever gwyne to see you no mo', no mo'"!
He was a mighty good nigger, Jim was.
But this time I somehow got to talking to him about his wife and young ones; and by and by he says: "What makes me feel so bad dis time 'uz bekase I hear sumpn over yonder on de bank like a whack, er a slam, while ago, en it mine me er de time I treat my
She warn't on'y 'bout fo' year ole, en she tuck de sk'yarlet fever, en had a powful rough spell; but she got well, en one day she was a-stannin' aroun', en I says to her, I says: "'Shet de do'.
' "She never done it; jis' stood dah, kiner smilin' up at me.
It make me mad; en I says agin, mighty loud, I says: "'Doan' you hear me?
Shet de do'!
' "She jis stood de same way, kiner smilin' up.
I was a-bilin'!
I says: "'I lay I _make_ you mine!
' "En wid dat I fetch' her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin'.
Den I went into de yuther room, en 'uz gone 'bout ten minutes; en when I come back dah was dat do' a-stannin' open _yit_, en dat chile stannin' mos' right in it, a-lookin' down and mournin', en de tears runnin' down.
My, but I _wuz_ mad!
I was a-gwyne for de chile, but jis' den--it was a do' dat open innerds--jis' den, 'long come de wind en slam it to, behine de chile, ker-BLAM!
--en my lan', de chile never move'!
My breff mos' hop outer me; en I feel so--so--I doan' know HOW I feel.
I crope out, all a-tremblin', en crope aroun' en open de do' easy en slow, en poke my head in behine de chile, sof' en still, en all uv a sudden I says POW!
jis' as loud as I could yell.
_She never budge!
_ Oh, Huck, I bust out a-cryin' en grab her up in my arms, en say, 'Oh, de po' little thing!
De Lord God Amighty fogive po' ole Jim, kaze he never gwyne to fogive hisself as long's he live!
' Oh, she was plumb deef en dumb, Huck, plumb deef en dumb--en I'd ben a-treat'n her so"!
CHAPTER XXIV.
NEXT day, towards night, we laid up under a little willow towhead out in the middle, where there was a village on each side of the river, and the duke and the king begun to lay out a plan for working them towns.
Jim he spoke to the duke, and said he hoped it wouldn't take but a few hours, because it got mighty heavy and tiresome to him when he had to lay all day in the wigwam tied with the rope.
You see, when we left him all alone we had to tie him, because if anybody happened on to him all by himself and not tied it wouldn't look much like he was a runaway nigger, you know.
So the duke said it _was_ kind of hard to have to lay roped all day, and he'd cipher out some way to get around it.
He was uncommon bright, the duke was, and he soon struck it.
He dressed Jim up in King Lear's outfit--it was a long curtain-calico gown, and a white horse-hair wig and whiskers; and then he took his theater paint and painted Jim's face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead, dull, solid blue, like a man
Blamed if he warn't the horriblest looking outrage I ever see.
Then the duke took and wrote out a sign on a shingle so: Sick Arab--but harmless when not out of his head.
And he nailed that shingle to a lath, and stood the lath up four or five foot in front of the wigwam.
Jim was satisfied.
He said it was a sight better than lying tied a couple of years every day, and trembling all over every time there was a sound.
The duke told him to make himself free and easy, and if anybody ever come meddling around, he must hop out of the wigwam, and carry on a little, and fetch a howl or two like a wild beast, and he reckoned they would light out and leave him alone.
Which was sound enough judgment; but you take the average man, and he wouldn't wait for him to howl.
Why, he didn't only look like he was dead, he looked considerable more than that.
These rapscallions wanted to try the Nonesuch again, because there was so much money in it, but they judged it wouldn't be safe, because maybe the news might a worked along down by this time.
They couldn't hit no project that suited exactly; so at last the duke said he reckoned he'd lay off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he couldn't put up something on the Arkansaw village; and the king he allowed he would drop over to t'other
We had all bought store clothes where we stopped last; and now the king put his'n on, and he told me to put mine on.
I done it, of course.
The king's duds was all black, and he did look real swell and starchy.
I never knowed how clothes could change a body before.
Why, before, he looked like the orneriest old rip that ever was; but now, when he'd take off his new white beaver and make a bow and do a smile, he looked that grand and good and pious that you'd say he had walked right out of the ark, and maybe was old
Jim cleaned up the canoe, and I got my paddle ready.
There was a big steamboat laying at the shore away up under the point, about three mile above the town--been there a couple of hours, taking on freight.
Says the king: "Seein' how I'm dressed, I reckon maybe I better arrive down from St. Louis or Cincinnati, or some other big place.
Go for the steamboat, Huckleberry; we'll come down to the village on her".
I didn't have to be ordered twice to go and take a steamboat ride.
I fetched the shore a half a mile above the village, and then went scooting along the bluff bank in the easy water.
Pretty soon we come to a nice innocent-looking young country jake setting on a log swabbing the sweat off of his face, for it was powerful warm weather; and he had a couple of big carpet-bags by him.
"Run her nose in shore," says the king.
I done it.
"Wher' you bound for, young man"?
"For the steamboat; going to Orleans".
"Git aboard," says the king.
"Hold on a minute, my servant 'll he'p you with them bags.
Jump out and he'p the gentleman, Adolphus"--meaning me, I see.
I done so, and then we all three started on again.
The young chap was mighty thankful; said it was tough work toting his baggage such weather.
He asked the king where he was going, and the king told him he'd come down the river and landed at the other village this morning, and now he was going up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up there.
The young fellow says: "When I first see you I says to myself, 'It's Mr. Wilks, sure, and he come mighty near getting here in time.
' But then I says again, 'No, I reckon it ain't him, or else he wouldn't be paddling up the river.
' You _ain't_ him, are you"?
"No, my name's Blodgett--Elexander Blodgett--_Reverend_ Elexander Blodgett, I s'pose I must say, as I'm one o' the Lord's poor servants.
But still I'm jist as able to be sorry for Mr. Wilks for not arriving in time, all the same, if he's missed anything by it--which I hope he hasn't".
"Well, he don't miss any property by it, because he'll get that all right; but he's missed seeing his brother Peter die--which he mayn't mind, nobody can tell as to that--but his brother would a give anything in this world to see _him_ before he died;
Peter and George were the only ones that come out here; George was the married brother; him and his wife both died last year.
Harvey and William's the only ones that's left now; and, as I was saying, they haven't got here in time".
"Did anybody send 'em word"?
"Oh, yes; a month or two ago, when Peter was first took; because Peter said then that he sorter felt like he warn't going to get well this time.
You see, he was pretty old, and George's g'yirls was too young to be much company for him, except Mary Jane, the red-headed one; and so he was kinder lonesome after George and his wife died, and didn't seem to care much to live.
He most desperately wanted to see Harvey--and William, too, for that matter--because he was one of them kind that can't bear to make a will.
He left a letter behind for Harvey, and said he'd told in it where his money was hid, and how he wanted the rest of the property divided up so George's g'yirls would be all right--for George didn't leave nothing.
And that letter was all they could get him to put a pen to".
"Why do you reckon Harvey don't come?
Wher' does he live"?
"Oh, he lives in England--Sheffield--preaches there--hasn't ever been in this country.
He hasn't had any too much time--and besides he mightn't a got the letter at all, you know".
"Too bad, too bad he couldn't a lived to see his brothers, poor soul.
You going to Orleans, you say"?
"Yes, but that ain't only a part of it.
I'm going in a ship, next Wednesday, for Ryo Janeero, where my uncle lives".
"It's a pretty long journey.
But it'll be lovely; wisht I was a-going.
Is Mary Jane the oldest?
How old is the others"?
"Mary Jane's nineteen, Susan's fifteen, and Joanna's about fourteen--that's the one that gives herself to good works and has a hare-lip".
"Poor things!
to be left alone in the cold world so".
"Well, they could be worse off.
Old Peter had friends, and they ain't going to let them come to no harm.
There's Hobson, the Babtis' preacher; and Deacon Lot Hovey, and Ben Rucker, and Abner Shackleford, and Levi Bell, the lawyer; and Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the widow Bartley, and--well, there's a lot of them; but these are the ones that Peter
Well, the old man went on asking questions till he just fairly emptied that young fellow.
Blamed if he didn't inquire about everybody and everything in that blessed town, and all about the Wilkses; and about Peter's business--which was a tanner; and about George's--which was a carpenter; and about Harvey's--which was a dissentering minister;
Then he says: "What did you want to walk all the way up to the steamboat for"?
"Because she's a big Orleans boat, and I was afeard she mightn't stop there.
When they're deep they won't stop for a hail.
A Cincinnati boat will, but this is a St. Louis one".
"Was Peter Wilks well off"?
"Oh, yes, pretty well off.
He had houses and land, and it's reckoned he left three or four thousand in cash hid up som'ers".
"When did you say he died"?
"I didn't say, but it was last night".
"Funeral to-morrow, likely"?
"Yes, 'bout the middle of the day".
"Well, it's all terrible sad; but we've all got to go, one time or another.
So what we want to do is to be prepared; then we're all right".
"Yes, sir, it's the best way.
Ma used to always say that".
When we struck the boat she was about done loading, and pretty soon she got off.
The king never said nothing about going aboard, so I lost my ride, after all.
When the boat was gone the king made me paddle up another mile to a lonesome place, and then he got ashore and says: "Now hustle back, right off, and fetch the duke up here, and the new carpet-bags.
And if he's gone over to t'other side, go over there and git him.
And tell him to git himself up regardless.
Shove along, now".
I see what _he_ was up to; but I never said nothing, of course.
When I got back with the duke we hid the canoe, and then they set down on a log, and the king told him everything, just like the young fellow had said it--every last word of it.
And all the time he was a-doing it he tried to talk like an Englishman; and he done it pretty well, too, for a slouch.
I can't imitate him, and so I ain't a-going to try to; but he really done it pretty good.
Then he says: "How are you on the deef and dumb, Bilgewater"?
The duke said, leave him alone for that; said he had played a deef and dumb person on the histronic boards.
So then they waited for a steamboat.
About the middle of the afternoon a couple of little boats come along, but they didn't come from high enough up the river; but at last there was a big one, and they hailed her.
She sent out her yawl, and we went aboard, and she was from Cincinnati; and when they found we only wanted to go four or five mile they was booming mad, and gave us a cussing, and said they wouldn't land us.
But the king was ca'm.
He says: "If gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece to be took on and put off in a yawl, a steamboat kin afford to carry 'em, can't it"?
So they softened down and said it was all right; and when we got to the village they yawled us ashore.
About two dozen men flocked down when they see the yawl a-coming, and when the king says: "Kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher' Mr. Peter Wilks lives"?
they give a glance at one another, and nodded their heads, as much as to say, "What d' I tell you"?
Then one of them says, kind of soft and gentle: "I'm sorry sir, but the best we can do is to tell you where he _did_ live yesterday evening".
Sudden as winking the ornery old cretur went an to smash, and fell up against the man, and put his chin on his shoulder, and cried down his back, and says: "Alas, alas, our poor brother--gone, and we never got to see him; oh, it's too, too hard"!
Then he turns around, blubbering, and makes a lot of idiotic signs to the duke on his hands, and blamed if he didn't drop a carpet-bag and bust out a-crying.
If they warn't the beatenest lot, them two frauds, that ever I struck.
Well, the men gathered around and sympathized with them, and said all sorts of kind things to them, and carried their carpet-bags up the hill for them, and let them lean on them and cry, and told the king all about his brother's last moments, and the king
Well, if ever I struck anything like it, I'm a nigger.
It was enough to make a body ashamed of the human race.
CHAPTER XXV.
THE news was all over town in two minutes, and you could see the people tearing down on the run from every which way, some of them putting on their coats as they come.
Pretty soon we was in the middle of a crowd, and the noise of the tramping was like a soldier march.
The windows and dooryards was full; and every minute somebody would say, over a fence: "Is it _them_"?
And somebody trotting along with the gang would answer back and say: "You bet it is".
When we got to the house the street in front of it was packed, and the three girls was standing in the door.
Mary Jane _was_ red-headed, but that don't make no difference, she was most awful beautiful, and her face and her eyes was all lit up like glory, she was so glad her uncles was come.
The king he spread his arms, and Mary Jane she jumped for them, and the hare-lip jumped for the duke, and there they had it!
Everybody most, leastways women, cried for joy to see them meet again at last and have such good times.
Then the king he hunched the duke private--I see him do it--and then he looked around and see the coffin, over in the corner on two chairs; so then him and the duke, with a hand across each other's shoulder, and t'other hand to their eyes, walked slow and
and all the men taking their hats off and drooping their heads, so you could a heard a pin fall.
And when they got there they bent over and looked in the coffin, and took one sight, and then they bust out a-crying so you could a heard them to Orleans, most; and then they put their arms around each other's necks, and hung their chins over each
And, mind you, everybody was doing the same; and the place was that damp I never see anything like it.
Then one of them got on one side of the coffin, and t'other on t'other side, and they kneeled down and rested their foreheads on the coffin, and let on to pray all to themselves.
Well, when it come to that it worked the crowd like you never see anything like it, and everybody broke down and went to sobbing right out loud--the poor girls, too; and every woman, nearly, went up to the girls, without saying a word, and kissed them,
I never see anything so disgusting.
Well, by and by the king he gets up and comes forward a little, and works himself up and slobbers out a speech, all full of tears and flapdoodle about its being a sore trial for him and his poor brother to lose the diseased, and to miss seeing diseased
And the minute the words were out of his mouth somebody over in the crowd struck up the doxolojer, and everybody joined in with all their might, and it just warmed you up and made you feel as good as church letting out.
Music is a good thing; and after all that soul-butter and hogwash I never see it freshen up things so, and sound so honest and bully.
Then the king begins to work his jaw again, and says how him and his nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal friends of the family would take supper here with them this evening, and help set up with the ashes of the diseased; and says if his
:--Rev.
Mr. Hobson, and Deacon Lot Hovey, and Mr. Ben Rucker, and Abner Shackleford, and Levi Bell, and Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the widow Bartley.
Rev.
Hobson and Dr. Robinson was down to the end of the town a-hunting together--that is, I mean the doctor was shipping a sick man to t'other world, and the preacher was pinting him right.
Lawyer Bell was away up to Louisville on business.
But the rest was on hand, and so they all come and shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him; and then they shook hands with the duke and didn't say nothing, but just kept a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a passel of sapheads
So the king he blattered along, and managed to inquire about pretty much everybody and dog in town, by his name, and mentioned all sorts of little things that happened one time or another in the town, or to George's family, or to Peter.
And he always let on that Peter wrote him the things; but that was a lie: he got every blessed one of them out of that young flathead that we canoed up to the steamboat.
Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left behind, and the king he read it out loud and cried over it.
It give the dwelling-house and three thousand dollars, gold, to the girls; and it give the tanyard (which was doing a good business), along with some other houses and land (worth about seven thousand), and three thousand dollars in gold to Harvey and
So these two frauds said they'd go and fetch it up, and have everything square and above-board; and told me to come with a candle.
We shut the cellar door behind us, and when they found the bag they spilt it out on the floor, and it was a lovely sight, all them yaller-boys.
My, the way the king's eyes did shine!
He slaps the duke on the shoulder and says: "Oh, _this_ ain't bully nor noth'n!
Oh, no, I reckon not!
Why, _bully_, it beats the Nonesuch, _don't_ it"?
The duke allowed it did.
They pawed the yaller-boys, and sifted them through their fingers and let them jingle down on the floor; and the king says: "It ain't no use talkin'; bein' brothers to a rich dead man and representatives of furrin heirs that's got left is the line for
Thish yer comes of trust'n to Providence.
It's the best way, in the long run.
I've tried 'em all, and ther' ain't no better way".
Most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile, and took it on trust; but no, they must count it.
So they counts it, and it comes out four hundred and fifteen dollars short.
Says the king: "Dern him, I wonder what he done with that four hundred and fifteen dollars"?
They worried over that awhile, and ransacked all around for it.
Then the duke says: "Well, he was a pretty sick man, and likely he made a mistake--I reckon that's the way of it.
The best way's to let it go, and keep still about it.
We can spare it".
"Oh, shucks, yes, we can _spare_ it.
I don't k'yer noth'n 'bout that--it's the _count_ I'm thinkin' about.
We want to be awful square and open and above-board here, you know.
We want to lug this h-yer money up stairs and count it before everybody--then ther' ain't noth'n suspicious.
But when the dead man says ther's six thous'n dollars, you know, we don't want to--" "Hold on," says the duke.
"Le's make up the deffisit," and he begun to haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket.
"It's a most amaz'n' good idea, duke--you _have_ got a rattlin' clever head on you," says the king.
"Blest if the old Nonesuch ain't a heppin' us out agin," and _he_ begun to haul out yaller-jackets and stack them up.
It most busted them, but they made up the six thousand clean and clear.
"Say," says the duke, "I got another idea.
Le's go up stairs and count this money, and then take and _give it to the girls_".
"Good land, duke, lemme hug you!
It's the most dazzling idea 'at ever a man struck.
You have cert'nly got the most astonishin' head I ever see.
Oh, this is the boss dodge, ther' ain't no mistake 'bout it.
Let 'em fetch along their suspicions now if they want to--this 'll lay 'em out".
When we got up-stairs everybody gethered around the table, and the king he counted it and stacked it up, three hundred dollars in a pile--twenty elegant little piles.
Everybody looked hungry at it, and licked their chops.
Then they raked it into the bag again, and I see the king begin to swell himself up for another speech.
He says: "Friends all, my poor brother that lays yonder has done generous by them that's left behind in the vale of sorrers.
He has done generous by these yer poor little lambs that he loved and sheltered, and that's left fatherless and motherless.
Yes, and we that knowed him knows that he would a done _more_ generous by 'em if he hadn't ben afeard o' woundin' his dear William and me.
Now, _wouldn't_ he?
Ther' ain't no question 'bout it in _my_ mind.
Well, then, what kind o' brothers would it be that 'd stand in his way at sech a time?
And what kind o' uncles would it be that 'd rob--yes, _rob_--sech poor sweet lambs as these 'at he loved so at sech a time?
If I know William--and I _think_ I do--he--well, I'll jest ask him".
He turns around and begins to make a lot of signs to the duke with his hands, and the duke he looks at him stupid and leather-headed a while; then all of a sudden he seems to catch his meaning, and jumps for the king, goo-gooing with all his might for joy,
Then the king says, "I knowed it; I reckon _that 'll_ convince anybody the way _he_ feels about it.
Here, Mary Jane, Susan, Joanner, take the money--take it _all_.
It's the gift of him that lays yonder, cold but joyful".
Mary Jane she went for him, Susan and the hare-lip went for the duke, and then such another hugging and kissing I never see yet.
And everybody crowded up with the tears in their eyes, and most shook the hands off of them frauds, saying all the time: "You _dear_ good souls!
--how _lovely_!
--how _could_ you"!
Well, then, pretty soon all hands got to talking about the diseased again, and how good he was, and what a loss he was, and all that; and before long a big iron-jawed man worked himself in there from outside, and stood a-listening and looking, and not
The king was saying--in the middle of something he'd started in on-- "--they bein' partickler friends o' the diseased.
That's why they're invited here this evenin'; but tomorrow we want _all_ to come--everybody; for he respected everybody, he liked everybody, and so it's fitten that his funeral orgies sh'd be public".
And so he went a-mooning on and on, liking to hear himself talk, and every little while he fetched in his funeral orgies again, till the duke he couldn't stand it no more; so he writes on a little scrap of paper, "_Obsequies_, you old fool," and folds it
The king he reads it and puts it in his pocket, and says: "Poor William, afflicted as he is, his _heart's_ aluz right.
Asks me to invite everybody to come to the funeral--wants me to make 'em all welcome.
But he needn't a worried--it was jest what I was at".
Then he weaves along again, perfectly ca'm, and goes to dropping in his funeral orgies again every now and then, just like he done before.
And when he done it the third time he says: "I say orgies, not because it's the common term, because it ain't--obsequies bein' the common term--but because orgies is the right term.
Obsequies ain't used in England no more now--it's gone out.
We say orgies now in England.
Orgies is better, because it means the thing you're after more exact.
It's a word that's made up out'n the Greek _orgo_, outside, open, abroad; and the Hebrew _jeesum_, to plant, cover up; hence in_ter.
_ So, you see, funeral orgies is an open er public funeral".
He was the _worst_ I ever struck.
Well, the iron-jawed man he laughed right in his face.
Everybody was shocked.
Everybody says, "Why, _doctor_"!
and Abner Shackleford says: "Why, Robinson, hain't you heard the news?
This is Harvey Wilks".
The king he smiled eager, and shoved out his flapper, and says: "Is it my poor brother's dear good friend and physician?
I--" "Keep your hands off of me"!
says the doctor.
"_You_ talk like an Englishman, _don't_ you?
It's the worst imitation I ever heard.
_You_ Peter Wilks's brother!
You're a fraud, that's what you are"!
Well, how they all took on!
They crowded around the doctor and tried to quiet him down, and tried to explain to him and tell him how Harvey 'd showed in forty ways that he _was_ Harvey, and knowed everybody by name, and the names of the very dogs, and begged and _begged_ him not to
But it warn't no use; he stormed right along, and said any man that pretended to be an Englishman and couldn't imitate the lingo no better than what he did was a fraud and a liar.
The poor girls was hanging to the king and crying; and all of a sudden the doctor ups and turns on _them_.
He says: "I was your father's friend, and I'm your friend; and I warn you as a friend, and an honest one that wants to protect you and keep you out of harm and trouble, to turn your backs on that scoundrel and have nothing to do with him, the ignorant
He is the thinnest kind of an impostor--has come here with a lot of empty names and facts which he picked up somewheres, and you take them for _proofs_, and are helped to fool yourselves by these foolish friends here, who ought to know better.
Mary Jane Wilks, you know me for your friend, and for your unselfish friend, too.
Now listen to me; turn this pitiful rascal out--I _beg_ you to do it.
Will you"?
Mary Jane straightened herself up, and my, but she was handsome!
She says: "_Here_ is my answer".
She hove up the bag of money and put it in the king's hands, and says, "Take this six thousand dollars, and invest for me and my sisters any way you want to, and don't give us no receipt for it".
Then she put her arm around the king on one side, and Susan and the hare-lip done the same on the other.
Everybody clapped their hands and stomped on the floor like a perfect storm, whilst the king held up his head and smiled proud.
The doctor says: "All right; I wash _my_ hands of the matter.
But I warn you all that a time 's coming when you're going to feel sick whenever you think of this day".
And away he went.
"All right, doctor," says the king, kinder mocking him; "we'll try and get 'em to send for you;" which made them all laugh, and they said it was a prime good hit.
CHAPTER XXVI.
WELL, when they was all gone the king he asks Mary Jane how they was off for spare rooms, and she said she had one spare room, which would do for Uncle William, and she'd give her own room to Uncle Harvey, which was a little bigger, and she would turn into
The king said the cubby would do for his valley--meaning me.
So Mary Jane took us up, and she showed them their rooms, which was plain but nice.
She said she'd have her frocks and a lot of other traps took out of her room if they was in Uncle Harvey's way, but he said they warn't.
The frocks was hung along the wall, and before them was a curtain made out of calico that hung down to the floor.
There was an old hair trunk in one corner, and a guitar-box in another, and all sorts of little knickknacks and jimcracks around, like girls brisken up a room with.
The king said it was all the more homely and more pleasanter for these fixings, and so don't disturb them.
The duke's room was pretty small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby.
That night they had a big supper, and all them men and women was there, and I stood behind the king and the duke's chairs and waited on them, and the niggers waited on the rest.
Mary Jane she set at the head of the table, with Susan alongside of her, and said how bad the biscuits was, and how mean the preserves was, and how ornery and tough the fried chickens was--and all that kind of rot, the way women always do for to force
and "Where, for the land's sake, _did_ you get these amaz'n pickles"?
and all that kind of humbug talky-talk, just the way people always does at a supper, you know.
And when it was all done me and the hare-lip had supper in the kitchen off of the leavings, whilst the others was helping the niggers clean up the things.
The hare-lip she got to pumping me about England, and blest if I didn't think the ice was getting mighty thin sometimes.
She says: "Did you ever see the king"?
"Who?
William Fourth?
Well, I bet I have--he goes to our church".
I knowed he was dead years ago, but I never let on.
So when I says he goes to our church, she says: "What--regular"?
"Yes--regular.
His pew's right over opposite ourn--on t'other side the pulpit".
"I thought he lived in London"?
"Well, he does.
Where _would_ he live"?
"But I thought _you_ lived in Sheffield"?
I see I was up a stump.
I had to let on to get choked with a chicken bone, so as to get time to think how to get down again.
Then I says: "I mean he goes to our church regular when he's in Sheffield.
That's only in the summer time, when he comes there to take the sea baths".
"Why, how you talk--Sheffield ain't on the sea".
"Well, who said it was"?
"Why, you did".
"I _didn't_ nuther".
"You did"!
"I didn't".
"You did".
"I never said nothing of the kind".
"Well, what _did_ you say, then"?
"Said he come to take the sea _baths_--that's what I said".
"Well, then, how's he going to take the sea baths if it ain't on the sea"?
"Looky here," I says; "did you ever see any Congress-water"?
"Yes".
"Well, did you have to go to Congress to get it"?
"Why, no".
"Well, neither does William Fourth have to go to the sea to get a sea bath".
"How does he get it, then"?
"Gets it the way people down here gets Congress-water--in barrels.
There in the palace at Sheffield they've got furnaces, and he wants his water hot.
They can't bile that amount of water away off there at the sea.
They haven't got no conveniences for it".
"Oh, I see, now.
You might a said that in the first place and saved time".
When she said that I see I was out of the woods again, and so I was comfortable and glad.
Next, she says: "Do you go to church, too"?
"Yes--regular".
"Where do you set"?
"Why, in our pew".
"_Whose_ pew"?
"Why, _ourn_--your Uncle Harvey's".
"His'n?
What does _he_ want with a pew"?
"Wants it to set in.
What did you _reckon_ he wanted with it"?
"Why, I thought he'd be in the pulpit".
Rot him, I forgot he was a preacher.
I see I was up a stump again, so I played another chicken bone and got another think.
Then I says: "Blame it, do you suppose there ain't but one preacher to a church"?
"Why, what do they want with more"?
"What!
--to preach before a king?
I never did see such a girl as you.
They don't have no less than seventeen".
"Seventeen!
My land!
Why, I wouldn't set out such a string as that, not if I _never_ got to glory.
It must take 'em a week".
"Shucks, they don't _all_ of 'em preach the same day--only _one_ of 'em".
"Well, then, what does the rest of 'em do"?
"Oh, nothing much.
Loll around, pass the plate--and one thing or another.
But mainly they don't do nothing".
"Well, then, what are they _for_"?
"Why, they're for _style_.
Don't you know nothing"?
"Well, I don't _want_ to know no such foolishness as that.
How is servants treated in England?
Do they treat 'em better 'n we treat our niggers"?
"_No_!
A servant ain't nobody there.
They treat them worse than dogs".
"Don't they give 'em holidays, the way we do, Christmas and New Year's week, and Fourth of July"?
"Oh, just listen!
A body could tell _you_ hain't ever been to England by that.
Why, Hare-l--why, Joanna, they never see a holiday from year's end to year's end; never go to the circus, nor theater, nor nigger shows, nor nowheres".
"Nor church"?
"Nor church".
"But _you_ always went to church".
Well, I was gone up again.
I forgot I was the old man's servant.
But next minute I whirled in on a kind of an explanation how a valley was different from a common servant and _had_ to go to church whether he wanted to or not, and set with the family, on account of its being the law.
But I didn't do it pretty good, and when I got done I see she warn't satisfied.
She says: "Honest injun, now, hain't you been telling me a lot of lies"?
"Honest injun," says I. "None of it at all"?
"None of it at all.
Not a lie in it," says I. "Lay your hand on this book and say it".
I see it warn't nothing but a dictionary, so I laid my hand on it and said it.
So then she looked a little better satisfied, and says: "Well, then, I'll believe some of it; but I hope to gracious if I'll believe the rest".
"What is it you won't believe, Joe"?
says Mary Jane, stepping in with Susan behind her.
"It ain't right nor kind for you to talk so to him, and him a stranger and so far from his people.
How would you like to be treated so"?
"That's always your way, Maim--always sailing in to help somebody before they're hurt.
I hain't done nothing to him.
He's told some stretchers, I reckon, and I said I wouldn't swallow it all; and that's every bit and grain I _did_ say.
I reckon he can stand a little thing like that, can't he"?
"I don't care whether 'twas little or whether 'twas big; he's here in our house and a stranger, and it wasn't good of you to say it.
If you was in his place it would make you feel ashamed; and so you oughtn't to say a thing to another person that will make _them_ feel ashamed".
"Why, Mam, he said--" "It don't make no difference what he _said_--that ain't the thing.
The thing is for you to treat him _kind_, and not be saying things to make him remember he ain't in his own country and amongst his own folks".
I says to myself, _this_ is a girl that I'm letting that old reptile rob her of her money!
Then Susan _she_ waltzed in; and if you'll believe me, she did give Hare-lip hark from the tomb!
Says I to myself, and this is _another_ one that I'm letting him rob her of her money!
Then Mary Jane she took another inning, and went in sweet and lovely again--which was her way; but when she got done there warn't hardly anything left o' poor Hare-lip.
So she hollered.
"All right, then," says the other girls; "you just ask his pardon".
She done it, too; and she done it beautiful.
She done it so beautiful it was good to hear; and I wished I could tell her a thousand lies, so she could do it again.
I says to myself, this is _another_ one that I'm letting him rob her of her money.
And when she got through they all jest laid theirselves out to make me feel at home and know I was amongst friends.
I felt so ornery and low down and mean that I says to myself, my mind's made up; I'll hive that money for them or bust.
So then I lit out--for bed, I said, meaning some time or another.
When I got by myself I went to thinking the thing over.
I says to myself, shall I go to that doctor, private, and blow on these frauds?
No--that won't do.
He might tell who told him; then the king and the duke would make it warm for me.
Shall I go, private, and tell Mary Jane?
No--I dasn't do it.
Her face would give them a hint, sure; they've got the money, and they'd slide right out and get away with it.
If she was to fetch in help I'd get mixed up in the business before it was done with, I judge.
No; there ain't no good way but one.
I got to steal that money, somehow; and I got to steal it some way that they won't suspicion that I done it.
They've got a good thing here, and they ain't a-going to leave till they've played this family and this town for all they're worth, so I'll find a chance time enough.
I'll steal it and hide it; and by and by, when I'm away down the river, I'll write a letter and tell Mary Jane where it's hid.
But I better hive it tonight if I can, because the doctor maybe hasn't let up as much as he lets on he has; he might scare them out of here yet.
So, thinks I, I'll go and search them rooms.
Upstairs the hall was dark, but I found the duke's room, and started to paw around it with my hands; but I recollected it wouldn't be much like the king to let anybody else take care of that money but his own self; so then I went to his room and begun to
But I see I couldn't do nothing without a candle, and I dasn't light one, of course.
So I judged I'd got to do the other thing--lay for them and eavesdrop.
About that time I hears their footsteps coming, and was going to skip under the bed; I reached for it, but it wasn't where I thought it would be; but I touched the curtain that hid Mary Jane's frocks, so I jumped in behind that and snuggled in amongst
They come in and shut the door; and the first thing the duke done was to get down and look under the bed.
Then I was glad I hadn't found the bed when I wanted it.
And yet, you know, it's kind of natural to hide under the bed when you are up to anything private.
They sets down then, and the king says: "Well, what is it?
And cut it middlin' short, because it's better for us to be down there a-whoopin' up the mournin' than up here givin' 'em a chance to talk us over".
"Well, this is it, Capet.
I ain't easy; I ain't comfortable.
That doctor lays on my mind.
I wanted to know your plans.
I've got a notion, and I think it's a sound one".
"What is it, duke"?
"That we better glide out of this before three in the morning, and clip it down the river with what we've got.
Specially, seeing we got it so easy--_given_ back to us, flung at our heads, as you may say, when of course we allowed to have to steal it back.
I'm for knocking off and lighting out".
That made me feel pretty bad.
About an hour or two ago it would a been a little different, but now it made me feel bad and disappointed, The king rips out and says: "What!
And not sell out the rest o' the property?
March off like a passel of fools and leave eight or nine thous'n' dollars' worth o' property layin' around jest sufferin' to be scooped in?
--and all good, salable stuff, too".
The duke he grumbled; said the bag of gold was enough, and he didn't want to go no deeper--didn't want to rob a lot of orphans of _everything_ they had.
"Why, how you talk"!
says the king.
"We sha'n't rob 'em of nothing at all but jest this money.
The people that _buys_ the property is the suff'rers; because as soon 's it's found out 'at we didn't own it--which won't be long after we've slid--the sale won't be valid, and it 'll all go back to the estate.
These yer orphans 'll git their house back agin, and that's enough for _them_; they're young and spry, and k'n easy earn a livin'.
_they_ ain't a-goin to suffer.
Why, jest think--there's thous'n's and thous'n's that ain't nigh so well off.
Bless you, _they_ ain't got noth'n' to complain of".
Well, the king he talked him blind; so at last he give in, and said all right, but said he believed it was blamed foolishness to stay, and that doctor hanging over them.
But the king says: "Cuss the doctor!
What do we k'yer for _him_?
Hain't we got all the fools in town on our side?
And ain't that a big enough majority in any town"?
So they got ready to go down stairs again.
The duke says: "I don't think we put that money in a good place".
That cheered me up.
I'd begun to think I warn't going to get a hint of no kind to help me.
The king says: "Why"?
"Because Mary Jane 'll be in mourning from this out; and first you know the nigger that does up the rooms will get an order to box these duds up and put 'em away; and do you reckon a nigger can run across money and not borrow some of it"?
"Your head's level agin, duke," says the king; and he comes a-fumbling under the curtain two or three foot from where I was.
I stuck tight to the wall and kept mighty still, though quivery; and I wondered what them fellows would say to me if they catched me; and I tried to think what I'd better do if they did catch me.
But the king he got the bag before I could think more than about a half a thought, and he never suspicioned I was around.
They took and shoved the bag through a rip in the straw tick that was under the feather-bed, and crammed it in a foot or two amongst the straw and said it was all right now, because a nigger only makes up the feather-bed, and don't turn over the straw
But I knowed better.
I had it out of there before they was half-way down stairs.
I groped along up to my cubby, and hid it there till I could get a chance to do better.
I judged I better hide it outside of the house somewheres, because if they missed it they would give the house a good ransacking: I knowed that very well.
Then I turned in, with my clothes all on; but I couldn't a gone to sleep if I'd a wanted to, I was in such a sweat to get through with the business.
By and by I heard the king and the duke come up; so I rolled off my pallet and laid with my chin at the top of my ladder, and waited to see if anything was going to happen.
But nothing did.
So I held on till all the late sounds had quit and the early ones hadn't begun yet; and then I slipped down the ladder.
CHAPTER XXVII.
I crept to their doors and listened; they was snoring.
So I tiptoed along, and got down stairs all right.
There warn't a sound anywheres.
I peeped through a crack of the dining-room door, and see the men that was watching the corpse all sound asleep on their chairs.
The door was open into the parlor, where the corpse was laying, and there was a candle in both rooms.
I passed along, and the parlor door was open; but I see there warn't nobody in there but the remainders of Peter; so I shoved on by; but the front door was locked, and the key wasn't there.
Just then I heard somebody coming down the stairs, back behind me.
I run in the parlor and took a swift look around, and the only place I see to hide the bag was in the coffin.
The lid was shoved along about a foot, showing the dead man's face down in there, with a wet cloth over it, and his shroud on.
I tucked the money-bag in under the lid, just down beyond where his hands was crossed, which made me creep, they was so cold, and then I run back across the room and in behind the door.
The person coming was Mary Jane.
She went to the coffin, very soft, and kneeled down and looked in; then she put up her handkerchief, and I see she begun to cry, though I couldn't hear her, and her back was to me.
I slid out, and as I passed the dining-room I thought I'd make sure them watchers hadn't seen me; so I looked through the crack, and everything was all right.
They hadn't stirred.
I slipped up to bed, feeling ruther blue, on accounts of the thing playing out that way after I had took so much trouble and run so much resk about it.
Says I, if it could stay where it is, all right; because when we get down the river a hundred mile or two I could write back to Mary Jane, and she could dig him up again and get it; but that ain't the thing that's going to happen; the thing that's going
Then the king 'll get it again, and it 'll be a long day before he gives anybody another chance to smouch it from him.
Of course I _wanted_ to slide down and get it out of there, but I dasn't try it.
Every minute it was getting earlier now, and pretty soon some of them watchers would begin to stir, and I might get catched--catched with six thousand dollars in my hands that nobody hadn't hired me to take care of.
I don't wish to be mixed up in no such business as that, I says to myself.
When I got down stairs in the morning the parlor was shut up, and the watchers was gone.
There warn't nobody around but the family and the widow Bartley and our tribe.
I watched their faces to see if anything had been happening, but I couldn't tell.
Towards the middle of the day the undertaker come with his man, and they set the coffin in the middle of the room on a couple of chairs, and then set all our chairs in rows, and borrowed more from the neighbors till the hall and the parlor and the
I see the coffin lid was the way it was before, but I dasn't go to look in under it, with folks around.
Then the people begun to flock in, and the beats and the girls took seats in the front row at the head of the coffin, and for a half an hour the people filed around slow, in single rank, and looked down at the dead man's face a minute, and some dropped in
There warn't no other sound but the scraping of the feet on the floor and blowing noses--because people always blows them more at a funeral than they do at other places except church.
When the place was packed full the undertaker he slid around in his black gloves with his softy soothering ways, putting on the last touches, and getting people and things all ship-shape and comfortable, and making no more sound than a cat.
He never spoke; he moved people around, he squeezed in late ones, he opened up passageways, and done it with nods, and signs with his hands.
Then he took his place over against the wall.
He was the softest, glidingest, stealthiest man I ever see; and there warn't no more smile to him than there is to a ham.
They had borrowed a melodeum--a sick one; and when everything was ready a young woman set down and worked it, and it was pretty skreeky and colicky, and everybody joined in and sung, and Peter was the only one that had a good thing, according to my notion.
Then the Reverend Hobson opened up, slow and solemn, and begun to talk; and straight off the most outrageous row busted out in the cellar a body ever heard; it was only one dog, but he made a most powerful racket, and he kept it up right along; the
It was right down awkward, and nobody didn't seem to know what to do.
But pretty soon they see that long-legged undertaker make a sign to the preacher as much as to say, "Don't you worry--just depend on me".
Then he stooped down and begun to glide along the wall, just his shoulders showing over the people's heads.
So he glided along, and the powwow and racket getting more and more outrageous all the time; and at last, when he had gone around two sides of the room, he disappears down cellar.
Then in about two seconds we heard a whack, and the dog he finished up with a most amazing howl or two, and then everything was dead still, and the parson begun his solemn talk where he left off.
In a minute or two here comes this undertaker's back and shoulders gliding along the wall again; and so he glided and glided around three sides of the room, and then rose up, and shaded his mouth with his hands, and stretched his neck out towards the
Then he drooped down and glided along the wall again to his place.
You could see it was a great satisfaction to the people, because naturally they wanted to know.
A little thing like that don't cost nothing, and it's just the little things that makes a man to be looked up to and liked.
There warn't no more popular man in town than what that undertaker was.
Well, the funeral sermon was very good, but pison long and tiresome; and then the king he shoved in and got off some of his usual rubbage, and at last the job was through, and the undertaker begun to sneak up on the coffin with his screw-driver.
I was in a sweat then, and watched him pretty keen.
But he never meddled at all; just slid the lid along as soft as mush, and screwed it down tight and fast.
So there I was!
I didn't know whether the money was in there or not.
So, says I, s'pose somebody has hogged that bag on the sly?
--now how do I know whether to write to Mary Jane or not?
S'pose she dug him up and didn't find nothing, what would she think of me?
Blame it, I says, I might get hunted up and jailed; I'd better lay low and keep dark, and not write at all; the thing's awful mixed now; trying to better it, I've worsened it a hundred times, and I wish to goodness I'd just let it alone, dad fetch the
They buried him, and we come back home, and I went to watching faces again--I couldn't help it, and I couldn't rest easy.
But nothing come of it; the faces didn't tell me nothing.
The king he visited around in the evening, and sweetened everybody up, and made himself ever so friendly; and he give out the idea that his congregation over in England would be in a sweat about him, so he must hurry and settle up the estate right away and
He was very sorry he was so pushed, and so was everybody; they wished he could stay longer, but they said they could see it couldn't be done.
And he said of course him and William would take the girls home with them; and that pleased everybody too, because then the girls would be well fixed and amongst their own relations; and it pleased the girls, too--tickled them so they clean forgot they
Them poor things was that glad and happy it made my heart ache to see them getting fooled and lied to so, but I didn't see no safe way for me to chip in and change the general tune.
Well, blamed if the king didn't bill the house and the niggers and all the property for auction straight off--sale two days after the funeral; but anybody could buy private beforehand if they wanted to.
So the next day after the funeral, along about noon-time, the girls' joy got the first jolt.
A couple of nigger traders come along, and the king sold them the niggers reasonable, for three-day drafts as they called it, and away they went, the two sons up the river to Memphis, and their mother down the river to Orleans.
I thought them poor girls and them niggers would break their hearts for grief; they cried around each other, and took on so it most made me down sick to see it.
The girls said they hadn't ever dreamed of seeing the family separated or sold away from the town.
I can't ever get it out of my memory, the sight of them poor miserable girls and niggers hanging around each other's necks and crying; and I reckon I couldn't a stood it all, but would a had to bust out and tell on our gang if I hadn't knowed the sale
The thing made a big stir in the town, too, and a good many come out flatfooted and said it was scandalous to separate the mother and the children that way.
It injured the frauds some; but the old fool he bulled right along, spite of all the duke could say or do, and I tell you the duke was powerful uneasy.
Next day was auction day.
About broad day in the morning the king and the duke come up in the garret and woke me up, and I see by their look that there was trouble.
The king says: "Was you in my room night before last"?
"No, your majesty"--which was the way I always called him when nobody but our gang warn't around.
"Was you in there yisterday er last night"?
"No, your majesty".
"Honor bright, now--no lies".
"Honor bright, your majesty, I'm telling you the truth.
I hain't been a-near your room since Miss Mary Jane took you and the duke and showed it to you".
The duke says: "Have you seen anybody else go in there"?
"No, your grace, not as I remember, I believe".
"Stop and think".
I studied awhile and see my chance; then I says: "Well, I see the niggers go in there several times".
Both of them gave a little jump, and looked like they hadn't ever expected it, and then like they _had_.
Then the duke says: "What, all of them"?
"No--leastways, not all at once--that is, I don't think I ever see them all come _out_ at once but just one time".
"Hello!
When was that"?
"It was the day we had the funeral.
In the morning.
It warn't early, because I overslept.
I was just starting down the ladder, and I see them".
"Well, go on, _go_ on!
What did they do?
How'd they act"?
"They didn't do nothing.
And they didn't act anyway much, as fur as I see.
They tiptoed away; so I seen, easy enough, that they'd shoved in there to do up your majesty's room, or something, s'posing you was up; and found you _warn't_ up, and so they was hoping to slide out of the way of trouble without waking you up, if they
"Great guns, _this_ is a go"!
says the king; and both of them looked pretty sick and tolerable silly.
They stood there a-thinking and scratching their heads a minute, and the duke he bust into a kind of a little raspy chuckle, and says: "It does beat all how neat the niggers played their hand.
They let on to be _sorry_ they was going out of this region!
And I believed they _was_ sorry, and so did you, and so did everybody.
Don't ever tell _me_ any more that a nigger ain't got any histrionic talent.
Why, the way they played that thing it would fool _anybody_.
In my opinion, there's a fortune in 'em.
If I had capital and a theater, I wouldn't want a better lay-out than that--and here we've gone and sold 'em for a song.
Yes, and ain't privileged to sing the song yet.
Say, where _is_ that song--that draft"?
"In the bank for to be collected.
Where _would_ it be"?
"Well, _that's_ all right then, thank goodness".
Says I, kind of timid-like: "Is something gone wrong"?
The king whirls on me and rips out: "None o' your business!
You keep your head shet, and mind y'r own affairs--if you got any.
Long as you're in this town don't you forgit _that_--you hear"?
Then he says to the duke, "We got to jest swaller it and say noth'n': mum's the word for _us_".
As they was starting down the ladder the duke he chuckles again, and says: "Quick sales _and_ small profits!
It's a good business--yes".
The king snarls around on him and says: "I was trying to do for the best in sellin' 'em out so quick.
If the profits has turned out to be none, lackin' considable, and none to carry, is it my fault any more'n it's yourn"?
"Well, _they'd_ be in this house yet and we _wouldn't_ if I could a got my advice listened to".
The king sassed back as much as was safe for him, and then swapped around and lit into _me_ again.
He give me down the banks for not coming and _telling_ him I see the niggers come out of his room acting that way--said any fool would a _knowed_ something was up.
And then waltzed in and cussed _himself_ awhile, and said it all come of him not laying late and taking his natural rest that morning, and he'd be blamed if he'd ever do it again.
So they went off a-jawing; and I felt dreadful glad I'd worked it all off on to the niggers, and yet hadn't done the niggers no harm by it.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
BY and by it was getting-up time.
So I come down the ladder and started for down-stairs; but as I come to the girls' room the door was open, and I see Mary Jane setting by her old hair trunk, which was open and she'd been packing things in it--getting ready to go to England.
But she had stopped now with a folded gown in her lap, and had her face in her hands, crying.
I felt awful bad to see it; of course anybody would.
I went in there and says: "Miss Mary Jane, you can't a-bear to see people in trouble, and I can't--most always.
Tell me about it".
So she done it.
And it was the niggers--I just expected it.
She said the beautiful trip to England was most about spoiled for her; she didn't know _how_ she was ever going to be happy there, knowing the mother and the children warn't ever going to see each other no more--and then busted out bitterer than ever,
"But they _will_--and inside of two weeks--and I _know_ it"!
says I. Laws, it was out before I could think!
And before I could budge she throws her arms around my neck and told me to say it _again_, say it _again_, say it _again_!
I see I had spoke too sudden and said too much, and was in a close place.
I asked her to let me think a minute; and she set there, very impatient and excited and handsome, but looking kind of happy and eased-up, like a person that's had a tooth pulled out.
So I went to studying it out.
I says to myself, I reckon a body that ups and tells the truth when he is in a tight place is taking considerable many resks, though I ain't had no experience, and can't say for certain; but it looks so to me, anyway; and yet here's a case where I'm
I must lay it by in my mind, and think it over some time or other, it's so kind of strange and unregular.
I never see nothing like it.
Well, I says to myself at last, I'm a-going to chance it; I'll up and tell the truth this time, though it does seem most like setting down on a kag of powder and touching it off just to see where you'll go to.
Then I says: "Miss Mary Jane, is there any place out of town a little ways where you could go and stay three or four days"?
"Yes; Mr. Lothrop's.
Why"?
"Never mind why yet.
If I'll tell you how I know the niggers will see each other again inside of two weeks--here in this house--and _prove_ how I know it--will you go to Mr. Lothrop's and stay four days"?
"Four days"!
she says; "I'll stay a year"!
"All right," I says, "I don't want nothing more out of _you_ than just your word--I druther have it than another man's kiss-the-Bible".
She smiled and reddened up very sweet, and I says, "If you don't mind it, I'll shut the door--and bolt it".
Then I come back and set down again, and says: "Don't you holler.
Just set still and take it like a man.
I got to tell the truth, and you want to brace up, Miss Mary, because it's a bad kind, and going to be hard to take, but there ain't no help for it.
These uncles of yourn ain't no uncles at all; they're a couple of frauds--regular dead-beats.
There, now we're over the worst of it, you can stand the rest middling easy".
It jolted her up like everything, of course; but I was over the shoal water now, so I went right along, her eyes a-blazing higher and higher all the time, and told her every blame thing, from where we first struck that young fool going up to the steamboat,
Come, don't waste a minute--not a _second_--we'll have them tarred and feathered, and flung in the river"!
Says I: "Cert'nly.
But do you mean _before_ you go to Mr. Lothrop's, or--" "Oh," she says, "what am I _thinking_ about"!
she says, and set right down again.
"Don't mind what I said--please don't--you _won't,_ now, _will_ you"?
Laying her silky hand on mine in that kind of a way that I said I would die first.
"I never thought, I was so stirred up," she says; "now go on, and I won't do so any more.
You tell me what to do, and whatever you say I'll do it".
"Well," I says, "it's a rough gang, them two frauds, and I'm fixed so I got to travel with them a while longer, whether I want to or not--I druther not tell you why; and if you was to blow on them this town would get me out of their claws, and I'd be all
Well, we got to save _him_, hain't we?
Of course.
Well, then, we won't blow on them".
Saying them words put a good idea in my head.
I see how maybe I could get me and Jim rid of the frauds; get them jailed here, and then leave.
But I didn't want to run the raft in the daytime without anybody aboard to answer questions but me; so I didn't want the plan to begin working till pretty late to-night.
I says: "Miss Mary Jane, I'll tell you what we'll do, and you won't have to stay at Mr. Lothrop's so long, nuther.
How fur is it"?
"A little short of four miles--right out in the country, back here".
"Well, that 'll answer.
Now you go along out there, and lay low till nine or half-past to-night, and then get them to fetch you home again--tell them you've thought of something.
If you get here before eleven put a candle in this window, and if I don't turn up wait _till_ eleven, and _then_ if I don't turn up it means I'm gone, and out of the way, and safe.
Then you come out and spread the news around, and get these beats jailed".
"Good," she says, "I'll do it".
"And if it just happens so that I don't get away, but get took up along with them, you must up and say I told you the whole thing beforehand, and you must stand by me all you can".
"Stand by you!
indeed I will.
They sha'n't touch a hair of your head"!
she says, and I see her nostrils spread and her eyes snap when she said it, too.
"If I get away I sha'n't be here," I says, "to prove these rapscallions ain't your uncles, and I couldn't do it if I _was_ here.
I could swear they was beats and bummers, that's all, though that's worth something.
Well, there's others can do that better than what I can, and they're people that ain't going to be doubted as quick as I'd be.
I'll tell you how to find them.
Gimme a pencil and a piece of paper.
There--'Royal Nonesuch, Bricksville.
' Put it away, and don't lose it.
When the court wants to find out something about these two, let them send up to Bricksville and say they've got the men that played the Royal Nonesuch, and ask for some witnesses--why, you'll have that entire town down here before you can hardly wink,
And they'll come a-biling, too".
I judged we had got everything fixed about right now.
So I says: "Just let the auction go right along, and don't worry.
Nobody don't have to pay for the things they buy till a whole day after the auction on accounts of the short notice, and they ain't going out of this till they get that money; and the way we've fixed it the sale ain't going to count, and they ain't going
It's just like the way it was with the niggers--it warn't no sale, and the niggers will be back before long.
Why, they can't collect the money for the _niggers_ yet--they're in the worst kind of a fix, Miss Mary".
"Well," she says, "I'll run down to breakfast now, and then I'll start straight for Mr. Lothrop's".
"'Deed, _that_ ain't the ticket, Miss Mary Jane," I says, "by no manner of means; go _before_ breakfast".
"Why"?
"What did you reckon I wanted you to go at all for, Miss Mary"?
"Well, I never thought--and come to think, I don't know.
What was it"?
"Why, it's because you ain't one of these leather-face people.
I don't want no better book than what your face is.
A body can set down and read it off like coarse print.
Do you reckon you can go and face your uncles when they come to kiss you good-morning, and never--" "There, there, don't!
Yes, I'll go before breakfast--I'll be glad to.
And leave my sisters with them"?
"Yes; never mind about them.
They've got to stand it yet a while.
They might suspicion something if all of you was to go.
I don't want you to see them, nor your sisters, nor nobody in this town; if a neighbor was to ask how is your uncles this morning your face would tell something.
No, you go right along, Miss Mary Jane, and I'll fix it with all of them.
I'll tell Miss Susan to give your love to your uncles and say you've went away for a few hours for to get a little rest and change, or to see a friend, and you'll be back to-night or early in the morning".
"Gone to see a friend is all right, but I won't have my love given to them".
"Well, then, it sha'n't be".
It was well enough to tell _her_ so--no harm in it.
It was only a little thing to do, and no trouble; and it's the little things that smooths people's roads the most, down here below; it would make Mary Jane comfortable, and it wouldn't cost nothing.
Then I says: "There's one more thing--that bag of money".
"Well, they've got that; and it makes me feel pretty silly to think _how_ they got it".
"No, you're out, there.
They hain't got it".
"Why, who's got it"?
"I wish I knowed, but I don't.
I _had_ it, because I stole it from them; and I stole it to give to you; and I know where I hid it, but I'm afraid it ain't there no more.
I'm awful sorry, Miss Mary Jane, I'm just as sorry as I can be; but I done the best I could; I did honest.
I come nigh getting caught, and I had to shove it into the first place I come to, and run--and it warn't a good place".
"Oh, stop blaming yourself--it's too bad to do it, and I won't allow it--you couldn't help it; it wasn't your fault.
Where did you hide it"?
I didn't want to set her to thinking about her troubles again; and I couldn't seem to get my mouth to tell her what would make her see that corpse laying in the coffin with that bag of money on his stomach.
So for a minute I didn't say nothing; then I says: "I'd ruther not _tell_ you where I put it, Miss Mary Jane, if you don't mind letting me off; but I'll write it for you on a piece of paper, and you can read it along the road to Mr. Lothrop's, if you
Do you reckon that 'll do"?
"Oh, yes".
So I wrote: "I put it in the coffin.
It was in there when you was crying there, away in the night.
I was behind the door, and I was mighty sorry for you, Miss Mary Jane".
It made my eyes water a little to remember her crying there all by herself in the night, and them devils laying there right under her own roof, shaming her and robbing her; and when I folded it up and give it to her I see the water come into her eyes, too;
I'm going to do everything just as you've told me; and if I don't ever see you again, I sha'n't ever forget you and I'll think of you a many and a many a time, and I'll _pray_ for you, too"!
--and she was gone.
Pray for me!
I reckoned if she knowed me she'd take a job that was more nearer her size.
But I bet she done it, just the same--she was just that kind.
She had the grit to pray for Judus if she took the notion--there warn't no back-down to her, I judge.
You may say what you want to, but in my opinion she had more sand in her than any girl I ever see; in my opinion she was just full of sand.
It sounds like flattery, but it ain't no flattery.
And when it comes to beauty--and goodness, too--she lays over them all.
I hain't ever seen her since that time that I see her go out of that door; no, I hain't ever seen her since, but I reckon I've thought of her a many and a many a million times, and of her saying she would pray for me; and if ever I'd a thought it would
Well, Mary Jane she lit out the back way, I reckon; because nobody see her go.
When I struck Susan and the hare-lip, I says: "What's the name of them people over on t'other side of the river that you all goes to see sometimes"?
They says: "There's several; but it's the Proctors, mainly".
"That's the name," I says; "I most forgot it.
Well, Miss Mary Jane she told me to tell you she's gone over there in a dreadful hurry--one of them's sick".
"Which one"?
"I don't know; leastways, I kinder forget; but I thinks it's--" "Sakes alive, I hope it ain't _Hanner_"?
"I'm sorry to say it," I says, "but Hanner's the very one".
"My goodness, and she so well only last week!
Is she took bad"?
"It ain't no name for it.
They set up with her all night, Miss Mary Jane said, and they don't think she'll last many hours".
"Only think of that, now!
What's the matter with her"?
I couldn't think of anything reasonable, right off that way, so I says: "Mumps".
"Mumps your granny!
They don't set up with people that's got the mumps".
"They don't, don't they?
You better bet they do with _these_ mumps.
These mumps is different.
It's a new kind, Miss Mary Jane said".
"How's it a new kind"?
"Because it's mixed up with other things".
"What other things"?
"Well, measles, and whooping-cough, and erysiplas, and consumption, and yaller janders, and brain-fever, and I don't know what all".
"My land!
And they call it the _mumps_"?
"That's what Miss Mary Jane said".
"Well, what in the nation do they call it the _mumps_ for"?
"Why, because it _is_ the mumps.
That's what it starts with".
"Well, ther' ain't no sense in it.
A body might stump his toe, and take pison, and fall down the well, and break his neck, and bust his brains out, and somebody come along and ask what killed him, and some numskull up and say, 'Why, he stumped his _toe_.
' Would ther' be any sense in that?
_No_.
And ther' ain't no sense in _this_, nuther.
Is it ketching"?
"Is it _ketching_?
Why, how you talk.
Is a _harrow_ catching--in the dark?
If you don't hitch on to one tooth, you're bound to on another, ain't you?
And you can't get away with that tooth without fetching the whole harrow along, can you?
Well, these kind of mumps is a kind of a harrow, as you may say--and it ain't no slouch of a harrow, nuther, you come to get it hitched on good".
"Well, it's awful, I think," says the hare-lip.
"I'll go to Uncle Harvey and--" "Oh, yes," I says, "I _would_.
Of _course_ I would.
I wouldn't lose no time".
"Well, why wouldn't you"?
"Just look at it a minute, and maybe you can see.
Hain't your uncles obleegd to get along home to England as fast as they can?
And do you reckon they'd be mean enough to go off and leave you to go all that journey by yourselves?
_you_ know they'll wait for you.
So fur, so good.
Your uncle Harvey's a preacher, ain't he?
Very well, then; is a _preacher_ going to deceive a steamboat clerk?
is he going to deceive a _ship clerk?
_--so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane go aboard?
Now _you_ know he ain't.
What _will_ he do, then?
Why, he'll say, 'It's a great pity, but my church matters has got to get along the best way they can; for my niece has been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum mumps, and so it's my bounden duty to set down here and wait the three months it takes to
' But never mind, if you think it's best to tell your uncle Harvey--" "Shucks, and stay fooling around here when we could all be having good times in England whilst we was waiting to find out whether Mary Jane's got it or not?
Why, you talk like a muggins".
"Well, anyway, maybe you'd better tell some of the neighbors".
"Listen at that, now.
You do beat all for natural stupidness.
Can't you _see_ that _they'd_ go and tell?
Ther' ain't no way but just to not tell anybody at _all_".
"Well, maybe you're right--yes, I judge you _are_ right".
"But I reckon we ought to tell Uncle Harvey she's gone out a while, anyway, so he won't be uneasy about her"?
"Yes, Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that.
She says, 'Tell them to give Uncle Harvey and William my love and a kiss, and say I've run over the river to see Mr.'--Mr.--what _is_ the name of that rich family your uncle Peter used to think so much of?
--I mean the one that--" "Why, you must mean the Apthorps, ain't it"?
"Of course; bother them kind of names, a body can't ever seem to remember them, half the time, somehow.
Yes, she said, say she has run over for to ask the Apthorps to be sure and come to the auction and buy this house, because she allowed her uncle Peter would ruther they had it than anybody else; and she's going to stick to them till they say they'll
She said, don't say nothing about the Proctors, but only about the Apthorps--which 'll be perfectly true, because she is going there to speak about their buying the house; I know it, because she told me so herself".
"All right," they said, and cleared out to lay for their uncles, and give them the love and the kisses, and tell them the message.
Everything was all right now.
The girls wouldn't say nothing because they wanted to go to England; and the king and the duke would ruther Mary Jane was off working for the auction than around in reach of Doctor Robinson.
I felt very good; I judged I had done it pretty neat--I reckoned Tom Sawyer couldn't a done it no neater himself.
Of course he would a throwed more style into it, but I can't do that very handy, not being brung up to it.
Well, they held the auction in the public square, along towards the end of the afternoon, and it strung along, and strung along, and the old man he was on hand and looking his level pisonest, up there longside of the auctioneer, and chipping in a little
But by and by the thing dragged through, and everything was sold--everything but a little old trifling lot in the graveyard.
So they'd got to work that off--I never see such a girafft as the king was for wanting to swallow _everything_.
Well, whilst they was at it a steamboat landed, and in about two minutes up comes a crowd a-whooping and yelling and laughing and carrying on, and singing out: "_Here's_ your opposition line!
here's your two sets o' heirs to old Peter Wilks--and you pays your money and you takes your choice"!
CHAPTER XXIX.
THEY was fetching a very nice-looking old gentleman along, and a nice-looking younger one, with his right arm in a sling.
And, my souls, how the people yelled and laughed, and kept it up.
But I didn't see no joke about it, and I judged it would strain the duke and the king some to see any.
I reckoned they'd turn pale.
But no, nary a pale did _they_ turn.
The duke he never let on he suspicioned what was up, but just went a goo-gooing around, happy and satisfied, like a jug that's googling out buttermilk; and as for the king, he just gazed and gazed down sorrowful on them new-comers like it give him the
Oh, he done it admirable.
Lots of the principal people gethered around the king, to let him see they was on his side.
That old gentleman that had just come looked all puzzled to death.
Pretty soon he begun to speak, and I see straight off he pronounced _like_ an Englishman--not the king's way, though the king's _was_ pretty good for an imitation.
I can't give the old gent's words, nor I can't imitate him; but he turned around to the crowd, and says, about like this: "This is a surprise to me which I wasn't looking for; and I'll acknowledge, candid and frank, I ain't very well fixed to meet it and
I am Peter Wilks' brother Harvey, and this is his brother William, which can't hear nor speak--and can't even make signs to amount to much, now't he's only got one hand to work them with.
We are who we say we are; and in a day or two, when I get the baggage, I can prove it.
But up till then I won't say nothing more, but go to the hotel and wait".
So him and the new dummy started off; and the king he laughs, and blethers out: "Broke his arm--_very_ likely, _ain't_ it?
--and very convenient, too, for a fraud that's got to make signs, and ain't learnt how.
Lost their baggage!
That's _mighty_ good!
--and mighty ingenious--under the _circumstances_"!
So he laughed again; and so did everybody else, except three or four, or maybe half a dozen.
One of these was that doctor; another one was a sharp-looking gentleman, with a carpet-bag of the old-fashioned kind made out of carpet-stuff, that had just come off of the steamboat and was talking to him in a low voice, and glancing towards the king
And when the king got done this husky up and says: "Say, looky here; if you are Harvey Wilks, when'd you come to this town"?
"The day before the funeral, friend," says the king.
"But what time o' day"?
"In the evenin'--'bout an hour er two before sundown".
"_How'd_ you come"?
"I come down on the Susan Powell from Cincinnati".
"Well, then, how'd you come to be up at the Pint in the _mornin_'--in a canoe"?
"I warn't up at the Pint in the mornin'".
"It's a lie".
Several of them jumped for him and begged him not to talk that way to an old man and a preacher.
"Preacher be hanged, he's a fraud and a liar.
He was up at the Pint that mornin'.
I live up there, don't I?
Well, I was up there, and he was up there.
I see him there.
He come in a canoe, along with Tim Collins and a boy".
The doctor he up and says: "Would you know the boy again if you was to see him, Hines"?
"I reckon I would, but I don't know.
Why, yonder he is, now.
I know him perfectly easy".
It was me he pointed at.
The doctor says: "Neighbors, I don't know whether the new couple is frauds or not; but if _these_ two ain't frauds, I am an idiot, that's all.
I think it's our duty to see that they don't get away from here till we've looked into this thing.
Come along, Hines; come along, the rest of you.
We'll take these fellows to the tavern and affront them with t'other couple, and I reckon we'll find out _something_ before we get through".
It was nuts for the crowd, though maybe not for the king's friends; so we all started.
It was about sundown.
The doctor he led me along by the hand, and was plenty kind enough, but he never let go my hand.
We all got in a big room in the hotel, and lit up some candles, and fetched in the new couple.
First, the doctor says: "I don't wish to be too hard on these two men, but I think they're frauds, and they may have complices that we don't know nothing about.
If they have, won't the complices get away with that bag of gold Peter Wilks left?
It ain't unlikely.
If these men ain't frauds, they won't object to sending for that money and letting us keep it till they prove they're all right--ain't that so"?
Everybody agreed to that.
So I judged they had our gang in a pretty tight place right at the outstart.
But the king he only looked sorrowful, and says: "Gentlemen, I wish the money was there, for I ain't got no disposition to throw anything in the way of a fair, open, out-and-out investigation o' this misable business; but, alas, the money ain't there;
"Where is it, then"?
"Well, when my niece give it to me to keep for her I took and hid it inside o' the straw tick o' my bed, not wishin' to bank it for the few days we'd be here, and considerin' the bed a safe place, we not bein' used to niggers, and suppos'n' 'em honest,
The niggers stole it the very next mornin' after I had went down stairs; and when I sold 'em I hadn't missed the money yit, so they got clean away with it.
My servant here k'n tell you 'bout it, gentlemen".
The doctor and several said "Shucks"!
and I see nobody didn't altogether believe him.
One man asked me if I see the niggers steal it.
I said no, but I see them sneaking out of the room and hustling away, and I never thought nothing, only I reckoned they was afraid they had waked up my master and was trying to get away before he made trouble with them.
That was all they asked me.
Then the doctor whirls on me and says: "Are _you_ English, too"?
I says yes; and him and some others laughed, and said, "Stuff"!
Well, then they sailed in on the general investigation, and there we had it, up and down, hour in, hour out, and nobody never said a word about supper, nor ever seemed to think about it--and so they kept it up, and kept it up; and it _was_ the worst
They made the king tell his yarn, and they made the old gentleman tell his'n; and anybody but a lot of prejudiced chuckleheads would a _seen_ that the old gentleman was spinning truth and t'other one lies.
And by and by they had me up to tell what I knowed.
The king he give me a left-handed look out of the corner of his eye, and so I knowed enough to talk on the right side.
I begun to tell about Sheffield, and how we lived there, and all about the English Wilkses, and so on; but I didn't get pretty fur till the doctor begun to laugh; and Levi Bell, the lawyer, says: "Set down, my boy; I wouldn't strain myself if I was you.
I reckon you ain't used to lying, it don't seem to come handy; what you want is practice.
You do it pretty awkward".
I didn't care nothing for the compliment, but I was glad to be let off, anyway.
The doctor he started to say something, and turns and says: "If you'd been in town at first, Levi Bell--" The king broke in and reached out his hand, and says: "Why, is this my poor dead brother's old friend that he's wrote so often about"?
The lawyer and him shook hands, and the lawyer smiled and looked pleased, and they talked right along awhile, and then got to one side and talked low; and at last the lawyer speaks up and says: "That 'll fix it.
I'll take the order and send it, along with your brother's, and then they'll know it's all right".
So they got some paper and a pen, and the king he set down and twisted his head to one side, and chawed his tongue, and scrawled off something; and then they give the pen to the duke--and then for the first time the duke looked sick.
But he took the pen and wrote.
So then the lawyer turns to the new old gentleman and says: "You and your brother please write a line or two and sign your names".
The old gentleman wrote, but nobody couldn't read it.
The lawyer looked powerful astonished, and says: "Well, it beats _me_"--and snaked a lot of old letters out of his pocket, and examined them, and then examined the old man's writing, and then _them_ again; and then says: "These old letters is from
Now, here's some letters from--" The new old gentleman says: "If you please, let me explain.
Nobody can read my hand but my brother there--so he copies for me.
It's _his_ hand you've got there, not mine".
"_Well_"!
says the lawyer, "this _is_ a state of things.
I've got some of William's letters, too; so if you'll get him to write a line or so we can com--" "He _can't_ write with his left hand," says the old gentleman.
"If he could use his right hand, you would see that he wrote his own letters and mine too.
Look at both, please--they're by the same hand".
The lawyer done it, and says: "I believe it's so--and if it ain't so, there's a heap stronger resemblance than I'd noticed before, anyway.
Well, well, well!
I thought we was right on the track of a solution, but it's gone to grass, partly.
But anyway, one thing is proved--_these_ two ain't either of 'em Wilkses"--and he wagged his head towards the king and the duke.
Well, what do you think?
That muleheaded old fool wouldn't give in _then_!
Indeed he wouldn't.
Said it warn't no fair test.
Said his brother William was the cussedest joker in the world, and hadn't tried to write--_he_ see William was going to play one of his jokes the minute he put the pen to paper.
And so he warmed up and went warbling and warbling right along till he was actuly beginning to believe what he was saying _himself_; but pretty soon the new gentleman broke in, and says: "I've thought of something.
Is there anybody here that helped to lay out my br--helped to lay out the late Peter Wilks for burying"?
"Yes," says somebody, "me and Ab Turner done it.
We're both here".
Then the old man turns towards the king, and says: "Perhaps this gentleman can tell me what was tattooed on his breast"?
Blamed if the king didn't have to brace up mighty quick, or he'd a squshed down like a bluff bank that the river has cut under, it took him so sudden; and, mind you, it was a thing that was calculated to make most _anybody_ sqush to get fetched such a
He whitened a little; he couldn't help it; and it was mighty still in there, and everybody bending a little forwards and gazing at him.
Says I to myself, _now_ he'll throw up the sponge--there ain't no more use.
Well, did he?
A body can't hardly believe it, but he didn't.
I reckon he thought he'd keep the thing up till he tired them people out, so they'd thin out, and him and the duke could break loose and get away.
Anyway, he set there, and pretty soon he begun to smile, and says: "Mf!
It's a _very_ tough question, _ain't_ it!
_yes_, sir, I k'n tell you what's tattooed on his breast.
It's jest a small, thin, blue arrow--that's what it is; and if you don't look clost, you can't see it.
_now_ what do you say--hey"?
Well, I never see anything like that old blister for clean out-and-out cheek.
The new old gentleman turns brisk towards Ab Turner and his pard, and his eye lights up like he judged he'd got the king _this_ time, and says: "There--you've heard what he said!
Was there any such mark on Peter Wilks' breast"?
Both of them spoke up and says: "We didn't see no such mark".
"Good"!
says the old gentleman.
"Now, what you _did_ see on his breast was a small dim P, and a B (which is an initial he dropped when he was young), and a W, with dashes between them, so: P--B--W"--and he marked them that way on a piece of paper.
"Come, ain't that what you saw"?
Both of them spoke up again, and says: "No, we _didn't_.
We never seen any marks at all".
Well, everybody _was_ in a state of mind now, and they sings out: "The whole _bilin_' of 'm 's frauds!
Le's duck 'em!
le's drown 'em!
le's ride 'em on a rail"!
and everybody was whooping at once, and there was a rattling powwow.
But the lawyer he jumps on the table and yells, and says: "Gentlemen--gentle_men!
_ Hear me just a word--just a _single_ word--if you _please_!
There's one way yet--let's go and dig up the corpse and look".
That took them.
"Hooray"!
they all shouted, and was starting right off; but the lawyer and the doctor sung out: "Hold on, hold on!
Collar all these four men and the boy, and fetch _them_ along, too"!
"We'll do it"!
they all shouted; "and if we don't find them marks we'll lynch the whole gang"!
I _was_ scared, now, I tell you.
But there warn't no getting away, you know.
They gripped us all, and marched us right along, straight for the graveyard, which was a mile and a half down the river, and the whole town at our heels, for we made noise enough, and it was only nine in the evening.
As we went by our house I wished I hadn't sent Mary Jane out of town; because now if I could tip her the wink she'd light out and save me, and blow on our dead-beats.
Well, we swarmed along down the river road, just carrying on like wildcats; and to make it more scary the sky was darking up, and the lightning beginning to wink and flitter, and the wind to shiver amongst the leaves.
This was the most awful trouble and most dangersome I ever was in; and I was kinder stunned; everything was going so different from what I had allowed for; stead of being fixed so I could take my own time if I wanted to, and see all the fun, and have Mary
If they didn't find them-- I couldn't bear to think about it; and yet, somehow, I couldn't think about nothing else.
It got darker and darker, and it was a beautiful time to give the crowd the slip; but that big husky had me by the wrist--Hines--and a body might as well try to give Goliar the slip.
He dragged me right along, he was so excited, and I had to run to keep up.
When they got there they swarmed into the graveyard and washed over it like an overflow.
And when they got to the grave they found they had about a hundred times as many shovels as they wanted, but nobody hadn't thought to fetch a lantern.
But they sailed into digging anyway by the flicker of the lightning, and sent a man to the nearest house, a half a mile off, to borrow one.
So they dug and dug like everything; and it got awful dark, and the rain started, and the wind swished and swushed along, and the lightning come brisker and brisker, and the thunder boomed; but them people never took no notice of it, they was so full of
At last they got out the coffin and begun to unscrew the lid, and then such another crowding and shouldering and shoving as there was, to scrouge in and get a sight, you never see; and in the dark, that way, it was awful.
Hines he hurt my wrist dreadful pulling and tugging so, and I reckon he clean forgot I was in the world, he was so excited and panting.
All of a sudden the lightning let go a perfect sluice of white glare, and somebody sings out: "By the living jingo, here's the bag of gold on his breast"!
Hines let out a whoop, like everybody else, and dropped my wrist and give a big surge to bust his way in and get a look, and the way I lit out and shinned for the road in the dark there ain't nobody can tell.
I had the road all to myself, and I fairly flew--leastways, I had it all to myself except the solid dark, and the now-and-then glares, and the buzzing of the rain, and the thrashing of the wind, and the splitting of the thunder; and sure as you are born I
When I struck the town I see there warn't nobody out in the storm, so I never hunted for no back streets, but humped it straight through the main one; and when I begun to get towards our house I aimed my eye and set it.
No light there; the house all dark--which made me feel sorry and disappointed, I didn't know why.
But at last, just as I was sailing by, _flash_ comes the light in Mary Jane's window!
and my heart swelled up sudden, like to bust; and the same second the house and all was behind me in the dark, and wasn't ever going to be before me no more in this world.
She _was_ the best girl I ever see, and had the most sand.
The minute I was far enough above the town to see I could make the towhead, I begun to look sharp for a boat to borrow, and the first time the lightning showed me one that wasn't chained I snatched it and shoved.
It was a canoe, and warn't fastened with nothing but a rope.
The towhead was a rattling big distance off, away out there in the middle of the river, but I didn't lose no time; and when I struck the raft at last I was so fagged I would a just laid down to blow and gasp if I could afforded it.
But I didn't.
As I sprung aboard I sung out: "Out with you, Jim, and set her loose!
Glory be to goodness, we're shut of them"!
Jim lit out, and was a-coming for me with both arms spread, he was so full of joy; but when I glimpsed him in the lightning my heart shot up in my mouth and I went overboard backwards; for I forgot he was old King Lear and a drownded A-rab all in one, and
But Jim fished me out, and was going to hug me and bless me, and so on, he was so glad I was back and we was shut of the king and the duke, but I says: "Not now; have it for breakfast, have it for breakfast!
Cut loose and let her slide"!
So in two seconds away we went a-sliding down the river, and it _did_ seem so good to be free again and all by ourselves on the big river, and nobody to bother us.
I had to skip around a bit, and jump up and crack my heels a few times--I couldn't help it; but about the third crack I noticed a sound that I knowed mighty well, and held my breath and listened and waited; and sure enough, when the next flash busted out
--and just a-laying to their oars and making their skiff hum!
It was the king and the duke.
So I wilted right down on to the planks then, and give up; and it was all I could do to keep from crying.
CHAPTER XXX.
WHEN they got aboard the king went for me, and shook me by the collar, and says: "Tryin' to give us the slip, was ye, you pup!
Tired of our company, hey"?
I says: "No, your majesty, we warn't--_please_ don't, your majesty"!
"Quick, then, and tell us what _was_ your idea, or I'll shake the insides out o' you"!
"Honest, I'll tell you everything just as it happened, your majesty.
The man that had a-holt of me was very good to me, and kept saying he had a boy about as big as me that died last year, and he was sorry to see a boy in such a dangerous fix; and when they was all took by surprise by finding the gold, and made a rush for
' and I lit out.
It didn't seem no good for _me_ to stay--I couldn't do nothing, and I didn't want to be hung if I could get away.
So I never stopped running till I found the canoe; and when I got here I told Jim to hurry, or they'd catch me and hang me yet, and said I was afeard you and the duke wasn't alive now, and I was awful sorry, and so was Jim, and was awful glad when we see
Jim said it was so; and the king told him to shut up, and said, "Oh, yes, it's _mighty_ likely"!
and shook me up again, and said he reckoned he'd drownd me.
But the duke says: "Leggo the boy, you old idiot!
Would _you_ a done any different?
Did you inquire around for _him_ when you got loose?
I don't remember it".
So the king let go of me, and begun to cuss that town and everybody in it.
But the duke says: "You better a blame' sight give _yourself_ a good cussing, for you're the one that's entitled to it most.
You hain't done a thing from the start that had any sense in it, except coming out so cool and cheeky with that imaginary blue-arrow mark.
That _was_ bright--it was right down bully; and it was the thing that saved us.
For if it hadn't been for that they'd a jailed us till them Englishmen's baggage come--and then--the penitentiary, you bet!
But that trick took 'em to the graveyard, and the gold done us a still bigger kindness; for if the excited fools hadn't let go all holts and made that rush to get a look we'd a slept in our cravats to-night--cravats warranted to _wear_, too--longer than
They was still a minute--thinking; then the king says, kind of absent-minded like: "Mf!
And we reckoned the _niggers_ stole it"!
That made me squirm!
"Yes," says the duke, kinder slow and deliberate and sarcastic, "_we_ did".
After about a half a minute the king drawls out: "Leastways, I did".
The duke says, the same way: "On the contrary, I did".
The king kind of ruffles up, and says: "Looky here, Bilgewater, what'r you referrin' to"?
The duke says, pretty brisk: "When it comes to that, maybe you'll let me ask, what was _you_ referring to"?
"Shucks"!
says the king, very sarcastic; "but I don't know--maybe you was asleep, and didn't know what you was about".
The duke bristles up now, and says: "Oh, let _up_ on this cussed nonsense; do you take me for a blame' fool?
Don't you reckon I know who hid that money in that coffin"?
"_Yes_, sir!
I know you _do_ know, because you done it yourself"!
"It's a lie"!
--and the duke went for him.
The king sings out: "Take y'r hands off!
--leggo my throat!
--I take it all back"!
The duke says: "Well, you just own up, first, that you _did_ hide that money there, intending to give me the slip one of these days, and come back and dig it up, and have it all to yourself".
"Wait jest a minute, duke--answer me this one question, honest and fair; if you didn't put the money there, say it, and I'll b'lieve you, and take back everything I said".
"You old scoundrel, I didn't, and you know I didn't.
There, now"!
"Well, then, I b'lieve you.
But answer me only jest this one more--now _don't_ git mad; didn't you have it in your mind to hook the money and hide it"?
The duke never said nothing for a little bit; then he says: "Well, I don't care if I _did_, I didn't _do_ it, anyway.
But you not only had it in mind to do it, but you _done_ it".
"I wisht I never die if I done it, duke, and that's honest.
I won't say I warn't goin' to do it, because I _was_; but you--I mean somebody--got in ahead o' me".
"It's a lie!
You done it, and you got to _say_ you done it, or--" The king began to gurgle, and then he gasps out: "'Nough!
--I _own up!
_" I was very glad to hear him say that; it made me feel much more easier than what I was feeling before.
So the duke took his hands off and says: "If you ever deny it again I'll drown you.
It's _well_ for you to set there and blubber like a baby--it's fitten for you, after the way you've acted.
I never see such an old ostrich for wanting to gobble everything--and I a-trusting you all the time, like you was my own father.
You ought to been ashamed of yourself to stand by and hear it saddled on to a lot of poor niggers, and you never say a word for 'em.
It makes me feel ridiculous to think I was soft enough to _believe_ that rubbage.
Cuss you, I can see now why you was so anxious to make up the deffisit--you wanted to get what money I'd got out of the Nonesuch and one thing or another, and scoop it _all_"!
The king says, timid, and still a-snuffling: "Why, duke, it was you that said make up the deffisit; it warn't me".
"Dry up!
I don't want to hear no more out of you"!
says the duke.
"And _now_ you see what you GOT by it.
They've got all their own money back, and all of _ourn_ but a shekel or two _besides_.
G'long to bed, and don't you deffersit _me_ no more deffersits, long 's _you_ live"!
So the king sneaked into the wigwam and took to his bottle for comfort, and before long the duke tackled HIS bottle; and so in about a half an hour they was as thick as thieves again, and the tighter they got the lovinger they got, and went off a-snoring
They both got powerful mellow, but I noticed the king didn't get mellow enough to forget to remember to not deny about hiding the money-bag again.
That made me feel easy and satisfied.
Of course when they got to snoring we had a long gabble, and I told Jim everything.
CHAPTER XXXI.
WE dasn't stop again at any town for days and days; kept right along down the river.
We was down south in the warm weather now, and a mighty long ways from home.
We begun to come to trees with Spanish moss on them, hanging down from the limbs like long, gray beards.
It was the first I ever see it growing, and it made the woods look solemn and dismal.
So now the frauds reckoned they was out of danger, and they begun to work the villages again.
First they done a lecture on temperance; but they didn't make enough for them both to get drunk on.
Then in another village they started a dancing-school; but they didn't know no more how to dance than a kangaroo does; so the first prance they made the general public jumped in and pranced them out of town.
Another time they tried to go at yellocution; but they didn't yellocute long till the audience got up and give them a solid good cussing, and made them skip out.
They tackled missionarying, and mesmerizing, and doctoring, and telling fortunes, and a little of everything; but they couldn't seem to have no luck.
So at last they got just about dead broke, and laid around the raft as she floated along, thinking and thinking, and never saying nothing, by the half a day at a time, and dreadful blue and desperate.
And at last they took a change and begun to lay their heads together in the wigwam and talk low and confidential two or three hours at a time.
Jim and me got uneasy.
We didn't like the look of it.
We judged they was studying up some kind of worse deviltry than ever.
We turned it over and over, and at last we made up our minds they was going to break into somebody's house or store, or was going into the counterfeit-money business, or something.
So then we was pretty scared, and made up an agreement that we wouldn't have nothing in the world to do with such actions, and if we ever got the least show we would give them the cold shake and clear out and leave them behind.
Well, early one morning we hid the raft in a good, safe place about two mile below a little bit of a shabby village named Pikesville, and the king he went ashore and told us all to stay hid whilst he went up to town and smelt around to see if anybody had
("House to rob, you _mean_," says I to myself; "and when you get through robbing it you'll come back here and wonder what has become of me and Jim and the raft--and you'll have to take it out in wondering".
) And he said if he warn't back by midday the duke and me would know it was all right, and we was to come along.
So we stayed where we was.
The duke he fretted and sweated around, and was in a mighty sour way.
He scolded us for everything, and we couldn't seem to do nothing right; he found fault with every little thing.
Something was a-brewing, sure.
I was good and glad when midday come and no king; we could have a change, anyway--and maybe a chance for _the_ change on top of it.
So me and the duke went up to the village, and hunted around there for the king, and by and by we found him in the back room of a little low doggery, very tight, and a lot of loafers bullyragging him for sport, and he a-cussing and a-threatening with all
The duke he begun to abuse him for an old fool, and the king begun to sass back, and the minute they was fairly at it I lit out and shook the reefs out of my hind legs, and spun down the river road like a deer, for I see our chance; and I made up my mind
I got down there all out of breath but loaded up with joy, and sung out: "Set her loose, Jim!
we're all right now"!
But there warn't no answer, and nobody come out of the wigwam.
Jim was gone!
I set up a shout--and then another--and then another one; and run this way and that in the woods, whooping and screeching; but it warn't no use--old Jim was gone.
Then I set down and cried; I couldn't help it.
But I couldn't set still long.
Pretty soon I went out on the road, trying to think what I better do, and I run across a boy walking, and asked him if he'd seen a strange nigger dressed so and so, and he says: "Yes".
"Whereabouts"?
says I. "Down to Silas Phelps' place, two mile below here.
He's a runaway nigger, and they've got him.
Was you looking for him"?
"You bet I ain't!
I run across him in the woods about an hour or two ago, and he said if I hollered he'd cut my livers out--and told me to lay down and stay where I was; and I done it.
Been there ever since; afeard to come out".
"Well," he says, "you needn't be afeard no more, becuz they've got him.
He run off f'm down South, som'ers".
"It's a good job they got him".
"Well, I _reckon_!
There's two hunderd dollars reward on him.
It's like picking up money out'n the road".
"Yes, it is--and I could a had it if I'd been big enough; I see him _first_.
Who nailed him"?
"It was an old fellow--a stranger--and he sold out his chance in him for forty dollars, becuz he's got to go up the river and can't wait.
Think o' that, now!
You bet _I'd_ wait, if it was seven year".
"That's me, every time," says I. "But maybe his chance ain't worth no more than that, if he'll sell it so cheap.
Maybe there's something ain't straight about it".
"But it _is_, though--straight as a string.
I see the handbill myself.
It tells all about him, to a dot--paints him like a picture, and tells the plantation he's frum, below Newr_leans_.
No-sirree-_bob_, they ain't no trouble 'bout _that_ speculation, you bet you.
Say, gimme a chaw tobacker, won't ye"?
I didn't have none, so he left.
I went to the raft, and set down in the wigwam to think.
But I couldn't come to nothing.
I thought till I wore my head sore, but I couldn't see no way out of the trouble.
After all this long journey, and after all we'd done for them scoundrels, here it was all come to nothing, everything all busted up and ruined, because they could have the heart to serve Jim such a trick as that, and make him a slave again all his life,
Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times better for Jim to be a slave at home where his family was, as long as he'd _got_ to be a slave, and so I'd better write a letter to Tom Sawyer and tell him to tell Miss Watson where he was.
But I soon give up that notion for two things: she'd be mad and disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness for leaving her, and so she'd sell him straight down the river again; and if she didn't, everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger, and
And then think of _me_!
It would get all around that Huck Finn helped a nigger to get his freedom; and if I was ever to see anybody from that town again I'd be ready to get down and lick his boots for shame.
That's just the way: a person does a low-down thing, and then he don't want to take no consequences of it.
Thinks as long as he can hide it, it ain't no disgrace.
That was my fix exactly.
The more I studied about this the more my conscience went to grinding me, and the more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feeling.
And at last, when it hit me all of a sudden that here was the plain hand of Providence slapping me in the face and letting me know my wickedness was being watched all the time from up there in heaven, whilst I was stealing a poor old woman's nigger that
Well, I tried the best I could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by saying I was brung up wicked, and so I warn't so much to blame; but something inside of me kept saying, "There was the Sunday-school, you could a gone to it; and if you'd a done
It made me shiver.
And I about made up my mind to pray, and see if I couldn't try to quit being the kind of a boy I was and be better.
So I kneeled down.
But the words wouldn't come.
Why wouldn't they?
It warn't no use to try and hide it from Him.
Nor from _me_, neither.
I knowed very well why they wouldn't come.
It was because my heart warn't right; it was because I warn't square; it was because I was playing double.
I was letting _on_ to give up sin, but away inside of me I was holding on to the biggest one of all.
I was trying to make my mouth _say_ I would do the right thing and the clean thing, and go and write to that nigger's owner and tell where he was; but deep down in me I knowed it was a lie, and He knowed it.
You can't pray a lie--I found that out.
So I was full of trouble, full as I could be; and didn't know what to do.
At last I had an idea; and I says, I'll go and write the letter--and then see if I can pray.
Why, it was astonishing, the way I felt as light as a feather right straight off, and my troubles all gone.
So I got a piece of paper and a pencil, all glad and excited, and set down and wrote: Miss Watson, your runaway nigger Jim is down here two mile below Pikesville, and Mr. Phelps has got him and he will give him up for the reward if you send.
_Huck Finn.
_ I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now.
But I didn't do it straight off, but laid the paper down and set there thinking--thinking how good it was all this happened so, and how near I come to being lost and going to hell.
And went on thinking.
And got to thinking over our trip down the river; and I see Jim before me all the time: in the day and in the night-time, sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms, and we a-floating along, talking and singing and laughing.
But somehow I couldn't seem to strike no places to harden me against him, but only the other kind.
I'd see him standing my watch on top of his'n, 'stead of calling me, so I could go on sleeping; and see him how glad he was when I come back out of the fog; and when I come to him again in the swamp, up there where the feud was; and such-like times; and
It was a close place.
I took it up, and held it in my hand.
I was a-trembling, because I'd got to decide, forever, betwixt two things, and I knowed it.
I studied a minute, sort of holding my breath, and then says to myself: "All right, then, I'll _go_ to hell"--and tore it up.
It was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said.
And I let them stay said; and never thought no more about reforming.
I shoved the whole thing out of my head, and said I would take up wickedness again, which was in my line, being brung up to it, and the other warn't.
And for a starter I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again; and if I could think up anything worse, I would do that, too; because as long as I was in, and in for good, I might as well go the whole hog.
Then I set to thinking over how to get at it, and turned over some considerable many ways in my mind; and at last fixed up a plan that suited me.
So then I took the bearings of a woody island that was down the river a piece, and as soon as it was fairly dark I crept out with my raft and went for it, and hid it there, and then turned in.
I slept the night through, and got up before it was light, and had my breakfast, and put on my store clothes, and tied up some others and one thing or another in a bundle, and took the canoe and cleared for shore.
I landed below where I judged was Phelps's place, and hid my bundle in the woods, and then filled up the canoe with water, and loaded rocks into her and sunk her where I could find her again when I wanted her, about a quarter of a mile below a little
Then I struck up the road, and when I passed the mill I see a sign on it, "Phelps's Sawmill," and when I come to the farm-houses, two or three hundred yards further along, I kept my eyes peeled, but didn't see nobody around, though it was good daylight
But I didn't mind, because I didn't want to see nobody just yet--I only wanted to get the lay of the land.
According to my plan, I was going to turn up there from the village, not from below.
So I just took a look, and shoved along, straight for town.
Well, the very first man I see when I got there was the duke.
He was sticking up a bill for the Royal Nonesuch--three-night performance--like that other time.
They had the cheek, them frauds!
I was right on him before I could shirk.
He looked astonished, and says: "Hel-_lo_!
Where'd _you_ come from"?
Then he says, kind of glad and eager, "Where's the raft?
--got her in a good place"?
I says: "Why, that's just what I was going to ask your grace".
Then he didn't look so joyful, and says: "What was your idea for asking _me_"?
he says.
"Well," I says, "when I see the king in that doggery yesterday I says to myself, we can't get him home for hours, till he's soberer; so I went a-loafing around town to put in the time and wait.
A man up and offered me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over the river and back to fetch a sheep, and so I went along; but when we was dragging him to the boat, and the man left me a-holt of the rope and went behind him to shove him along, he was too
We didn't have no dog, and so we had to chase him all over the country till we tired him out.
We never got him till dark; then we fetched him over, and I started down for the raft.
When I got there and see it was gone, I says to myself, 'They've got into trouble and had to leave; and they've took my nigger, which is the only nigger I've got in the world, and now I'm in a strange country, and ain't got no property no more, nor
I slept in the woods all night.
But what _did_ become of the raft, then?
--and Jim--poor Jim"!
"Blamed if I know--that is, what's become of the raft.
That old fool had made a trade and got forty dollars, and when we found him in the doggery the loafers had matched half-dollars with him and got every cent but what he'd spent for whisky; and when I got him home late last night and found the raft gone,
'" "I wouldn't shake my _nigger_, would I?
--the only nigger I had in the world, and the only property".
"We never thought of that.
Fact is, I reckon we'd come to consider him _our_ nigger; yes, we did consider him so--goodness knows we had trouble enough for him.
So when we see the raft was gone and we flat broke, there warn't anything for it but to try the Royal Nonesuch another shake.
And I've pegged along ever since, dry as a powder-horn.
Where's that ten cents?
Give it here".
I had considerable money, so I give him ten cents, but begged him to spend it for something to eat, and give me some, because it was all the money I had, and I hadn't had nothing to eat since yesterday.
He never said nothing.
The next minute he whirls on me and says: "Do you reckon that nigger would blow on us?
We'd skin him if he done that"!
"How can he blow?
Hain't he run off"?
"No!
That old fool sold him, and never divided with me, and the money's gone".
"_Sold_ him"?
I says, and begun to cry; "why, he was _my_ nigger, and that was my money.
Where is he?
--I want my nigger".
"Well, you can't _get_ your nigger, that's all--so dry up your blubbering.
Looky here--do you think _you'd_ venture to blow on us?
Blamed if I think I'd trust you.
Why, if you _was_ to blow on us--" He stopped, but I never see the duke look so ugly out of his eyes before.
I went on a-whimpering, and says: "I don't want to blow on nobody; and I ain't got no time to blow, nohow.
I got to turn out and find my nigger".
He looked kinder bothered, and stood there with his bills fluttering on his arm, thinking, and wrinkling up his forehead.
At last he says: "I'll tell you something.
We got to be here three days.
If you'll promise you won't blow, and won't let the nigger blow, I'll tell you where to find him".
So I promised, and he says: "A farmer by the name of Silas Ph--" and then he stopped.
You see, he started to tell me the truth; but when he stopped that way, and begun to study and think again, I reckoned he was changing his mind.
And so he was.
He wouldn't trust me; he wanted to make sure of having me out of the way the whole three days.
So pretty soon he says: "The man that bought him is named Abram Foster--Abram G. Foster--and he lives forty mile back here in the country, on the road to Lafayette".
"All right," I says, "I can walk it in three days.
And I'll start this very afternoon".
"No you wont, you'll start _now_; and don't you lose any time about it, neither, nor do any gabbling by the way.
Just keep a tight tongue in your head and move right along, and then you won't get into trouble with _us_, d'ye hear"?
That was the order I wanted, and that was the one I played for.
I wanted to be left free to work my plans.
"So clear out," he says; "and you can tell Mr. Foster whatever you want to.
Maybe you can get him to believe that Jim _is_ your nigger--some idiots don't require documents--leastways I've heard there's such down South here.
And when you tell him the handbill and the reward's bogus, maybe he'll believe you when you explain to him what the idea was for getting 'em out.
Go 'long now, and tell him anything you want to; but mind you don't work your jaw any _between_ here and there".
So I left, and struck for the back country.
I didn't look around, but I kinder felt like he was watching me.
But I knowed I could tire him out at that.
I went straight out in the country as much as a mile before I stopped; then I doubled back through the woods towards Phelps'.
I reckoned I better start in on my plan straight off without fooling around, because I wanted to stop Jim's mouth till these fellows could get away.
I didn't want no trouble with their kind.
I'd seen all I wanted to of them, and wanted to get entirely shut of them.
CHAPTER XXXII.
WHEN I got there it was all still and Sunday-like, and hot and sunshiny; the hands was gone to the fields; and there was them kind of faint dronings of bugs and flies in the air that makes it seem so lonesome and like everybody's dead and gone; and if a
As a general thing it makes a body wish _he_ was dead, too, and done with it all.
Phelps' was one of these little one-horse cotton plantations, and they all look alike.
A rail fence round a two-acre yard; a stile made out of logs sawed off and up-ended in steps, like barrels of a different length, to climb over the fence with, and for the women to stand on when they are going to jump on to a horse; some sickly
I went around and clumb over the back stile by the ash-hopper, and started for the kitchen.
When I got a little ways I heard the dim hum of a spinning-wheel wailing along up and sinking along down again; and then I knowed for certain I wished I was dead--for that _is_ the lonesomest sound in the whole world.
I went right along, not fixing up any particular plan, but just trusting to Providence to put the right words in my mouth when the time come; for I'd noticed that Providence always did put the right words in my mouth if I left it alone.
When I got half-way, first one hound and then another got up and went for me, and of course I stopped and faced them, and kept still.
And such another powwow as they made!
In a quarter of a minute I was a kind of a hub of a wheel, as you may say--spokes made out of dogs--circle of fifteen of them packed together around me, with their necks and noses stretched up towards me, a-barking and howling; and more a-coming; you
A nigger woman come tearing out of the kitchen with a rolling-pin in her hand, singing out, "Begone _you_ Tige!
you Spot!
begone sah"!
and she fetched first one and then another of them a clip and sent them howling, and then the rest followed; and the next second half of them come back, wagging their tails around me, and making friends with me.
There ain't no harm in a hound, nohow.
And behind the woman comes a little nigger girl and two little nigger boys without anything on but tow-linen shirts, and they hung on to their mother's gown, and peeped out from behind her at me, bashful, the way they always do.
And here comes the white woman running from the house, about forty-five or fifty year old, bareheaded, and her spinning-stick in her hand; and behind her comes her little white children, acting the same way the little niggers was doing.
She was smiling all over so she could hardly stand--and says: "It's _you_, at last!
--_ain't_ it"?
I out with a "Yes'm" before I thought.
She grabbed me and hugged me tight; and then gripped me by both hands and shook and shook; and the tears come in her eyes, and run down over; and she couldn't seem to hug and shake enough, and kept saying, "You don't look as much like your mother as I
Dear, dear, it does seem like I could eat you up!
Children, it's your cousin Tom!
--tell him howdy".
But they ducked their heads, and put their fingers in their mouths, and hid behind her.
So she run on: "Lize, hurry up and get him a hot breakfast right away--or did you get your breakfast on the boat"?
I said I had got it on the boat.
So then she started for the house, leading me by the hand, and the children tagging after.
When we got there she set me down in a split-bottomed chair, and set herself down on a little low stool in front of me, holding both of my hands, and says: "Now I can have a _good_ look at you; and, laws-a-me, I've been hungry for it a many and a many a
We been expecting you a couple of days and more.
What kep' you?
--boat get aground"?
"Yes'm--she--" "Don't say yes'm--say Aunt Sally.
Where'd she get aground"?
I didn't rightly know what to say, because I didn't know whether the boat would be coming up the river or down.
But I go a good deal on instinct; and my instinct said she would be coming up--from down towards Orleans.
That didn't help me much, though; for I didn't know the names of bars down that way.
I see I'd got to invent a bar, or forget the name of the one we got aground on--or--Now I struck an idea, and fetched it out: "It warn't the grounding--that didn't keep us back but a little.
We blowed out a cylinder-head".
"Good gracious!
anybody hurt"?
"No'm.
Killed a nigger".
"Well, it's lucky; because sometimes people do get hurt.
Two years ago last Christmas your uncle Silas was coming up from Newrleans on the old Lally Rook, and she blowed out a cylinder-head and crippled a man.
And I think he died afterwards.
He was a Baptist.
Your uncle Silas knowed a family in Baton Rouge that knowed his people very well.
Yes, I remember now, he _did_ die.
Mortification set in, and they had to amputate him.
But it didn't save him.
Yes, it was mortification--that was it.
He turned blue all over, and died in the hope of a glorious resurrection.
They say he was a sight to look at.
Your uncle's been up to the town every day to fetch you.
And he's gone again, not more'n an hour ago; he'll be back any minute now.
You must a met him on the road, didn't you?
--oldish man, with a--" "No, I didn't see nobody, Aunt Sally.
The boat landed just at daylight, and I left my baggage on the wharf-boat and went looking around the town and out a piece in the country, to put in the time and not get here too soon; and so I come down the back way".
"Who'd you give the baggage to"?
"Nobody".
"Why, child, it 'll be stole"!
"Not where I hid it I reckon it won't," I says.
"How'd you get your breakfast so early on the boat"?
It was kinder thin ice, but I says: "The captain see me standing around, and told me I better have something to eat before I went ashore; so he took me in the texas to the officers' lunch, and give me all I wanted".
I was getting so uneasy I couldn't listen good.
I had my mind on the children all the time; I wanted to get them out to one side and pump them a little, and find out who I was.
But I couldn't get no show, Mrs. Phelps kept it up and run on so.
Pretty soon she made the cold chills streak all down my back, because she says: "But here we're a-running on this way, and you hain't told me a word about Sis, nor any of them.
Now I'll rest my works a little, and you start up yourn; just tell me _everything_--tell me all about 'm all every one of 'm; and how they are, and what they're doing, and what they told you to tell me; and every last thing you can think of".
Well, I see I was up a stump--and up it good.
Providence had stood by me this fur all right, but I was hard and tight aground now.
I see it warn't a bit of use to try to go ahead--I'd got to throw up my hand.
So I says to myself, here's another place where I got to resk the truth.
I opened my mouth to begin; but she grabbed me and hustled me in behind the bed, and says: "Here he comes!
Stick your head down lower--there, that'll do; you can't be seen now.
Don't you let on you're here.
I'll play a joke on him.
Children, don't you say a word".
I see I was in a fix now.
But it warn't no use to worry; there warn't nothing to do but just hold still, and try and be ready to stand from under when the lightning struck.
I had just one little glimpse of the old gentleman when he come in; then the bed hid him.
Mrs. Phelps she jumps for him, and says: "Has he come"?
"No," says her husband.
"Good-_ness_ gracious"!
she says, "what in the warld can have become of him"?
"I can't imagine," says the old gentleman; "and I must say it makes me dreadful uneasy".
"Uneasy"!
she says; "I'm ready to go distracted!
He _must_ a come; and you've missed him along the road.
I _know_ it's so--something tells me so".
"Why, Sally, I _couldn't_ miss him along the road--_you_ know that".
"But oh, dear, dear, what _will_ Sis say!
He must a come!
You must a missed him.
He--" "Oh, don't distress me any more'n I'm already distressed.
I don't know what in the world to make of it.
I'm at my wit's end, and I don't mind acknowledging 't I'm right down scared.
But there's no hope that he's come; for he _couldn't_ come and me miss him.
Sally, it's terrible--just terrible--something's happened to the boat, sure"!
"Why, Silas!
Look yonder!
--up the road!
--ain't that somebody coming"?
He sprung to the window at the head of the bed, and that give Mrs. Phelps the chance she wanted.
She stooped down quick at the foot of the bed and give me a pull, and out I come; and when he turned back from the window there she stood, a-beaming and a-smiling like a house afire, and I standing pretty meek and sweaty alongside.
The old gentleman stared, and says: "Why, who's that"?
"Who do you reckon 't is"?
"I hain't no idea.
Who _is_ it"?
"It's _Tom Sawyer!
_" By jings, I most slumped through the floor!
But there warn't no time to swap knives; the old man grabbed me by the hand and shook, and kept on shaking; and all the time how the woman did dance around and laugh and cry; and then how they both did fire off questions about Sid, and Mary, and the rest
But if they was joyful, it warn't nothing to what I was; for it was like being born again, I was so glad to find out who I was.
Well, they froze to me for two hours; and at last, when my chin was so tired it couldn't hardly go any more, I had told them more about my family--I mean the Sawyer family--than ever happened to any six Sawyer families.
And I explained all about how we blowed out a cylinder-head at the mouth of White River, and it took us three days to fix it.
Which was all right, and worked first-rate; because _they_ didn't know but what it would take three days to fix it.
If I'd a called it a bolthead it would a done just as well.
Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side, and pretty uncomfortable all up the other.
Being Tom Sawyer was easy and comfortable, and it stayed easy and comfortable till by and by I hear a steamboat coughing along down the river.
Then I says to myself, s'pose Tom Sawyer comes down on that boat?
And s'pose he steps in here any minute, and sings out my name before I can throw him a wink to keep quiet?
Well, I couldn't _have_ it that way; it wouldn't do at all.
I must go up the road and waylay him.
So I told the folks I reckoned I would go up to the town and fetch down my baggage.
The old gentleman was for going along with me, but I said no, I could drive the horse myself, and I druther he wouldn't take no trouble about me.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
SO I started for town in the wagon, and when I was half-way I see a wagon coming, and sure enough it was Tom Sawyer, and I stopped and waited till he come along.
I says "Hold on"!
and it stopped alongside, and his mouth opened up like a trunk, and stayed so; and he swallowed two or three times like a person that's got a dry throat, and then says: "I hain't ever done you no harm.
You know that.
So, then, what you want to come back and ha'nt _me_ for"?
I says: "I hain't come back--I hain't been _gone_".
When he heard my voice it righted him up some, but he warn't quite satisfied yet.
He says: "Don't you play nothing on me, because I wouldn't on you.
Honest injun now, you ain't a ghost"?
"Honest injun, I ain't," I says.
"Well--I--I--well, that ought to settle it, of course; but I can't somehow seem to understand it no way.
Looky here, warn't you ever murdered _at all?
_" "No.
I warn't ever murdered at all--I played it on them.
You come in here and feel of me if you don't believe me".
So he done it; and it satisfied him; and he was that glad to see me again he didn't know what to do.
And he wanted to know all about it right off, because it was a grand adventure, and mysterious, and so it hit him where he lived.
But I said, leave it alone till by and by; and told his driver to wait, and we drove off a little piece, and I told him the kind of a fix I was in, and what did he reckon we better do?
He said, let him alone a minute, and don't disturb him.
So he thought and thought, and pretty soon he says: "It's all right; I've got it.
Take my trunk in your wagon, and let on it's your'n; and you turn back and fool along slow, so as to get to the house about the time you ought to; and I'll go towards town a piece, and take a fresh start, and get there a quarter or a half an hour after
I says: "All right; but wait a minute.
There's one more thing--a thing that _nobody_ don't know but me.
And that is, there's a nigger here that I'm a-trying to steal out of slavery, and his name is _Jim_--old Miss Watson's Jim".
He says: "What!
Why, Jim is--" He stopped and went to studying.
I says: "I know what you'll say.
You'll say it's dirty, low-down business; but what if it is?
I'm low down; and I'm a-going to steal him, and I want you keep mum and not let on.
Will you"?
His eye lit up, and he says: "I'll _help_ you steal him"!
Well, I let go all holts then, like I was shot.
It was the most astonishing speech I ever heard--and I'm bound to say Tom Sawyer fell considerable in my estimation.
Only I couldn't believe it.
Tom Sawyer a _nigger-stealer!
_ "Oh, shucks"!
I says; "you're joking".
"I ain't joking, either".
"Well, then," I says, "joking or no joking, if you hear anything said about a runaway nigger, don't forget to remember that _you_ don't know nothing about him, and I don't know nothing about him".
Then we took the trunk and put it in my wagon, and he drove off his way and I drove mine.
But of course I forgot all about driving slow on accounts of being glad and full of thinking; so I got home a heap too quick for that length of a trip.
The old gentleman was at the door, and he says: "Why, this is wonderful!
Whoever would a thought it was in that mare to do it?
I wish we'd a timed her.
And she hain't sweated a hair--not a hair.
It's wonderful.
Why, I wouldn't take a hundred dollars for that horse now--I wouldn't, honest; and yet I'd a sold her for fifteen before, and thought 'twas all she was worth".
That's all he said.
He was the innocentest, best old soul I ever see.
But it warn't surprising; because he warn't only just a farmer, he was a preacher, too, and had a little one-horse log church down back of the plantation, which he built it himself at his own expense, for a church and schoolhouse, and never charged nothing
There was plenty other farmer-preachers like that, and done the same way, down South.
In about half an hour Tom's wagon drove up to the front stile, and Aunt Sally she see it through the window, because it was only about fifty yards, and says: "Why, there's somebody come!
I wonder who 'tis?
Why, I do believe it's a stranger.
Jimmy" (that's one of the children) "run and tell Lize to put on another plate for dinner".
Everybody made a rush for the front door, because, of course, a stranger don't come _every_ year, and so he lays over the yaller-fever, for interest, when he does come.
Tom was over the stile and starting for the house; the wagon was spinning up the road for the village, and we was all bunched in the front door.
Tom had his store clothes on, and an audience--and that was always nuts for Tom Sawyer.
In them circumstances it warn't no trouble to him to throw in an amount of style that was suitable.
He warn't a boy to meeky along up that yard like a sheep; no, he come ca'm and important, like the ram.
When he got a-front of us he lifts his hat ever so gracious and dainty, like it was the lid of a box that had butterflies asleep in it and he didn't want to disturb them, and says: "Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume"?
"No, my boy," says the old gentleman, "I'm sorry to say 't your driver has deceived you; Nichols's place is down a matter of three mile more.
Come in, come in".
Tom he took a look back over his shoulder, and says, "Too late--he's out of sight".
"Yes, he's gone, my son, and you must come in and eat your dinner with us; and then we'll hitch up and take you down to Nichols's".
"Oh, I _can't_ make you so much trouble; I couldn't think of it.
I'll walk--I don't mind the distance".
"But we won't _let_ you walk--it wouldn't be Southern hospitality to do it.
Come right in".
"Oh, _do_," says Aunt Sally; "it ain't a bit of trouble to us, not a bit in the world.
You must stay.
It's a long, dusty three mile, and we can't let you walk.
And, besides, I've already told 'em to put on another plate when I see you coming; so you mustn't disappoint us.
Come right in and make yourself at home".
So Tom he thanked them very hearty and handsome, and let himself be persuaded, and come in; and when he was in he said he was a stranger from Hicksville, Ohio, and his name was William Thompson--and he made another bow.
Well, he run on, and on, and on, making up stuff about Hicksville and everybody in it he could invent, and I getting a little nervious, and wondering how this was going to help me out of my scrape; and at last, still talking along, he reached over and
He looked kind of hurt, and says: "I'm surprised at you, m'am".
"You're s'rp--Why, what do you reckon I am?
I've a good notion to take and--Say, what do you mean by kissing me"?
He looked kind of humble, and says: "I didn't mean nothing, m'am.
I didn't mean no harm.
I--I--thought you'd like it".
"Why, you born fool"!
She took up the spinning stick, and it looked like it was all she could do to keep from giving him a crack with it.
"What made you think I'd like it"?
"Well, I don't know.
Only, they--they--told me you would".
"_They_ told you I would.
Whoever told you's _another_ lunatic.
I never heard the beat of it.
Who's _they_"?
"Why, everybody.
They all said so, m'am".
It was all she could do to hold in; and her eyes snapped, and her fingers worked like she wanted to scratch him; and she says: "Who's 'everybody'?
Out with their names, or ther'll be an idiot short".
He got up and looked distressed, and fumbled his hat, and says: "I'm sorry, and I warn't expecting it.
They told me to.
They all told me to.
They all said, kiss her; and said she'd like it.
They all said it--every one of them.
But I'm sorry, m'am, and I won't do it no more--I won't, honest".
"You won't, won't you?
Well, I sh'd _reckon_ you won't"!
"No'm, I'm honest about it; I won't ever do it again--till you ask me".
"Till I _ask_ you!
Well, I never see the beat of it in my born days!
I lay you'll be the Methusalem-numskull of creation before ever I ask you--or the likes of you".
"Well," he says, "it does surprise me so.
I can't make it out, somehow.
They said you would, and I thought you would.
But--" He stopped and looked around slow, like he wished he could run across a friendly eye somewheres, and fetched up on the old gentleman's, and says, "Didn't _you_ think she'd like me to kiss her, sir"?
"Why, no; I--I--well, no, I b'lieve I didn't".
Then he looks on around the same way to me, and says: "Tom, didn't _you_ think Aunt Sally 'd open out her arms and say, 'Sid Sawyer--'" "My land"!
she says, breaking in and jumping for him, "you impudent young rascal, to fool a body so--" and was going to hug him, but he fended her off, and says: "No, not till you've asked me first".
So she didn't lose no time, but asked him; and hugged him and kissed him over and over again, and then turned him over to the old man, and he took what was left.
And after they got a little quiet again she says: "Why, dear me, I never see such a surprise.
We warn't looking for _you_ at all, but only Tom.
Sis never wrote to me about anybody coming but him".
"It's because it warn't _intended_ for any of us to come but Tom," he says; "but I begged and begged, and at the last minute she let me come, too; so, coming down the river, me and Tom thought it would be a first-rate surprise for him to come here to the
But it was a mistake, Aunt Sally.
This ain't no healthy place for a stranger to come".
"No--not impudent whelps, Sid.
You ought to had your jaws boxed; I hain't been so put out since I don't know when.
But I don't care, I don't mind the terms--I'd be willing to stand a thousand such jokes to have you here.
Well, to think of that performance!
I don't deny it, I was most putrified with astonishment when you give me that smack".
We had dinner out in that broad open passage betwixt the house and the kitchen; and there was things enough on that table for seven families--and all hot, too; none of your flabby, tough meat that's laid in a cupboard in a damp cellar all night and tastes
Uncle Silas he asked a pretty long blessing over it, but it was worth it; and it didn't cool it a bit, neither, the way I've seen them kind of interruptions do lots of times.
There was a considerable good deal of talk all the afternoon, and me and Tom was on the lookout all the time; but it warn't no use, they didn't happen to say nothing about any runaway nigger, and we was afraid to try to work up to it.
But at supper, at night, one of the little boys says: "Pa, mayn't Tom and Sid and me go to the show"?
"No," says the old man, "I reckon there ain't going to be any; and you couldn't go if there was; because the runaway nigger told Burton and me all about that scandalous show, and Burton said he would tell the people; so I reckon they've drove the owdacious
So there it was!
--but I couldn't help it.
Tom and me was to sleep in the same room and bed; so, being tired, we bid good-night and went up to bed right after supper, and clumb out of the window and down the lightning-rod, and shoved for the town; for I didn't believe anybody was going to give
On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned I was murdered, and how pap disappeared pretty soon, and didn't come back no more, and what a stir there was when Jim run away; and I told Tom all about our Royal Nonesuch rapscallions, and as much
Well, it made me sick to see it; and I was sorry for them poor pitiful rascals, it seemed like I couldn't ever feel any hardness against them any more in the world.
It was a dreadful thing to see.
Human beings _can_ be awful cruel to one another.
We see we was too late--couldn't do no good.
We asked some stragglers about it, and they said everybody went to the show looking very innocent; and laid low and kept dark till the poor old king was in the middle of his cavortings on the stage; then somebody give a signal, and the house rose up and
So we poked along back home, and I warn't feeling so brash as I was before, but kind of ornery, and humble, and to blame, somehow--though I hadn't done nothing.
But that's always the way; it don't make no difference whether you do right or wrong, a person's conscience ain't got no sense, and just goes for him anyway.
If I had a yaller dog that didn't know no more than a person's conscience does I would pison him.
It takes up more room than all the rest of a person's insides, and yet ain't no good, nohow.
Tom Sawyer he says the same.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
WE stopped talking, and got to thinking.
By and by Tom says: "Looky here, Huck, what fools we are to not think of it before!
I bet I know where Jim is".
"No!
Where"?
"In that hut down by the ash-hopper.
Why, looky here.
When we was at dinner, didn't you see a nigger man go in there with some vittles"?
"Yes".
"What did you think the vittles was for"?
"For a dog".
"So 'd I. Well, it wasn't for a dog".
"Why"?
"Because part of it was watermelon".
"So it was--I noticed it.
Well, it does beat all that I never thought about a dog not eating watermelon.
It shows how a body can see and don't see at the same time".
"Well, the nigger unlocked the padlock when he went in, and he locked it again when he came out.
He fetched uncle a key about the time we got up from table--same key, I bet.
Watermelon shows man, lock shows prisoner; and it ain't likely there's two prisoners on such a little plantation, and where the people's all so kind and good.
Jim's the prisoner.
All right--I'm glad we found it out detective fashion; I wouldn't give shucks for any other way.
Now you work your mind, and study out a plan to steal Jim, and I will study out one, too; and we'll take the one we like the best".
What a head for just a boy to have!
If I had Tom Sawyer's head I wouldn't trade it off to be a duke, nor mate of a steamboat, nor clown in a circus, nor nothing I can think of.
I went to thinking out a plan, but only just to be doing something; I knowed very well where the right plan was going to come from.
Pretty soon Tom says: "Ready"?
"Yes," I says.
"All right--bring it out".
"My plan is this," I says.
"We can easy find out if it's Jim in there.
Then get up my canoe to-morrow night, and fetch my raft over from the island.
Then the first dark night that comes steal the key out of the old man's britches after he goes to bed, and shove off down the river on the raft with Jim, hiding daytimes and running nights, the way me and Jim used to do before.
Wouldn't that plan work"?
"_Work_?
Why, cert'nly it would work, like rats a-fighting.
But it's too blame' simple; there ain't nothing _to_ it.
What's the good of a plan that ain't no more trouble than that?
It's as mild as goose-milk.
Why, Huck, it wouldn't make no more talk than breaking into a soap factory".
I never said nothing, because I warn't expecting nothing different; but I knowed mighty well that whenever he got _his_ plan ready it wouldn't have none of them objections to it.
And it didn't.
He told me what it was, and I see in a minute it was worth fifteen of mine for style, and would make Jim just as free a man as mine would, and maybe get us all killed besides.
So I was satisfied, and said we would waltz in on it.
I needn't tell what it was here, because I knowed it wouldn't stay the way, it was.
I knowed he would be changing it around every which way as we went along, and heaving in new bullinesses wherever he got a chance.
And that is what he done.
Well, one thing was dead sure, and that was that Tom Sawyer was in earnest, and was actuly going to help steal that nigger out of slavery.
That was the thing that was too many for me.
Here was a boy that was respectable and well brung up; and had a character to lose; and folks at home that had characters; and he was bright and not leather-headed; and knowing and not ignorant; and not mean, but kind; and yet here he was, without any
I _couldn't_ understand it no way at all.
It was outrageous, and I knowed I ought to just up and tell him so; and so be his true friend, and let him quit the thing right where he was and save himself.
And I _did_ start to tell him; but he shut me up, and says: "Don't you reckon I know what I'm about?
Don't I generly know what I'm about"?
"Yes".
"Didn't I _say_ I was going to help steal the nigger"?
"Yes".
"_Well_, then".
That's all he said, and that's all I said.
It warn't no use to say any more; because when he said he'd do a thing, he always done it.
But I couldn't make out how he was willing to go into this thing; so I just let it go, and never bothered no more about it.
If he was bound to have it so, I couldn't help it.
When we got home the house was all dark and still; so we went on down to the hut by the ash-hopper for to examine it.
We went through the yard so as to see what the hounds would do.
They knowed us, and didn't make no more noise than country dogs is always doing when anything comes by in the night.
When we got to the cabin we took a look at the front and the two sides; and on the side I warn't acquainted with--which was the north side--we found a square window-hole, up tolerable high, with just one stout board nailed across it.
I says: "Here's the ticket.
This hole's big enough for Jim to get through if we wrench off the board".
Tom says: "It's as simple as tit-tat-toe, three-in-a-row, and as easy as playing hooky.
I should _hope_ we can find a way that's a little more complicated than _that_, Huck Finn".
"Well, then," I says, "how 'll it do to saw him out, the way I done before I was murdered that time"?
"That's more _like_," he says.
"It's real mysterious, and troublesome, and good," he says; "but I bet we can find a way that's twice as long.
There ain't no hurry; le's keep on looking around".
Betwixt the hut and the fence, on the back side, was a lean-to that joined the hut at the eaves, and was made out of plank.
It was as long as the hut, but narrow--only about six foot wide.
The door to it was at the south end, and was padlocked.
Tom he went to the soap-kettle and searched around, and fetched back the iron thing they lift the lid with; so he took it and prized out one of the staples.
The chain fell down, and we opened the door and went in, and shut it, and struck a match, and see the shed was only built against a cabin and hadn't no connection with it; and there warn't no floor to the shed, nor nothing in it but some old rusty
The match went out, and so did we, and shoved in the staple again, and the door was locked as good as ever.
Tom was joyful.
He says; "Now we're all right.
We'll _dig_ him out.
It 'll take about a week"!
Then we started for the house, and I went in the back door--you only have to pull a buckskin latch-string, they don't fasten the doors--but that warn't romantical enough for Tom Sawyer; no way would do him but he must climb up the lightning-rod.
But after he got up half way about three times, and missed fire and fell every time, and the last time most busted his brains out, he thought he'd got to give it up; but after he was rested he allowed he would give her one more turn for luck, and this
In the morning we was up at break of day, and down to the nigger cabins to pet the dogs and make friends with the nigger that fed Jim--if it _was_ Jim that was being fed.
The niggers was just getting through breakfast and starting for the fields; and Jim's nigger was piling up a tin pan with bread and meat and things; and whilst the others was leaving, the key come from the house.
This nigger had a good-natured, chuckle-headed face, and his wool was all tied up in little bunches with thread.
That was to keep witches off.
He said the witches was pestering him awful these nights, and making him see all kinds of strange things, and hear all kinds of strange words and noises, and he didn't believe he was ever witched so long before in his life.
He got so worked up, and got to running on so about his troubles, he forgot all about what he'd been a-going to do.
So Tom says: "What's the vittles for?
Going to feed the dogs"?
The nigger kind of smiled around gradually over his face, like when you heave a brickbat in a mud-puddle, and he says: "Yes, Mars Sid, A dog.
Cur'us dog, too.
Does you want to go en look at 'im"?
"Yes".
I hunched Tom, and whispers: "You going, right here in the daybreak?
_that_ warn't the plan".
"No, it warn't; but it's the plan _now_".
So, drat him, we went along, but I didn't like it much.
When we got in we couldn't hardly see anything, it was so dark; but Jim was there, sure enough, and could see us; and he sings out: "Why, _Huck_!
En good _lan_'!
ain' dat Misto Tom"?
I just knowed how it would be; I just expected it.
I didn't know nothing to do; and if I had I couldn't a done it, because that nigger busted in and says: "Why, de gracious sakes!
do he know you genlmen"?
We could see pretty well now.
Tom he looked at the nigger, steady and kind of wondering, and says: "Does _who_ know us"?
"Why, dis-yer runaway nigger".
"I don't reckon he does; but what put that into your head"?
"What _put_ it dar?
Didn' he jis' dis minute sing out like he knowed you"?
Tom says, in a puzzled-up kind of way: "Well, that's mighty curious.
_Who_ sung out?
_when_ did he sing out?
_what_ did he sing out"?
And turns to me, perfectly ca'm, and says, "Did _you_ hear anybody sing out"?
Of course there warn't nothing to be said but the one thing; so I says: "No; I ain't heard nobody say nothing".
Then he turns to Jim, and looks him over like he never see him before, and says: "Did you sing out"?
"No, sah," says Jim; "I hain't said nothing, sah".
"Not a word"?
"No, sah, I hain't said a word".
"Did you ever see us before"?
"No, sah; not as I knows on".
So Tom turns to the nigger, which was looking wild and distressed, and says, kind of severe: "What do you reckon's the matter with you, anyway?
What made you think somebody sung out"?
"Oh, it's de dad-blame' witches, sah, en I wisht I was dead, I do.
Dey's awluz at it, sah, en dey do mos' kill me, dey sk'yers me so.
Please to don't tell nobody 'bout it sah, er ole Mars Silas he'll scole me; 'kase he say dey _ain't_ no witches.
I jis' wish to goodness he was heah now--_den_ what would he say!
I jis' bet he couldn' fine no way to git aroun' it _dis_ time.
But it's awluz jis' so; people dat's _sot_, stays sot; dey won't look into noth'n'en fine it out f'r deyselves, en when _you_ fine it out en tell um 'bout it, dey doan' b'lieve you".
Tom give him a dime, and said we wouldn't tell nobody; and told him to buy some more thread to tie up his wool with; and then looks at Jim, and says: "I wonder if Uncle Silas is going to hang this nigger.
If I was to catch a nigger that was ungrateful enough to run away, I wouldn't give him up, I'd hang him".
And whilst the nigger stepped to the door to look at the dime and bite it to see if it was good, he whispers to Jim and says: "Don't ever let on to know us.
And if you hear any digging going on nights, it's us; we're going to set you free".
Jim only had time to grab us by the hand and squeeze it; then the nigger come back, and we said we'd come again some time if the nigger wanted us to; and he said he would, more particular if it was dark, because the witches went for him mostly in the dark,
CHAPTER XXXV.
IT would be most an hour yet till breakfast, so we left and struck down into the woods; because Tom said we got to have _some_ light to see how to dig by, and a lantern makes too much, and might get us into trouble; what we must have was a lot of them
We fetched an armful and hid it in the weeds, and set down to rest, and Tom says, kind of dissatisfied: "Blame it, this whole thing is just as easy and awkward as it can be.
And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan.
There ain't no watchman to be drugged--now there _ought_ to be a watchman.
There ain't even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to.
And there's Jim chained by one leg, with a ten-foot chain, to the leg of his bed: why, all you got to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off the chain.
And Uncle Silas he trusts everybody; sends the key to the punkin-headed nigger, and don't send nobody to watch the nigger.
Jim could a got out of that window-hole before this, only there wouldn't be no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg.
Why, drat it, Huck, it's the stupidest arrangement I ever see.
You got to invent _all_ the difficulties.
Well, we can't help it; we got to do the best we can with the materials we've got.
Anyhow, there's one thing--there's more honor in getting him out through a lot of difficulties and dangers, where there warn't one of them furnished to you by the people who it was their duty to furnish them, and you had to contrive them all out of your
Now look at just that one thing of the lantern.
When you come down to the cold facts, we simply got to _let on_ that a lantern's resky.
Why, we could work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to, I believe.
Now, whilst I think of it, we got to hunt up something to make a saw out of the first chance we get".
"What do we want of a saw"?
"What do we _want_ of it?
Hain't we got to saw the leg of Jim's bed off, so as to get the chain loose"?
"Why, you just said a body could lift up the bedstead and slip the chain off".
"Well, if that ain't just like you, Huck Finn.
You _can_ get up the infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing.
Why, hain't you ever read any books at all?
--Baron Trenck, nor Casanova, nor Benvenuto Chelleeny, nor Henri IV.
, nor none of them heroes?
Who ever heard of getting a prisoner loose in such an old-maidy way as that?
No; the way all the best authorities does is to saw the bed-leg in two, and leave it just so, and swallow the sawdust, so it can't be found, and put some dirt and grease around the sawed place so the very keenest seneskal can't see no sign of it's being
Then, the night you're ready, fetch the leg a kick, down she goes; slip off your chain, and there you are.
Nothing to do but hitch your rope ladder to the battlements, shin down it, break your leg in the moat--because a rope ladder is nineteen foot too short, you know--and there's your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and fling you across
It's gaudy, Huck.
I wish there was a moat to this cabin.
If we get time, the night of the escape, we'll dig one".
I says: "What do we want of a moat when we're going to snake him out from under the cabin"?
But he never heard me.
He had forgot me and everything else.
He had his chin in his hand, thinking.
Pretty soon he sighs and shakes his head; then sighs again, and says: "No, it wouldn't do--there ain't necessity enough for it".
"For what"?
I says.
"Why, to saw Jim's leg off," he says.
"Good land"!
I says; "why, there ain't _no_ necessity for it.
And what would you want to saw his leg off for, anyway"?
"Well, some of the best authorities has done it.
They couldn't get the chain off, so they just cut their hand off and shoved.
And a leg would be better still.
But we got to let that go.
There ain't necessity enough in this case; and, besides, Jim's a nigger, and wouldn't understand the reasons for it, and how it's the custom in Europe; so we'll let it go.
But there's one thing--he can have a rope ladder; we can tear up our sheets and make him a rope ladder easy enough.
And we can send it to him in a pie; it's mostly done that way.
And I've et worse pies".
"Why, Tom Sawyer, how you talk," I says; "Jim ain't got no use for a rope ladder".
"He _has_ got use for it.
How _you_ talk, you better say; you don't know nothing about it.
He's _got_ to have a rope ladder; they all do".
"What in the nation can he _do_ with it"?
"_Do_ with it?
He can hide it in his bed, can't he"?
That's what they all do; and _he's_ got to, too.
Huck, you don't ever seem to want to do anything that's regular; you want to be starting something fresh all the time.
S'pose he _don't_ do nothing with it?
ain't it there in his bed, for a clew, after he's gone?
and don't you reckon they'll want clews?
Of course they will.
And you wouldn't leave them any?
That would be a _pretty_ howdy-do, _wouldn't_ it!
I never heard of such a thing".
"Well," I says, "if it's in the regulations, and he's got to have it, all right, let him have it; because I don't wish to go back on no regulations; but there's one thing, Tom Sawyer--if we go to tearing up our sheets to make Jim a rope ladder, we're going
Now, the way I look at it, a hickry-bark ladder don't cost nothing, and don't waste nothing, and is just as good to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick, as any rag ladder you can start; and as for Jim, he ain't had no experience, and so he don't
Who ever heard of a state prisoner escaping by a hickry-bark ladder?
Why, it's perfectly ridiculous".
"Well, all right, Tom, fix it your own way; but if you'll take my advice, you'll let me borrow a sheet off of the clothesline".
He said that would do.
And that gave him another idea, and he says: "Borrow a shirt, too".
"What do we want of a shirt, Tom"?
"Want it for Jim to keep a journal on".
"Journal your granny--_Jim_ can't write".
"S'pose he _can't_ write--he can make marks on the shirt, can't he, if we make him a pen out of an old pewter spoon or a piece of an old iron barrel-hoop"?
"Why, Tom, we can pull a feather out of a goose and make him a better one; and quicker, too".
"_Prisoners_ don't have geese running around the donjon-keep to pull pens out of, you muggins.
They _always_ make their pens out of the hardest, toughest, troublesomest piece of old brass candlestick or something like that they can get their hands on; and it takes them weeks and weeks and months and months to file it out, too, because they've got
_They_ wouldn't use a goose-quill if they had it.
It ain't regular".
"Well, then, what'll we make him the ink out of"?
"Many makes it out of iron-rust and tears; but that's the common sort and women; the best authorities uses their own blood.
Jim can do that; and when he wants to send any little common ordinary mysterious message to let the world know where he's captivated, he can write it on the bottom of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out of the window.
The Iron Mask always done that, and it's a blame' good way, too".
"Jim ain't got no tin plates.
They feed him in a pan".
"That ain't nothing; we can get him some".
"Can't nobody _read_ his plates".
"That ain't got anything to _do_ with it, Huck Finn.
All _he's_ got to do is to write on the plate and throw it out.
You don't _have_ to be able to read it.
Why, half the time you can't read anything a prisoner writes on a tin plate, or anywhere else".
"Well, then, what's the sense in wasting the plates"?
"Why, blame it all, it ain't the _prisoner's_ plates".
"But it's _somebody's_ plates, ain't it"?
"Well, spos'n it is?
What does the _prisoner_ care whose--" He broke off there, because we heard the breakfast-horn blowing.
So we cleared out for the house.
Along during the morning I borrowed a sheet and a white shirt off of the clothes-line; and I found an old sack and put them in it, and we went down and got the fox-fire, and put that in too.
I called it borrowing, because that was what pap always called it; but Tom said it warn't borrowing, it was stealing.
He said we was representing prisoners; and prisoners don't care how they get a thing so they get it, and nobody don't blame them for it, either.
It ain't no crime in a prisoner to steal the thing he needs to get away with, Tom said; it's his right; and so, as long as we was representing a prisoner, we had a perfect right to steal anything on this place we had the least use for to get ourselves
He said if we warn't prisoners it would be a very different thing, and nobody but a mean, ornery person would steal when he warn't a prisoner.
So we allowed we would steal everything there was that come handy.
And yet he made a mighty fuss, one day, after that, when I stole a watermelon out of the nigger-patch and eat it; and he made me go and give the niggers a dime without telling them what it was for.
Tom said that what he meant was, we could steal anything we _needed_.
Well, I says, I needed the watermelon.
But he said I didn't need it to get out of prison with; there's where the difference was.
He said if I'd a wanted it to hide a knife in, and smuggle it to Jim to kill the seneskal with, it would a been all right.
So I let it go at that, though I couldn't see no advantage in my representing a prisoner if I got to set down and chaw over a lot of gold-leaf distinctions like that every time I see a chance to hog a watermelon.
Well, as I was saying, we waited that morning till everybody was settled down to business, and nobody in sight around the yard; then Tom he carried the sack into the lean-to whilst I stood off a piece to keep watch.
By and by he come out, and we went and set down on the woodpile to talk.
He says: "Everything's all right now except tools; and that's easy fixed".
"Tools"?
I says.
"Yes".
"Tools for what"?
"Why, to dig with.
We ain't a-going to _gnaw_ him out, are we"?
"Ain't them old crippled picks and things in there good enough to dig a nigger out with"?
I says.
He turns on me, looking pitying enough to make a body cry, and says: "Huck Finn, did you _ever_ hear of a prisoner having picks and shovels, and all the modern conveniences in his wardrobe to dig himself out with?
Now I want to ask you--if you got any reasonableness in you at all--what kind of a show would _that_ give him to be a hero?
Why, they might as well lend him the key and done with it.
Picks and shovels--why, they wouldn't furnish 'em to a king".
"Well, then," I says, "if we don't want the picks and shovels, what do we want"?
"A couple of case-knives".
"To dig the foundations out from under that cabin with"?
"Yes".
"Confound it, it's foolish, Tom".
"It don't make no difference how foolish it is, it's the _right_ way--and it's the regular way.
And there ain't no _other_ way, that ever I heard of, and I've read all the books that gives any information about these things.
They always dig out with a case-knife--and not through dirt, mind you; generly it's through solid rock.
And it takes them weeks and weeks and weeks, and for ever and ever.
Why, look at one of them prisoners in the bottom dungeon of the Castle Deef, in the harbor of Marseilles, that dug himself out that way; how long was _he_ at it, you reckon"?
"I don't know".
"Well, guess".
"I don't know.
A month and a half".
"_Thirty-seven year_--and he come out in China.
_That's_ the kind.
I wish the bottom of _this_ fortress was solid rock".
"_Jim_ don't know nobody in China".
"What's _that_ got to do with it?
Neither did that other fellow.
But you're always a-wandering off on a side issue.
Why can't you stick to the main point"?
"All right--I don't care where he comes out, so he _comes_ out; and Jim don't, either, I reckon.
But there's one thing, anyway--Jim's too old to be dug out with a case-knife.
He won't last".
"Yes he will _last_, too.
You don't reckon it's going to take thirty-seven years to dig out through a _dirt_ foundation, do you"?
"How long will it take, Tom"?
"Well, we can't resk being as long as we ought to, because it mayn't take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down there by New Orleans.
He'll hear Jim ain't from there.
Then his next move will be to advertise Jim, or something like that.
So we can't resk being as long digging him out as we ought to.
By rights I reckon we ought to be a couple of years; but we can't.
Things being so uncertain, what I recommend is this: that we really dig right in, as quick as we can; and after that, we can _let on_, to ourselves, that we was at it thirty-seven years.
Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the first time there's an alarm.
Yes, I reckon that 'll be the best way".
"Now, there's _sense_ in that," I says.
"Letting on don't cost nothing; letting on ain't no trouble; and if it's any object, I don't mind letting on we was at it a hundred and fifty year.
It wouldn't strain me none, after I got my hand in.
So I'll mosey along now, and smouch a couple of case-knives".
"Smouch three," he says; "we want one to make a saw out of".
"Tom, if it ain't unregular and irreligious to sejest it," I says, "there's an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking under the weather-boarding behind the smoke-house".
He looked kind of weary and discouraged-like, and says: "It ain't no use to try to learn you nothing, Huck.
Run along and smouch the knives--three of them".
So I done it.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
AS soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down the lightning-rod, and shut ourselves up in the lean-to, and got out our pile of fox-fire, and went to work.
We cleared everything out of the way, about four or five foot along the middle of the bottom log.
Tom said he was right behind Jim's bed now, and we'd dig in under it, and when we got through there couldn't nobody in the cabin ever know there was any hole there, because Jim's counter-pin hung down most to the ground, and you'd have to raise it up and
So we dug and dug with the case-knives till most midnight; and then we was dog-tired, and our hands was blistered, and yet you couldn't see we'd done anything hardly.
At last I says: "This ain't no thirty-seven year job; this is a thirty-eight year job, Tom Sawyer".
He never said nothing.
But he sighed, and pretty soon he stopped digging, and then for a good little while I knowed that he was thinking.
Then he says: "It ain't no use, Huck, it ain't a-going to work.
If we was prisoners it would, because then we'd have as many years as we wanted, and no hurry; and we wouldn't get but a few minutes to dig, every day, while they was changing watches, and so our hands wouldn't get blistered, and we could keep it up
But _we_ can't fool along; we got to rush; we ain't got no time to spare.
If we was to put in another night this way we'd have to knock off for a week to let our hands get well--couldn't touch a case-knife with them sooner".
"Well, then, what we going to do, Tom"?
"I'll tell you.
It ain't right, and it ain't moral, and I wouldn't like it to get out; but there ain't only just the one way: we got to dig him out with the picks, and _let on_ it's case-knives".
"_Now_ you're _talking_"!
I says; "your head gets leveler and leveler all the time, Tom Sawyer," I says.
"Picks is the thing, moral or no moral; and as for me, I don't care shucks for the morality of it, nohow.
When I start in to steal a nigger, or a watermelon, or a Sunday-school book, I ain't no ways particular how it's done so it's done.
What I want is my nigger; or what I want is my watermelon; or what I want is my Sunday-school book; and if a pick's the handiest thing, that's the thing I'm a-going to dig that nigger or that watermelon or that Sunday-school book out with; and I don't
"Well," he says, "there's excuse for picks and letting-on in a case like this; if it warn't so, I wouldn't approve of it, nor I wouldn't stand by and see the rules broke--because right is right, and wrong is wrong, and a body ain't got no business doing
It might answer for _you_ to dig Jim out with a pick, _without_ any letting on, because you don't know no better; but it wouldn't for me, because I do know better.
Gimme a case-knife".
He had his own by him, but I handed him mine.
He flung it down, and says: "Gimme a _case-knife_".
I didn't know just what to do--but then I thought.
I scratched around amongst the old tools, and got a pickaxe and give it to him, and he took it and went to work, and never said a word.
He was always just that particular.
Full of principle.
So then I got a shovel, and then we picked and shoveled, turn about, and made the fur fly.
We stuck to it about a half an hour, which was as long as we could stand up; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for it.
When I got up stairs I looked out at the window and see Tom doing his level best with the lightning-rod, but he couldn't come it, his hands was so sore.
At last he says: "It ain't no use, it can't be done.
What you reckon I better do?
Can't you think of no way"?
"Yes," I says, "but I reckon it ain't regular.
Come up the stairs, and let on it's a lightning-rod".
So he done it.
Next day Tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick in the house, for to make some pens for Jim out of, and six tallow candles; and I hung around the nigger cabins and laid for a chance, and stole three tin plates.
Tom says it wasn't enough; but I said nobody wouldn't ever see the plates that Jim throwed out, because they'd fall in the dog-fennel and jimpson weeds under the window-hole--then we could tote them back and he could use them over again.
So Tom was satisfied.
Then he says: "Now, the thing to study out is, how to get the things to Jim".
"Take them in through the hole," I says, "when we get it done".
He only just looked scornful, and said something about nobody ever heard of such an idiotic idea, and then he went to studying.
By and by he said he had ciphered out two or three ways, but there warn't no need to decide on any of them yet.
Said we'd got to post Jim first.
That night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten, and took one of the candles along, and listened under the window-hole, and heard Jim snoring; so we pitched it in, and it didn't wake him.
Then we whirled in with the pick and shovel, and in about two hours and a half the job was done.
We crept in under Jim's bed and into the cabin, and pawed around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over Jim awhile, and found him looking hearty and healthy, and then we woke him up gentle and gradual.
He was so glad to see us he most cried; and called us honey, and all the pet names he could think of; and was for having us hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away, and clearing out without losing any time.
But Tom he showed him how unregular it would be, and set down and told him all about our plans, and how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an alarm; and not to be the least afraid, because we would see he got away, _sure_.
So Jim he said it was all right, and we set there and talked over old times awhile, and then Tom asked a lot of questions, and when Jim told him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with him, and Aunt Sally come in to see if he was comfortable
We'll send you some things by them".
I said, "Don't do nothing of the kind; it's one of the most jackass ideas I ever struck;" but he never paid no attention to me; went right on.
It was his way when he'd got his plans set.
So he told Jim how we'd have to smuggle in the rope-ladder pie and other large things by Nat, the nigger that fed him, and he must be on the lookout, and not be surprised, and not let Nat see him open them; and we would put small things in uncle's
And told him how to keep a journal on the shirt with his blood, and all that.
He told him everything.
Jim he couldn't see no sense in the most of it, but he allowed we was white folks and knowed better than him; so he was satisfied, and said he would do it all just as Tom said.
Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco; so we had a right down good sociable time; then we crawled out through the hole, and so home to bed, with hands that looked like they'd been chawed.
Tom was in high spirits.
He said it was the best fun he ever had in his life, and the most intellectural; and said if he only could see his way to it we would keep it up all the rest of our lives and leave Jim to our children to get out; for he believed Jim would come to like it
He said that in that way it could be strung out to as much as eighty year, and would be the best time on record.
And he said it would make us all celebrated that had a hand in it.
In the morning we went out to the woodpile and chopped up the brass candlestick into handy sizes, and Tom put them and the pewter spoon in his pocket.
Then we went to the nigger cabins, and while I got Nat's notice off, Tom shoved a piece of candlestick into the middle of a corn-pone that was in Jim's pan, and we went along with Nat to see how it would work, and it just worked noble; when Jim bit into
Tom said so himself.
Jim he never let on but what it was only just a piece of rock or something like that that's always getting into bread, you know; but after that he never bit into nothing but what he jabbed his fork into it in three or four places first.
And whilst we was a-standing there in the dimmish light, here comes a couple of the hounds bulging in from under Jim's bed; and they kept on piling in till there was eleven of them, and there warn't hardly room in there to get your breath.
By jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to door!
The nigger Nat he only just hollered "Witches" once, and keeled over on to the floor amongst the dogs, and begun to groan like he was dying.
Tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of Jim's meat, and the dogs went for it, and in two seconds he was out himself and back again and shut the door, and I knowed he'd fixed the other door too.
Then he went to work on the nigger, coaxing him and petting him, and asking him if he'd been imagining he saw something again.
He raised up, and blinked his eyes around, and says: "Mars Sid, you'll say I's a fool, but if I didn't b'lieve I see most a million dogs, er devils, er some'n, I wisht I may die right heah in dese tracks.
I did, mos' sholy.
Mars Sid, I _felt_ um--I _felt_ um, sah; dey was all over me.
Dad fetch it, I jis' wisht I could git my han's on one er dem witches jis' wunst--on'y jis' wunst--it's all I'd ast.
But mos'ly I wisht dey'd lemme 'lone, I does".
Tom says: "Well, I tell you what I think.
What makes them come here just at this runaway nigger's breakfast-time?
It's because they're hungry; that's the reason.
You make them a witch pie; that's the thing for _you_ to do".
"But my lan', Mars Sid, how's I gwyne to make 'm a witch pie?
I doan' know how to make it.
I hain't ever hearn er sich a thing b'fo'".
"Well, then, I'll have to make it myself".
"Will you do it, honey?
--will you?
I'll wusshup de groun' und' yo' foot, I will"!
"All right, I'll do it, seeing it's you, and you've been good to us and showed us the runaway nigger.
But you got to be mighty careful.
When we come around, you turn your back; and then whatever we've put in the pan, don't you let on you see it at all.
And don't you look when Jim unloads the pan--something might happen, I don't know what.
And above all, don't you _handle_ the witch-things".
"_Hannel 'M_, Mars Sid?
What _is_ you a-talkin' 'bout?
I wouldn' lay de weight er my finger on um, not f'r ten hund'd thous'n billion dollars, I wouldn't".
CHAPTER XXXVII.
THAT was all fixed.
So then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile in the back yard, where they keep the old boots, and rags, and pieces of bottles, and wore-out tin things, and all such truck, and scratched around and found an old tin washpan, and stopped up the holes
And when she come she was hot and red and cross, and couldn't hardly wait for the blessing; and then she went to sluicing out coffee with one hand and cracking the handiest child's head with her thimble with the other, and says: "I've hunted high and I've
My heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things, and a hard piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it and got met on the road with a cough, and was shot across the table, and took one of the children in the eye and curled him up like a
But after that we was all right again--it was the sudden surprise of it that knocked us so kind of cold.
Uncle Silas he says: "It's most uncommon curious, I can't understand it.
I know perfectly well I took it _off_, because--" "Because you hain't got but one _on_.
Just _listen_ at the man!
I know you took it off, and know it by a better way than your wool-gethering memory, too, because it was on the clo's-line yesterday--I see it there myself.
But it's gone, that's the long and the short of it, and you'll just have to change to a red flann'l one till I can get time to make a new one.
And it 'll be the third I've made in two years.
It just keeps a body on the jump to keep you in shirts; and whatever you do manage to _do_ with 'm all is more'n I can make out.
A body 'd think you _would_ learn to take some sort of care of 'em at your time of life".
"I know it, Sally, and I do try all I can.
But it oughtn't to be altogether my fault, because, you know, I don't see them nor have nothing to do with them except when they're on me; and I don't believe I've ever lost one of them _off_ of me".
"Well, it ain't _your_ fault if you haven't, Silas; you'd a done it if you could, I reckon.
And the shirt ain't all that's gone, nuther.
Ther's a spoon gone; and _that_ ain't all.
There was ten, and now ther's only nine.
The calf got the shirt, I reckon, but the calf never took the spoon, _that's_ certain".
"Why, what else is gone, Sally"?
"Ther's six _candles_ gone--that's what.
The rats could a got the candles, and I reckon they did; I wonder they don't walk off with the whole place, the way you're always going to stop their holes and don't do it; and if they warn't fools they'd sleep in your hair, Silas--_you'd_ never find it
"Well, Sally, I'm in fault, and I acknowledge it; I've been remiss; but I won't let to-morrow go by without stopping up them holes".
"Oh, I wouldn't hurry; next year 'll do.
Matilda Angelina Araminta _Phelps!
_" Whack comes the thimble, and the child snatches her claws out of the sugar-bowl without fooling around any.
Just then the nigger woman steps on to the passage, and says: "Missus, dey's a sheet gone".
"A _sheet_ gone!
Well, for the land's sake"!
"I'll stop up them holes to-day," says Uncle Silas, looking sorrowful.
"Oh, _do_ shet up!
--s'pose the rats took the _sheet_?
_where's_ it gone, Lize"?
"Clah to goodness I hain't no notion, Miss' Sally.
She wuz on de clo'sline yistiddy, but she done gone: she ain' dah no mo' now".
"I reckon the world _is_ coming to an end.
I _never_ see the beat of it in all my born days.
A shirt, and a sheet, and a spoon, and six can--" "Missus," comes a young yaller wench, "dey's a brass cannelstick miss'n".
"Cler out from here, you hussy, er I'll take a skillet to ye"!
Well, she was just a-biling.
I begun to lay for a chance; I reckoned I would sneak out and go for the woods till the weather moderated.
She kept a-raging right along, running her insurrection all by herself, and everybody else mighty meek and quiet; and at last Uncle Silas, looking kind of foolish, fishes up that spoon out of his pocket.
She stopped, with her mouth open and her hands up; and as for me, I wished I was in Jeruslem or somewheres.
But not long, because she says: "It's _just_ as I expected.
So you had it in your pocket all the time; and like as not you've got the other things there, too.
How'd it get there"?
"I reely don't know, Sally," he says, kind of apologizing, "or you know I would tell.
I was a-studying over my text in Acts Seventeen before breakfast, and I reckon I put it in there, not noticing, meaning to put my Testament in, and it must be so, because my Testament ain't in; but I'll go and see; and if the Testament is where I had it,
Give a body a rest!
Go 'long now, the whole kit and biling of ye; and don't come nigh me again till I've got back my peace of mind".
I'D a heard her if she'd a said it to herself, let alone speaking it out; and I'd a got up and obeyed her if I'd a been dead.
As we was passing through the setting-room the old man he took up his hat, and the shingle-nail fell out on the floor, and he just merely picked it up and laid it on the mantel-shelf, and never said nothing, and went out.
Tom see him do it, and remembered about the spoon, and says: "Well, it ain't no use to send things by _him_ no more, he ain't reliable".
Then he says: "But he done us a good turn with the spoon, anyway, without knowing it, and so we'll go and do him one without _him_ knowing it--stop up his rat-holes".
There was a noble good lot of them down cellar, and it took us a whole hour, but we done the job tight and good and shipshape.
Then we heard steps on the stairs, and blowed out our light and hid; and here comes the old man, with a candle in one hand and a bundle of stuff in t'other, looking as absent-minded as year before last.
He went a mooning around, first to one rat-hole and then another, till he'd been to them all.
Then he stood about five minutes, picking tallow-drip off of his candle and thinking.
Then he turns off slow and dreamy towards the stairs, saying: "Well, for the life of me I can't remember when I done it.
I could show her now that I warn't to blame on account of the rats.
But never mind--let it go.
I reckon it wouldn't do no good".
And so he went on a-mumbling up stairs, and then we left.
He was a mighty nice old man.
And always is.
Tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon, but he said we'd got to have it; so he took a think.
When he had ciphered it out he told me how we was to do; then we went and waited around the spoon-basket till we see Aunt Sally coming, and then Tom went to counting the spoons and laying them out to one side, and I slid one of them up my sleeve, and Tom
She says: "Go 'long to your play, and don't bother me.
I know better, I counted 'm myself".
"Well, I've counted them twice, Aunty, and I can't make but nine".
She looked out of all patience, but of course she come to count--anybody would.
"I declare to gracious ther' _ain't_ but nine"!
she says.
"Why, what in the world--plague _take_ the things, I'll count 'm again".
So I slipped back the one I had, and when she got done counting, she says: "Hang the troublesome rubbage, ther's _ten_ now"!
and she looked huffy and bothered both.
But Tom says: "Why, Aunty, I don't think there's ten".
"You numskull, didn't you see me _count 'm?
_" "I know, but--" "Well, I'll count 'm _again_".
So I smouched one, and they come out nine, same as the other time.
Well, she _was_ in a tearing way--just a-trembling all over, she was so mad.
But she counted and counted till she got that addled she'd start to count in the basket for a spoon sometimes; and so, three times they come out right, and three times they come out wrong.
Then she grabbed up the basket and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat galley-west; and she said cle'r out and let her have some peace, and if we come bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner she'd skin us.
So we had the odd spoon, and dropped it in her apron-pocket whilst she was a-giving us our sailing orders, and Jim got it all right, along with her shingle nail, before noon.
We was very well satisfied with this business, and Tom allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took, because he said _now_ she couldn't ever count them spoons twice alike again to save her life; and wouldn't believe she'd counted them right if she
So we put the sheet back on the line that night, and stole one out of her closet; and kept on putting it back and stealing it again for a couple of days till she didn't know how many sheets she had any more, and she didn't _care_, and warn't a-going to
So we was all right now, as to the shirt and the sheet and the spoon and the candles, by the help of the calf and the rats and the mixed-up counting; and as to the candlestick, it warn't no consequence, it would blow over by and by.
But that pie was a job; we had no end of trouble with that pie.
We fixed it up away down in the woods, and cooked it there; and we got it done at last, and very satisfactory, too; but not all in one day; and we had to use up three wash-pans full of flour before we got through, and we got burnt pretty much all over,
But of course we thought of the right way at last--which was to cook the ladder, too, in the pie.
So then we laid in with Jim the second night, and tore up the sheet all in little strings and twisted them together, and long before daylight we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a person with.
We let on it took nine months to make it.
And in the forenoon we took it down to the woods, but it wouldn't go into the pie.
Being made of a whole sheet, that way, there was rope enough for forty pies if we'd a wanted them, and plenty left over for soup, or sausage, or anything you choose.
We could a had a whole dinner.
But we didn't need it.
All we needed was just enough for the pie, and so we throwed the rest away.
We didn't cook none of the pies in the wash-pan--afraid the solder would melt; but Uncle Silas he had a noble brass warming-pan which he thought considerable of, because it belonged to one of his ancesters with a long wooden handle that come over from
We took and lined her with dough, and set her in the coals, and loaded her up with rag rope, and put on a dough roof, and shut down the lid, and put hot embers on top, and stood off five foot, with the long handle, cool and comfortable, and in fifteen
But the person that et it would want to fetch a couple of kags of toothpicks along, for if that rope ladder wouldn't cramp him down to business I don't know nothing what I'm talking about, and lay him in enough stomach-ache to last him till next time, too.
Nat didn't look when we put the witch pie in Jim's pan; and we put the three tin plates in the bottom of the pan under the vittles; and so Jim got everything all right, and as soon as he was by himself he busted into the pie and hid the rope ladder inside
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
MAKING them pens was a distressid tough job, and so was the saw; and Jim allowed the inscription was going to be the toughest of all.
That's the one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall.
But he had to have it; Tom said he'd _got_ to; there warn't no case of a state prisoner not scrabbling his inscription to leave behind, and his coat of arms.
"Look at Lady Jane Grey," he says; "look at Gilford Dudley; look at old Northumberland!
Why, Huck, s'pose it _is_ considerble trouble?
--what you going to do?
--how you going to get around it?
Jim's _got_ to do his inscription and coat of arms.
They all do".
Jim says: "Why, Mars Tom, I hain't got no coat o' arm; I hain't got nuffn but dish yer ole shirt, en you knows I got to keep de journal on dat".
"Oh, you don't understand, Jim; a coat of arms is very different".
"Well," I says, "Jim's right, anyway, when he says he ain't got no coat of arms, because he hain't".
"I reckon I knowed that," Tom says, "but you bet he'll have one before he goes out of this--because he's going out _right_, and there ain't going to be no flaws in his record".
So whilst me and Jim filed away at the pens on a brickbat apiece, Jim a-making his'n out of the brass and I making mine out of the spoon, Tom set to work to think out the coat of arms.
By and by he said he'd struck so many good ones he didn't hardly know which to take, but there was one which he reckoned he'd decide on.
He says: "On the scutcheon we'll have a bend _or_ in the dexter base, a saltire _murrey_ in the fess, with a dog, couchant, for common charge, and under his foot a chain embattled, for slavery, with a chevron _vert_ in a chief engrailed, and three
_ Got it out of a book--means the more haste the less speed".
"Geewhillikins," I says, "but what does the rest of it mean"?
"We ain't got no time to bother over that," he says; "we got to dig in like all git-out".
"Well, anyway," I says, "what's _some_ of it?
What's a fess"?
"A fess--a fess is--_you_ don't need to know what a fess is.
I'll show him how to make it when he gets to it".
"Shucks, Tom," I says, "I think you might tell a person.
What's a bar sinister"?
"Oh, I don't know.
But he's got to have it.
All the nobility does".
That was just his way.
If it didn't suit him to explain a thing to you, he wouldn't do it.
You might pump at him a week, it wouldn't make no difference.
He'd got all that coat of arms business fixed, so now he started in to finish up the rest of that part of the work, which was to plan out a mournful inscription--said Jim got to have one, like they all done.
He made up a lot, and wrote them out on a paper, and read them off, so: 1.
Here a captive heart busted.
2.
Here a poor prisoner, forsook by the world and friends, fretted his sorrowful life.
3.
Here a lonely heart broke, and a worn spirit went to its rest, after thirty-seven years of solitary captivity.
4.
Here, homeless and friendless, after thirty-seven years of bitter captivity, perished a noble stranger, natural son of Louis XIV.
Tom's voice trembled whilst he was reading them, and he most broke down.
When he got done he couldn't no way make up his mind which one for Jim to scrabble on to the wall, they was all so good; but at last he allowed he would let him scrabble them all on.
Jim said it would take him a year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail, and he didn't know how to make letters, besides; but Tom said he would block them out for him, and then he wouldn't have nothing to do but just follow the
Then pretty soon he says: "Come to think, the logs ain't a-going to do; they don't have log walls in a dungeon: we got to dig the inscriptions into a rock.
We'll fetch a rock".
Jim said the rock was worse than the logs; he said it would take him such a pison long time to dig them into a rock he wouldn't ever get out.
But Tom said he would let me help him do it.
Then he took a look to see how me and Jim was getting along with the pens.
It was most pesky tedious hard work and slow, and didn't give my hands no show to get well of the sores, and we didn't seem to make no headway, hardly; so Tom says: "I know how to fix it.
We got to have a rock for the coat of arms and mournful inscriptions, and we can kill two birds with that same rock.
There's a gaudy big grindstone down at the mill, and we'll smouch it, and carve the things on it, and file out the pens and the saw on it, too".
It warn't no slouch of an idea; and it warn't no slouch of a grindstone nuther; but we allowed we'd tackle it.
It warn't quite midnight yet, so we cleared out for the mill, leaving Jim at work.
We smouched the grindstone, and set out to roll her home, but it was a most nation tough job.
Sometimes, do what we could, we couldn't keep her from falling over, and she come mighty near mashing us every time.
Tom said she was going to get one of us, sure, before we got through.
We got her half way; and then we was plumb played out, and most drownded with sweat.
We see it warn't no use; we got to go and fetch Jim.
So he raised up his bed and slid the chain off of the bed-leg, and wrapt it round and round his neck, and we crawled out through our hole and down there, and Jim and me laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing; and Tom superintended.
He could out-superintend any boy I ever see.
He knowed how to do everything.
Our hole was pretty big, but it warn't big enough to get the grindstone through; but Jim he took the pick and soon made it big enough.
Then Tom marked out them things on it with the nail, and set Jim to work on them, with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbage in the lean-to for a hammer, and told him to work till the rest of his candle quit on him, and then he could go
Then we helped him fix his chain back on the bed-leg, and was ready for bed ourselves.
But Tom thought of something, and says: "You got any spiders in here, Jim"?
"No, sah, thanks to goodness I hain't, Mars Tom".
"All right, we'll get you some".
"But bless you, honey, I doan' _want_ none.
I's afeard un um.
I jis' 's soon have rattlesnakes aroun'".
Tom thought a minute or two, and says: "It's a good idea.
And I reckon it's been done.
It _must_ a been done; it stands to reason.
Yes, it's a prime good idea.
Where could you keep it"?
"Keep what, Mars Tom"?
"Why, a rattlesnake".
"De goodness gracious alive, Mars Tom!
Why, if dey was a rattlesnake to come in heah I'd take en bust right out thoo dat log wall, I would, wid my head".
"Why, Jim, you wouldn't be afraid of it after a little.
You could tame it".
"_Tame_ it"!
"Yes--easy enough.
Every animal is grateful for kindness and petting, and they wouldn't _think_ of hurting a person that pets them.
Any book will tell you that.
You try--that's all I ask; just try for two or three days.
Why, you can get him so, in a little while, that he'll love you; and sleep with you; and won't stay away from you a minute; and will let you wrap him round your neck and put his head in your mouth".
"_Please_, Mars Tom--_doan_' talk so!
I can't _stan_' it!
He'd _let_ me shove his head in my mouf--fer a favor, hain't it?
I lay he'd wait a pow'ful long time 'fo' I _ast_ him.
En mo' en dat, I doan' _want_ him to sleep wid me".
"Jim, don't act so foolish.
A prisoner's _got_ to have some kind of a dumb pet, and if a rattlesnake hain't ever been tried, why, there's more glory to be gained in your being the first to ever try it than any other way you could ever think of to save your life".
"Why, Mars Tom, I doan' _want_ no sich glory.
Snake take 'n bite Jim's chin off, den _whah_ is de glory?
No, sah, I doan' want no sich doin's".
"Blame it, can't you _try_?
I only _want_ you to try--you needn't keep it up if it don't work".
"But de trouble all _done_ ef de snake bite me while I's a tryin' him.
Mars Tom, I's willin' to tackle mos' anything 'at ain't onreasonable, but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame, I's gwyne to _leave_, dat's _shore_".
"Well, then, let it go, let it go, if you're so bull-headed about it.
We can get you some garter-snakes, and you can tie some buttons on their tails, and let on they're rattlesnakes, and I reckon that 'll have to do".
"I k'n stan' _dem_, Mars Tom, but blame' 'f I couldn' get along widout um, I tell you dat.
I never knowed b'fo' 't was so much bother and trouble to be a prisoner".
"Well, it _always_ is when it's done right.
You got any rats around here"?
"No, sah, I hain't seed none".
"Well, we'll get you some rats".
"Why, Mars Tom, I doan' _want_ no rats.
Dey's de dadblamedest creturs to 'sturb a body, en rustle roun' over 'im, en bite his feet, when he's tryin' to sleep, I ever see.
No, sah, gimme g'yarter-snakes, 'f I's got to have 'm, but doan' gimme no rats; I hain' got no use f'r um, skasely".
"But, Jim, you _got_ to have 'em--they all do.
So don't make no more fuss about it.
Prisoners ain't ever without rats.
There ain't no instance of it.
And they train them, and pet them, and learn them tricks, and they get to be as sociable as flies.
But you got to play music to them.
You got anything to play music on"?
"I ain' got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o' paper, en a juice-harp; but I reck'n dey wouldn' take no stock in a juice-harp".
"Yes they would_they_ don't care what kind of music 'tis.
A jews-harp's plenty good enough for a rat.
All animals like music--in a prison they dote on it.
Specially, painful music; and you can't get no other kind out of a jews-harp.
It always interests them; they come out to see what's the matter with you.
Yes, you're all right; you're fixed very well.
You want to set on your bed nights before you go to sleep, and early in the mornings, and play your jews-harp; play 'The Last Link is Broken'--that's the thing that 'll scoop a rat quicker 'n anything else; and when you've played about two minutes you'll
And they'll just fairly swarm over you, and have a noble good time".
"Yes, _dey_ will, I reck'n, Mars Tom, but what kine er time is _Jim_ havin'?
Blest if I kin see de pint.
But I'll do it ef I got to.
I reck'n I better keep de animals satisfied, en not have no trouble in de house".
Tom waited to think it over, and see if there wasn't nothing else; and pretty soon he says: "Oh, there's one thing I forgot.
Could you raise a flower here, do you reckon"?
"I doan know but maybe I could, Mars Tom; but it's tolable dark in heah, en I ain' got no use f'r no flower, nohow, en she'd be a pow'ful sight o' trouble".
"Well, you try it, anyway.
Some other prisoners has done it".
"One er dem big cat-tail-lookin' mullen-stalks would grow in heah, Mars Tom, I reck'n, but she wouldn't be wuth half de trouble she'd coss".
"Don't you believe it.
We'll fetch you a little one and you plant it in the corner over there, and raise it.
And don't call it mullen, call it Pitchiola--that's its right name when it's in a prison.
And you want to water it with your tears".
"Why, I got plenty spring water, Mars Tom".
"You don't _want_ spring water; you want to water it with your tears.
It's the way they always do".
"Why, Mars Tom, I lay I kin raise one er dem mullen-stalks twyste wid spring water whiles another man's a _start'n_ one wid tears".
"That ain't the idea.
You _got_ to do it with tears".
"She'll die on my han's, Mars Tom, she sholy will; kase I doan' skasely ever cry".
So Tom was stumped.
But he studied it over, and then said Jim would have to worry along the best he could with an onion.
He promised he would go to the nigger cabins and drop one, private, in Jim's coffee-pot, in the morning.
Jim said he would "jis' 's soon have tobacker in his coffee;" and found so much fault with it, and with the work and bother of raising the mullen, and jews-harping the rats, and petting and flattering up the snakes and spiders and things, on top of all the
So Jim he was sorry, and said he wouldn't behave so no more, and then me and Tom shoved for bed.
CHAPTER XXXIX.
IN the morning we went up to the village and bought a wire rat-trap and fetched it down, and unstopped the best rat-hole, and in about an hour we had fifteen of the bulliest kind of ones; and then we took it and put it in a safe place under Aunt Sally's
But while we was gone for spiders little Thomas Franklin Benjamin Jefferson Elexander Phelps found it there, and opened the door of it to see if the rats would come out, and they did; and Aunt Sally she come in, and when we got back she was a-standing on
So she took and dusted us both with the hickry, and we was as much as two hours catching another fifteen or sixteen, drat that meddlesome cub, and they warn't the likeliest, nuther, because the first haul was the pick of the flock.
I never see a likelier lot of rats than what that first haul was.
We got a splendid stock of sorted spiders, and bugs, and frogs, and caterpillars, and one thing or another; and we like to got a hornet's nest, but we didn't.
The family was at home.
We didn't give it right up, but stayed with them as long as we could; because we allowed we'd tire them out or they'd got to tire us out, and they done it.
Then we got allycumpain and rubbed on the places, and was pretty near all right again, but couldn't set down convenient.
And so we went for the snakes, and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes, and put them in a bag, and put it in our room, and by that time it was supper-time, and a rattling good honest day's work: and hungry?
--oh, no, I reckon not!
And there warn't a blessed snake up there when we went back--we didn't half tie the sack, and they worked out somehow, and left.
But it didn't matter much, because they was still on the premises somewheres.
So we judged we could get some of them again.
No, there warn't no real scarcity of snakes about the house for a considerable spell.
You'd see them dripping from the rafters and places every now and then; and they generly landed in your plate, or down the back of your neck, and most of the time where you didn't want them.
Well, they was handsome and striped, and there warn't no harm in a million of them; but that never made no difference to Aunt Sally; she despised snakes, be the breed what they might, and she couldn't stand them no way you could fix it; and every time
I never see such a woman.
And you could hear her whoop to Jericho.
You couldn't get her to take a-holt of one of them with the tongs.
And if she turned over and found one in bed she would scramble out and lift a howl that you would think the house was afire.
She disturbed the old man so that he said he could most wish there hadn't ever been no snakes created.
Why, after every last snake had been gone clear out of the house for as much as a week Aunt Sally warn't over it yet; she warn't near over it; when she was setting thinking about something you could touch her on the back of her neck with a feather and
It was very curious.
But Tom said all women was just so.
He said they was made that way for some reason or other.
We got a licking every time one of our snakes come in her way, and she allowed these lickings warn't nothing to what she would do if we ever loaded up the place again with them.
I didn't mind the lickings, because they didn't amount to nothing; but I minded the trouble we had to lay in another lot.
But we got them laid in, and all the other things; and you never see a cabin as blithesome as Jim's was when they'd all swarm out for music and go for him.
Jim didn't like the spiders, and the spiders didn't like Jim; and so they'd lay for him, and make it mighty warm for him.
And he said that between the rats and the snakes and the grindstone there warn't no room in bed for him, skasely; and when there was, a body couldn't sleep, it was so lively, and it was always lively, he said, because _they_ never all slept at one time,
He said if he ever got out this time he wouldn't ever be a prisoner again, not for a salary.
Well, by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape.
The shirt was sent in early, in a pie, and every time a rat bit Jim he would get up and write a little in his journal whilst the ink was fresh; the pens was made, the inscriptions and so on was all carved on the grindstone; the bed-leg was sawed in two,
We reckoned we was all going to die, but didn't.
It was the most undigestible sawdust I ever see; and Tom said the same.
But as I was saying, we'd got all the work done now, at last; and we was all pretty much fagged out, too, but mainly Jim.
The old man had wrote a couple of times to the plantation below Orleans to come and get their runaway nigger, but hadn't got no answer, because there warn't no such plantation; so he allowed he would advertise Jim in the St. Louis and New Orleans papers;
So Tom said, now for the nonnamous letters.
"What's them"?
I says.
"Warnings to the people that something is up.
Sometimes it's done one way, sometimes another.
But there's always somebody spying around that gives notice to the governor of the castle.
When Louis XVI.
was going to light out of the Tooleries, a servant-girl done it.
It's a very good way, and so is the nonnamous letters.
We'll use them both.
And it's usual for the prisoner's mother to change clothes with him, and she stays in, and he slides out in her clothes.
We'll do that, too".
"But looky here, Tom, what do we want to _warn_ anybody for that something's up?
Let them find it out for themselves--it's their lookout".
"Yes, I know; but you can't depend on them.
It's the way they've acted from the very start--left us to do _everything_.
They're so confiding and mullet-headed they don't take notice of nothing at all.
So if we don't _give_ them notice there won't be nobody nor nothing to interfere with us, and so after all our hard work and trouble this escape 'll go off perfectly flat; won't amount to nothing--won't be nothing _to_ it".
"Well, as for me, Tom, that's the way I'd like".
"Shucks"!
he says, and looked disgusted.
So I says: "But I ain't going to make no complaint.
Any way that suits you suits me.
What you going to do about the servant-girl"?
"You'll be her.
You slide in, in the middle of the night, and hook that yaller girl's frock".
"Why, Tom, that 'll make trouble next morning; because, of course, she prob'bly hain't got any but that one".
"I know; but you don't want it but fifteen minutes, to carry the nonnamous letter and shove it under the front door".
"All right, then, I'll do it; but I could carry it just as handy in my own togs".
"You wouldn't look like a servant-girl _then_, would you"?
"No, but there won't be nobody to see what I look like, _anyway_".
"That ain't got nothing to do with it.
The thing for us to do is just to do our _duty_, and not worry about whether anybody _sees_ us do it or not.
Hain't you got no principle at all"?
"All right, I ain't saying nothing; I'm the servant-girl.
Who's Jim's mother"?
"I'm his mother.
I'll hook a gown from Aunt Sally".
"Well, then, you'll have to stay in the cabin when me and Jim leaves".
"Not much.
I'll stuff Jim's clothes full of straw and lay it on his bed to represent his mother in disguise, and Jim 'll take the nigger woman's gown off of me and wear it, and we'll all evade together.
When a prisoner of style escapes it's called an evasion.
It's always called so when a king escapes, f'rinstance.
And the same with a king's son; it don't make no difference whether he's a natural one or an unnatural one".
So Tom he wrote the nonnamous letter, and I smouched the yaller wench's frock that night, and put it on, and shoved it under the front door, the way Tom told me to.
It said: Beware.
Trouble is brewing.
Keep a sharp lookout.
_Unknown_ _Friend_.
Next night we stuck a picture, which Tom drawed in blood, of a skull and crossbones on the front door; and next night another one of a coffin on the back door.
I never see a family in such a sweat.
They couldn't a been worse scared if the place had a been full of ghosts laying for them behind everything and under the beds and shivering through the air.
If a door banged, Aunt Sally she jumped and said "ouch"!
if anything fell, she jumped and said "ouch"!
if you happened to touch her, when she warn't noticing, she done the same; she couldn't face noway and be satisfied, because she allowed there was something behind her every time--so she was always a-whirling around sudden, and saying "ouch," and before
So the thing was working very well, Tom said; he said he never see a thing work more satisfactory.
He said it showed it was done right.
So he said, now for the grand bulge!
So the very next morning at the streak of dawn we got another letter ready, and was wondering what we better do with it, because we heard them say at supper they was going to have a nigger on watch at both doors all night.
Tom he went down the lightning-rod to spy around; and the nigger at the back door was asleep, and he stuck it in the back of his neck and come back.
This letter said: Don't betray me, I wish to be your friend.
There is a desprate gang of cutthroats from over in the Indian Territory going to steal your runaway nigger to-night, and they have been trying to scare you so as you will stay in the house and not bother them.
I am one of the gang, but have got religgion and wish to quit it and lead an honest life again, and will betray the helish design.
They will sneak down from northards, along the fence, at midnight exact, with a false key, and go in the nigger's cabin to get him.
I am to be off a piece and blow a tin horn if I see any danger; but stead of that I will _baa_ like a sheep soon as they get in and not blow at all; then whilst they are getting his chains loose, you slip there and lock them in, and can kill them at your
Don't do anything but just the way I am telling you, if you do they will suspicion something and raise whoop-jamboreehoo.
I do not wish any reward but to know I have done the right thing.
_Unknown Friend.
_ CHAPTER XL.
WE was feeling pretty good after breakfast, and took my canoe and went over the river a-fishing, with a lunch, and had a good time, and took a look at the raft and found her all right, and got home late to supper, and found them in such a sweat and worry
"I laid out a hunk of it," I says, "on a piece of a corn-pone".
"Well, you _left_ it laid out, then--it ain't here".
"We can get along without it," I says.
"We can get along _with_ it, too," he says; "just you slide down cellar and fetch it.
And then mosey right down the lightning-rod and come along.
I'll go and stuff the straw into Jim's clothes to represent his mother in disguise, and be ready to _baa_ like a sheep and shove soon as you get there".
So out he went, and down cellar went I. The hunk of butter, big as a person's fist, was where I had left it, so I took up the slab of corn-pone with it on, and blowed out my light, and started up stairs very stealthy, and got up to the main floor all
"Yes'm".
"What you been doing down there"?
"Noth'n".
"_Noth'n!
_" "No'm".
"Well, then, what possessed you to go down there this time of night"?
"I don't know 'm".
"You don't _know_?
Don't answer me that way.
Tom, I want to know what you been _doing_ down there".
"I hain't been doing a single thing, Aunt Sally, I hope to gracious if I have".
I reckoned she'd let me go now, and as a generl thing she would; but I s'pose there was so many strange things going on she was just in a sweat about every little thing that warn't yard-stick straight; so she says, very decided: "You just march into that
You been up to something you no business to, and I lay I'll find out what it is before I'M done with you".
So she went away as I opened the door and walked into the setting-room.
My, but there was a crowd there!
Fifteen farmers, and every one of them had a gun.
I was most powerful sick, and slunk to a chair and set down.
They was setting around, some of them talking a little, in a low voice, and all of them fidgety and uneasy, but trying to look like they warn't; but I knowed they was, because they was always taking off their hats, and putting them on, and scratching their
I warn't easy myself, but I didn't take my hat off, all the same.
I did wish Aunt Sally would come, and get done with me, and lick me, if she wanted to, and let me get away and tell Tom how we'd overdone this thing, and what a thundering hornet's-nest we'd got ourselves into, so we could stop fooling around straight off,
At last she come and begun to ask me questions, but I _couldn't_ answer them straight, I didn't know which end of me was up; because these men was in such a fidget now that some was wanting to start right NOW and lay for them desperadoes, and saying it
He's got the brain-fever as shore as you're born, and they're oozing out"!
And everybody runs to see, and she snatches off my hat, and out comes the bread and what was left of the butter, and she grabbed me, and hugged me, and says: "Oh, what a turn you did give me!
and how glad and grateful I am it ain't no worse; for luck's against us, and it never rains but it pours, and when I see that truck I thought we'd lost you, for I knowed by the color and all it was just like your brains would be if--Dear, dear, whyd'nt you
Now cler out to bed, and don't lemme see no more of you till morning"!
I was up stairs in a second, and down the lightning-rod in another one, and shinning through the dark for the lean-to.
I couldn't hardly get my words out, I was so anxious; but I told Tom as quick as I could we must jump for it now, and not a minute to lose--the house full of men, yonder, with guns!
His eyes just blazed; and he says: "No!
--is that so?
_ain't_ it bully!
Why, Huck, if it was to do over again, I bet I could fetch two hundred!
If we could put it off till--" "Hurry!
_Hurry_"!
I says.
"Where's Jim"?
"Right at your elbow; if you reach out your arm you can touch him.
He's dressed, and everything's ready.
Now we'll slide out and give the sheep-signal".
But then we heard the tramp of men coming to the door, and heard them begin to fumble with the pad-lock, and heard a man say: "I _told_ you we'd be too soon; they haven't come--the door is locked.
Here, I'll lock some of you into the cabin, and you lay for 'em in the dark and kill 'em when they come; and the rest scatter around a piece, and listen if you can hear 'em coming".
So in they come, but couldn't see us in the dark, and most trod on us whilst we was hustling to get under the bed.
But we got under all right, and out through the hole, swift but soft--Jim first, me next, and Tom last, which was according to Tom's orders.
Now we was in the lean-to, and heard trampings close by outside.
So we crept to the door, and Tom stopped us there and put his eye to the crack, but couldn't make out nothing, it was so dark; and whispered and said he would listen for the steps to get further, and when he nudged us Jim must glide out first, and him
So he set his ear to the crack and listened, and listened, and listened, and the steps a-scraping around out there all the time; and at last he nudged us, and we slid out, and stooped down, not breathing, and not making the least noise, and slipped
Answer, or I'll shoot"!
But we didn't answer; we just unfurled our heels and shoved.
Then there was a rush, and a _Bang, Bang, Bang!
_ and the bullets fairly whizzed around us!
We heard them sing out: "Here they are!
They've broke for the river!
After 'em, boys, and turn loose the dogs"!
So here they come, full tilt.
We could hear them because they wore boots and yelled, but we didn't wear no boots and didn't yell.
We was in the path to the mill; and when they got pretty close on to us we dodged into the bush and let them go by, and then dropped in behind them.
They'd had all the dogs shut up, so they wouldn't scare off the robbers; but by this time somebody had let them loose, and here they come, making powwow enough for a million; but they was our dogs; so we stopped in our tracks till they catched up; and
Then we struck out, easy and comfortable, for the island where my raft was; and we could hear them yelling and barking at each other all up and down the bank, till we was so far away the sounds got dim and died out.
And when we stepped on to the raft I says: "_Now_, old Jim, you're a free man again, and I bet you won't ever be a slave no more".
"En a mighty good job it wuz, too, Huck.
It 'uz planned beautiful, en it 'uz done beautiful; en dey ain't _nobody_ kin git up a plan dat's mo' mixed-up en splendid den what dat one wuz".
We was all glad as we could be, but Tom was the gladdest of all because he had a bullet in the calf of his leg.
When me and Jim heard that we didn't feel so brash as what we did before.
It was hurting him considerable, and bleeding; so we laid him in the wigwam and tore up one of the duke's shirts for to bandage him, but he says: "Gimme the rags; I can do it myself.
Don't stop now; don't fool around here, and the evasion booming along so handsome; man the sweeps, and set her loose!
Boys, we done it elegant!
--'deed we did.
I wish _we'd_ a had the handling of Louis XVI.
, there wouldn't a been no 'Son of Saint Louis, ascend to heaven!
' wrote down in _his_ biography; no, sir, we'd a whooped him over the _border_--that's what we'd a done with _him_--and done it just as slick as nothing at all, too.
Man the sweeps--man the sweeps"!
But me and Jim was consulting--and thinking.
And after we'd thought a minute, I says: "Say it, Jim".
So he says: "Well, den, dis is de way it look to me, Huck.
Ef it wuz _him_ dat 'uz bein' sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, would he say, 'Go on en save me, nemmine 'bout a doctor f'r to save dis one?
' Is dat like Mars Tom Sawyer?
Would he say dat?
You _bet_ he wouldn't!
_well_, den, is _Jim_ gywne to say it?
No, sah--I doan' budge a step out'n dis place 'dout a _doctor_, not if it's forty year"!
I knowed he was white inside, and I reckoned he'd say what he did say--so it was all right now, and I told Tom I was a-going for a doctor.
He raised considerable row about it, but me and Jim stuck to it and wouldn't budge; so he was for crawling out and setting the raft loose himself; but we wouldn't let him.
Then he give us a piece of his mind, but it didn't do no good.
So when he sees me getting the canoe ready, he says: "Well, then, if you're bound to go, I'll tell you the way to do when you get to the village.
Shut the door and blindfold the doctor tight and fast, and make him swear to be silent as the grave, and put a purse full of gold in his hand, and then take and lead him all around the back alleys and everywheres in the dark, and then fetch him here in
It's the way they all do".
So I said I would, and left, and Jim was to hide in the woods when he see the doctor coming till he was gone again.
CHAPTER XLI.
THE doctor was an old man; a very nice, kind-looking old man when I got him up.
I told him me and my brother was over on Spanish Island hunting yesterday afternoon, and camped on a piece of a raft we found, and about midnight he must a kicked his gun in his dreams, for it went off and shot him in the leg, and we wanted him to go
"Who is your folks"?
he says.
"The Phelpses, down yonder".
"Oh," he says.
And after a minute, he says: "How'd you say he got shot"?
"He had a dream," I says, "and it shot him".
"Singular dream," he says.
So he lit up his lantern, and got his saddle-bags, and we started.
But when he sees the canoe he didn't like the look of her--said she was big enough for one, but didn't look pretty safe for two.
I says: "Oh, you needn't be afeard, sir, she carried the three of us easy enough".
"What three"?
"Why, me and Sid, and--and--and _the guns_; that's what I mean".
"Oh," he says.
But he put his foot on the gunnel and rocked her, and shook his head, and said he reckoned he'd look around for a bigger one.
But they was all locked and chained; so he took my canoe, and said for me to wait till he come back, or I could hunt around further, or maybe I better go down home and get them ready for the surprise if I wanted to.
But I said I didn't; so I told him just how to find the raft, and then he started.
I struck an idea pretty soon.
I says to myself, spos'n he can't fix that leg just in three shakes of a sheep's tail, as the saying is?
spos'n it takes him three or four days?
What are we going to do?
--lay around there till he lets the cat out of the bag?
No, sir; I know what _I'll_ do.
I'll wait, and when he comes back if he says he's got to go any more I'll get down there, too, if I swim; and we'll take and tie him, and keep him, and shove out down the river; and when Tom's done with him we'll give him what it's worth, or all we got,
So then I crept into a lumber-pile to get some sleep; and next time I waked up the sun was away up over my head!
I shot out and went for the doctor's house, but they told me he'd gone away in the night some time or other, and warn't back yet.
Well, thinks I, that looks powerful bad for Tom, and I'll dig out for the island right off.
So away I shoved, and turned the corner, and nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas's stomach!
He says: "Why, _Tom!
_ Where you been all this time, you rascal"?
"I hain't been nowheres," I says, "only just hunting for the runaway nigger--me and Sid".
"Why, where ever did you go"?
he says.
"Your aunt's been mighty uneasy".
"She needn't," I says, "because we was all right.
We followed the men and the dogs, but they outrun us, and we lost them; but we thought we heard them on the water, so we got a canoe and took out after them and crossed over, but couldn't find nothing of them; so we cruised along up-shore till we got
So then we went to the post-office to get "Sid"; but just as I suspicioned, he warn't there; so the old man he got a letter out of the office, and we waited awhile longer, but Sid didn't come; so the old man said, come along, let Sid foot it home, or canoe
I couldn't get him to let me stay and wait for Sid; and he said there warn't no use in it, and I must come along, and let Aunt Sally see we was all right.
When we got home Aunt Sally was that glad to see me she laughed and cried both, and hugged me, and give me one of them lickings of hern that don't amount to shucks, and said she'd serve Sid the same when he come.
And the place was plum full of farmers and farmers' wives, to dinner; and such another clack a body never heard.
Old Mrs. Hotchkiss was the worst; her tongue was a-going all the time.
She says: "Well, Sister Phelps, I've ransacked that-air cabin over, an' I b'lieve the nigger was crazy.
I says to Sister Damrell--didn't I, Sister Damrell?
--s'I, he's crazy, s'I--them's the very words I said.
You all hearn me: he's crazy, s'I; everything shows it, s'I.
Look at that-air grindstone, s'I; want to tell _me_'t any cretur 't's in his right mind 's a goin' to scrabble all them crazy things onto a grindstone, s'I?
Here sich 'n' sich a person busted his heart; 'n' here so 'n' so pegged along for thirty-seven year, 'n' all that--natcherl son o' Louis somebody, 'n' sich everlast'n rubbage.
He's plumb crazy, s'I; it's what I says in the fust place, it's what I says in the middle, 'n' it's what I says last 'n' all the time--the nigger's crazy--crazy 's Nebokoodneezer, s'I".
"An' look at that-air ladder made out'n rags, Sister Hotchkiss," says old Mrs. Damrell; "what in the name o' goodness _could_ he ever want of--" "The very words I was a-sayin' no longer ago th'n this minute to Sister Utterback, 'n' she'll tell you so
Sh-she, look at that-air rag ladder, sh-she; 'n' s'I, yes, _look_ at it, s'I--what _could_ he a-wanted of it, s'I.
Sh-she, Sister Hotchkiss, sh-she--" "But how in the nation'd they ever _git_ that grindstone _in_ there, _anyway_?
'n' who dug that-air _hole_?
'n' who--" "My very _words_, Brer Penrod!
I was a-sayin'--pass that-air sasser o' m'lasses, won't ye?
--I was a-sayin' to Sister Dunlap, jist this minute, how _did_ they git that grindstone in there, s'I.
Without _help_, mind you--'thout _help_!
_that's_ wher 'tis.
Don't tell _me_, s'I; there _wuz_ help, s'I; 'n' ther' wuz a _plenty_ help, too, s'I; ther's ben a _dozen_ a-helpin' that nigger, 'n' I lay I'd skin every last nigger on this place but _I'd_ find out who done it, s'I; 'n' moreover, s'I--" "A _dozen_ says
--_forty_ couldn't a done every thing that's been done.
Look at them case-knife saws and things, how tedious they've been made; look at that bed-leg sawed off with 'm, a week's work for six men; look at that nigger made out'n straw on the bed; and look at--" "You may _well_ say it, Brer Hightower!
It's jist as I was a-sayin' to Brer Phelps, his own self.
S'e, what do _you_ think of it, Sister Hotchkiss, s'e?
Think o' what, Brer Phelps, s'I?
Think o' that bed-leg sawed off that a way, s'e?
_think_ of it, s'I?
I lay it never sawed _itself_ off, s'I--somebody _sawed_ it, s'I; that's my opinion, take it or leave it, it mayn't be no 'count, s'I, but sich as 't is, it's my opinion, s'I, 'n' if any body k'n start a better one, s'I, let him _do_ it, s'I, that's all.
I says to Sister Dunlap, s'I--" "Why, dog my cats, they must a ben a house-full o' niggers in there every night for four weeks to a done all that work, Sister Phelps.
Look at that shirt--every last inch of it kivered over with secret African writ'n done with blood!
Must a ben a raft uv 'm at it right along, all the time, amost.
Why, I'd give two dollars to have it read to me; 'n' as for the niggers that wrote it, I 'low I'd take 'n' lash 'm t'll--" "People to _help_ him, Brother Marples!
Well, I reckon you'd _think_ so if you'd a been in this house for a while back.
Why, they've stole everything they could lay their hands on--and we a-watching all the time, mind you.
They stole that shirt right off o' the line!
and as for that sheet they made the rag ladder out of, ther' ain't no telling how many times they _didn't_ steal that; and flour, and candles, and candlesticks, and spoons, and the old warming-pan, and most a thousand things that I disremember now, and my
I tell you, it just bangs anything I ever _heard_ of.
Why, _sperits_ couldn't a done better and been no smarter.
And I reckon they must a _been_ sperits--because, _you_ know our dogs, and ther' ain't no better; well, them dogs never even got on the _track_ of 'm once!
You explain _that_ to me if you can!
--_any_ of you"!
"Well, it does beat--" "Laws alive, I never--" "So help me, I wouldn't a be--" "_House_-thieves as well as--" "Goodnessgracioussakes, I'd a ben afeard to live in sich a--" "'Fraid to _live_!
--why, I was that scared I dasn't hardly go to bed, or get up, or lay down, or _set_ down, Sister Ridgeway.
Why, they'd steal the very--why, goodness sakes, you can guess what kind of a fluster I was in by the time midnight come last night.
I hope to gracious if I warn't afraid they'd steal some o' the family!
I was just to that pass I didn't have no reasoning faculties no more.
It looks foolish enough _now_, in the daytime; but I says to myself, there's my two poor boys asleep, 'way up stairs in that lonesome room, and I declare to goodness I was that uneasy 't I crep' up there and locked 'em in!
I _did_.
And anybody would.
Because, you know, when you get scared that way, and it keeps running on, and getting worse and worse all the time, and your wits gets to addling, and you get to doing all sorts o' wild things, and by and by you think to yourself, spos'n I was a boy, and
Says I to myself, I can explain better how we come to not be in that room this morning if I go out to one side and study over it a little.
So I done it.
But I dasn't go fur, or she'd a sent for me.
And when it was late in the day the people all went, and then I come in and told her the noise and shooting waked up me and "Sid," and the door was locked, and we wanted to see the fun, so we went down the lightning-rod, and both of us got hurt a little,
And then I went on and told her all what I told Uncle Silas before; and then she said she'd forgive us, and maybe it was all right enough anyway, and about what a body might expect of boys, for all boys was a pretty harum-scarum lot as fur as she could
So then she kissed me, and patted me on the head, and dropped into a kind of a brown study; and pretty soon jumps up, and says: "Why, lawsamercy, it's most night, and Sid not come yet!
What _has_ become of that boy"?
I see my chance; so I skips up and says: "I'll run right up to town and get him," I says.
"No you won't," she says.
"You'll stay right wher' you are; _one's_ enough to be lost at a time.
If he ain't here to supper, your uncle 'll go".
Well, he warn't there to supper; so right after supper uncle went.
He come back about ten a little bit uneasy; hadn't run across Tom's track.
Aunt Sally was a good _deal_ uneasy; but Uncle Silas he said there warn't no occasion to be--boys will be boys, he said, and you'll see this one turn up in the morning all sound and right.
So she had to be satisfied.
But she said she'd set up for him a while anyway, and keep a light burning so he could see it.
And then when I went up to bed she come up with me and fetched her candle, and tucked me in, and mothered me so good I felt mean, and like I couldn't look her in the face; and she set down on the bed and talked with me a long time, and said what a splendid
And when she was going away she looked down in my eyes so steady and gentle, and says: "The door ain't going to be locked, Tom, and there's the window and the rod; but you'll be good, _won't_ you?
And you won't go?
For _my_ sake".
Laws knows I _wanted_ to go bad enough to see about Tom, and was all intending to go; but after that I wouldn't a went, not for kingdoms.
But she was on my mind and Tom was on my mind, so I slept very restless.
And twice I went down the rod away in the night, and slipped around front, and see her setting there by her candle in the window with her eyes towards the road and the tears in them; and I wished I could do something for her, but I couldn't, only to swear
And the third time I waked up at dawn, and slid down, and she was there yet, and her candle was most out, and her old gray head was resting on her hand, and she was asleep.
CHAPTER XLII.
THE old man was uptown again before breakfast, but couldn't get no track of Tom; and both of them set at the table thinking, and not saying nothing, and looking mournful, and their coffee getting cold, and not eating anything.
And by and by the old man says: "Did I give you the letter"?
"What letter"?
"The one I got yesterday out of the post-office".
"No, you didn't give me no letter".
"Well, I must a forgot it".
So he rummaged his pockets, and then went off somewheres where he had laid it down, and fetched it, and give it to her.
She says: "Why, it's from St. Petersburg--it's from Sis".
I allowed another walk would do me good; but I couldn't stir.
But before she could break it open she dropped it and run--for she see something.
And so did I. It was Tom Sawyer on a mattress; and that old doctor; and Jim, in _her_ calico dress, with his hands tied behind him; and a lot of people.
I hid the letter behind the first thing that come handy, and rushed.
She flung herself at Tom, crying, and says: "Oh, he's dead, he's dead, I know he's dead"!
And Tom he turned his head a little, and muttered something or other, which showed he warn't in his right mind; then she flung up her hands, and says: "He's alive, thank God!
And that's enough"!
and she snatched a kiss of him, and flew for the house to get the bed ready, and scattering orders right and left at the niggers and everybody else, as fast as her tongue could go, every jump of the way.
I followed the men to see what they was going to do with Jim; and the old doctor and Uncle Silas followed after Tom into the house.
The men was very huffy, and some of them wanted to hang Jim for an example to all the other niggers around there, so they wouldn't be trying to run away like Jim done, and making such a raft of trouble, and keeping a whole family scared most to death for
But the others said, don't do it, it wouldn't answer at all; he ain't our nigger, and his owner would turn up and make us pay for him, sure.
So that cooled them down a little, because the people that's always the most anxious for to hang a nigger that hain't done just right is always the very ones that ain't the most anxious to pay for him when they've got their satisfaction out of him.
They cussed Jim considerble, though, and give him a cuff or two side the head once in a while, but Jim never said nothing, and he never let on to know me, and they took him to the same cabin, and put his own clothes on him, and chained him again, and not
When I got to where I found the boy I see I couldn't cut the bullet out without some help, and he warn't in no condition for me to leave to go and get help; and he got a little worse and a little worse, and after a long time he went out of his head, and
Of course I judged he must be a runaway nigger, and there I _was_!
and there I had to stick right straight along all the rest of the day and all night.
It was a fix, I tell you!
I had a couple of patients with the chills, and of course I'd of liked to run up to town and see them, but I dasn't, because the nigger might get away, and then I'd be to blame; and yet never a skiff come close enough for me to hail.
So there I had to stick plumb until daylight this morning; and I never see a nigger that was a better nuss or faithfuller, and yet he was risking his freedom to do it, and was all tired out, too, and I see plain enough he'd been worked main hard lately.
I liked the nigger for that; I tell you, gentlemen, a nigger like that is worth a thousand dollars--and kind treatment, too.
I had everything I needed, and the boy was doing as well there as he would a done at home--better, maybe, because it was so quiet; but there I _was_, with both of 'm on my hands, and there I had to stick till about dawn this morning; then some men in a
And the boy being in a kind of a flighty sleep, too, we muffled the oars and hitched the raft on, and towed her over very nice and quiet, and the nigger never made the least row nor said a word from the start.
He ain't no bad nigger, gentlemen; that's what I think about him".
Somebody says: "Well, it sounds very good, doctor, I'm obleeged to say".
Then the others softened up a little, too, and I was mighty thankful to that old doctor for doing Jim that good turn; and I was glad it was according to my judgment of him, too; because I thought he had a good heart in him and was a good man the first time
Then they all agreed that Jim had acted very well, and was deserving to have some notice took of it, and reward.
So every one of them promised, right out and hearty, that they wouldn't cuss him no more.
Then they come out and locked him up.
I hoped they was going to say he could have one or two of the chains took off, because they was rotten heavy, or could have meat and greens with his bread and water; but they didn't think of it, and I reckoned it warn't best for me to mix in, but I
But I had plenty time.
Aunt Sally she stuck to the sick-room all day and all night, and every time I see Uncle Silas mooning around I dodged him.
Next morning I heard Tom was a good deal better, and they said Aunt Sally was gone to get a nap.
So I slips to the sick-room, and if I found him awake I reckoned we could put up a yarn for the family that would wash.
But he was sleeping, and sleeping very peaceful, too; and pale, not fire-faced the way he was when he come.
So I set down and laid for him to wake.
In about half an hour Aunt Sally comes gliding in, and there I was, up a stump again!
She motioned me to be still, and set down by me, and begun to whisper, and said we could all be joyful now, because all the symptoms was first-rate, and he'd been sleeping like that for ever so long, and looking better and peacefuller all the time, and
So we set there watching, and by and by he stirs a bit, and opened his eyes very natural, and takes a look, and says: "Hello!
--why, I'm at _home_!
How's that?
Where's the raft"?
"It's all right," I says.
"And _Jim_"?
"The same," I says, but couldn't say it pretty brash.
But he never noticed, but says: "Good!
Splendid!
_Now_ we're all right and safe!
Did you tell Aunty"?
I was going to say yes; but she chipped in and says: "About what, Sid"?
"Why, about the way the whole thing was done".
"What whole thing"?
"Why, _the_ whole thing.
There ain't but one; how we set the runaway nigger free--me and Tom".
"Good land!
Set the run--What _is_ the child talking about!
Dear, dear, out of his head again"!
"_No_, I ain't out of my _head_; I know all what I'm talking about.
We _did_ set him free--me and Tom.
We laid out to do it, and we _done_ it.
And we done it elegant, too".
He'd got a start, and she never checked him up, just set and stared and stared, and let him clip along, and I see it warn't no use for _me_ to put in.
"Why, Aunty, it cost us a power of work--weeks of it--hours and hours, every night, whilst you was all asleep.
And we had to steal candles, and the sheet, and the shirt, and your dress, and spoons, and tin plates, and case-knives, and the warming-pan, and the grindstone, and flour, and just no end of things, and you can't think what work it was to make the saws,
And we had to make up the pictures of coffins and things, and nonnamous letters from the robbers, and get up and down the lightning-rod, and dig the hole into the cabin, and made the rope ladder and send it in cooked up in a pie, and send in spoons and
"--and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so on, for company for Jim; and then you kept Tom here so long with the butter in his hat that you come near spiling the whole business, because the men come before we was out of the cabin, and we had to
"Well, I never heard the likes of it in all my born days!
So it was _you_, you little rapscallions, that's been making all this trouble, and turned everybody's wits clean inside out and scared us all most to death.
I've as good a notion as ever I had in my life to take it out o' you this very minute.
To think, here I've been, night after night, a--_you_ just get well once, you young scamp, and I lay I'll tan the Old Harry out o' both o' ye"!
But Tom, he _was_ so proud and joyful, he just _couldn't_ hold in, and his tongue just _went_ it--she a-chipping in, and spitting fire all along, and both of them going it at once, like a cat convention; and she says: "_Well_, you get all the enjoyment you
Tom says, dropping his smile and looking surprised.
"With _who_?
Why, the runaway nigger, of course.
Who'd you reckon"?
Tom looks at me very grave, and says: "Tom, didn't you just tell me he was all right?
Hasn't he got away"?
"_Him_"?
says Aunt Sally; "the runaway nigger?
'Deed he hasn't.
They've got him back, safe and sound, and he's in that cabin again, on bread and water, and loaded down with chains, till he's claimed or sold"!
Tom rose square up in bed, with his eye hot, and his nostrils opening and shutting like gills, and sings out to me: "They hain't no _right_ to shut him up!
SHOVE!
--and don't you lose a minute.
Turn him loose!
he ain't no slave; he's as free as any cretur that walks this earth"!
"What _does_ the child mean"?
"I mean every word I _say_, Aunt Sally, and if somebody don't go, _I'll_ go.
I've knowed him all his life, and so has Tom, there.
Old Miss Watson died two months ago, and she was ashamed she ever was going to sell him down the river, and _said_ so; and she set him free in her will".
"Then what on earth did _you_ want to set him free for, seeing he was already free"?
"Well, that _is_ a question, I must say; and just like women!
Why, I wanted the _adventure_ of it; and I'd a waded neck-deep in blood to--goodness alive, _Aunt Polly!
_" If she warn't standing right there, just inside the door, looking as sweet and contented as an angel half full of pie, I wish I may never!
Aunt Sally jumped for her, and most hugged the head off of her, and cried over her, and I found a good enough place for me under the bed, for it was getting pretty sultry for us, seemed to me.
And I peeped out, and in a little while Tom's Aunt Polly shook herself loose and stood there looking across at Tom over her spectacles--kind of grinding him into the earth, you know.
And then she says: "Yes, you _better_ turn y'r head away--I would if I was you, Tom".
"Oh, deary me"!
says Aunt Sally; "_Is_ he changed so?
Why, that ain't _Tom_, it's Sid; Tom's--Tom's--why, where is Tom?
He was here a minute ago".
"You mean where's Huck _Finn_--that's what you mean!
I reckon I hain't raised such a scamp as my Tom all these years not to know him when I _see_ him.
That _would_ be a pretty howdy-do.
Come out from under that bed, Huck Finn".
So I done it.
But not feeling brash.
Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-upest-looking persons I ever see--except one, and that was Uncle Silas, when he come in and they told it all to him.
It kind of made him drunk, as you may say, and he didn't know nothing at all the rest of the day, and preached a prayer-meeting sermon that night that gave him a rattling ruputation, because the oldest man in the world couldn't a understood it.
So Tom's Aunt Polly, she told all about who I was, and what; and I had to up and tell how I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom Sawyer--she chipped in and says, "Oh, go on and call me Aunt Sally, I'm used to it now, and
And so it turned out, and he let on to be Sid, and made things as soft as he could for me.
And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss Watson setting Jim free in her will; and so, sure enough, Tom Sawyer had gone and took all that trouble and bother to set a free nigger free!
and I couldn't ever understand before, until that minute and that talk, how he _could_ help a body set a nigger free with his bringing-up.
Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her that Tom and _Sid_ had come all right and safe, she says to herself: "Look at that, now!
I might have expected it, letting him go off that way without anybody to watch him.
So now I got to go and trapse all the way down the river, eleven hundred mile, and find out what that creetur's up to _this_ time, as long as I couldn't seem to get any answer out of you about it".
"Why, I never heard nothing from you," says Aunt Sally.
"Well, I wonder!
Why, I wrote you twice to ask you what you could mean by Sid being here".
"Well, I never got 'em, Sis".
Aunt Polly she turns around slow and severe, and says: "You, Tom"!
"Well--_what_"?
he says, kind of pettish.
"Don't you what _me_, you impudent thing--hand out them letters".
"What letters"?
"_Them_ letters.
I be bound, if I have to take a-holt of you I'll--" "They're in the trunk.
There, now.
And they're just the same as they was when I got them out of the office.
I hain't looked into them, I hain't touched them.
But I knowed they'd make trouble, and I thought if you warn't in no hurry, I'd--" "Well, you _do_ need skinning, there ain't no mistake about it.
And I wrote another one to tell you I was coming; and I s'pose he--" "No, it come yesterday; I hain't read it yet, but _it's_ all right, I've got that one".
I wanted to offer to bet two dollars she hadn't, but I reckoned maybe it was just as safe to not to.
So I never said nothing.
CHAPTER THE LAST THE first time I catched Tom private I asked him what was his idea, time of the evasion?
--what it was he'd planned to do if the evasion worked all right and he managed to set a nigger free that was already free before?
And he said, what he had planned in his head from the start, if we got Jim out all safe, was for us to run him down the river on the raft, and have adventures plumb to the mouth of the river, and then tell him about his being free, and take him back up
But I reckoned it was about as well the way it was.
We had Jim out of the chains in no time, and when Aunt Polly and Uncle Silas and Aunt Sally found out how good he helped the doctor nurse Tom, they made a heap of fuss over him, and fixed him up prime, and give him all he wanted to eat, and a good time,
And we had him up to the sick-room, and had a high talk; and Tom give Jim forty dollars for being prisoner for us so patient, and doing it up so good, and Jim was pleased most to death, and busted out, and says: "Dah, now, Huck, what I tell you?
--what I tell you up dah on Jackson islan'?
I _tole_ you I got a hairy breas', en what's de sign un it; en I _tole_ you I ben rich wunst, en gwineter to be rich _agin_; en it's come true; en heah she is!
_dah_, now!
doan' talk to _me_--signs is _signs_, mine I tell you; en I knowed jis' 's well 'at I 'uz gwineter be rich agin as I's a-stannin' heah dis minute"!
And then Tom he talked along and talked along, and says, le's all three slide out of here one of these nights and get an outfit, and go for howling adventures amongst the Injuns, over in the Territory, for a couple of weeks or two; and I says, all right,
"No, he hain't," Tom says; "it's all there yet--six thousand dollars and more; and your pap hain't ever been back since.
Hadn't when I come away, anyhow".
Jim says, kind of solemn: "He ain't a-comin' back no mo', Huck".
I says: "Why, Jim"?
"Nemmine why, Huck--but he ain't comin' back no mo".
But I kept at him; so at last he says: "Doan' you 'member de house dat was float'n down de river, en dey wuz a man in dah, kivered up, en I went in en unkivered him and didn' let you come in?
Well, den, you kin git yo' money when you wants it, kase dat wuz him".
Tom's most well now, and got his bullet around his neck on a watch-guard for a watch, and is always seeing what time it is, and so there ain't nothing more to write about, and I am rotten glad of it, because if I'd a knowed what a trouble it was to make a
But I reckon I got to light out for the Territory ahead of the rest, because Aunt Sally she's going to adopt me and sivilize me, and I can't stand it.
I been there before.
THE END.
YOURS TRULY, _HUCK FINN_.COMPLETE *** Produced by David Widger.
Earliest PG text edition produced by Graham Allan LIFE ON THE MISSISSIPPI By Mark Twain TABLE OF CONTENTS CHAPTER I. The Mississippi is Well worth Reading about.
--It is Remarkable.
--Instead of Widening towards its Mouth, it grows Narrower.
--It Empties four hundred and six million Tons of Mud.
--It was First Seen in 1542.
--It is Older than some Pages in European History.
--De Soto has the Pull.
--Older than the Atlantic Coast.
--Some Half-breeds chip in.
--La Salle Thinks he will Take a Hand.
CHAPTER II.
La Salle again Appears, and so does a Cat-fish.
--Buffaloes also.
--Some Indian Paintings are Seen on the Rocks.
--"The Father of Waters "does not Flow into the Pacific.
--More History and Indians.
--Some Curious Performances--not Early English.
--Natchez, or the Site of it, is Approached.
CHAPTER III.
A little History.
--Early Commerce.
--Coal Fleets and Timber Rafts.
--We start on a Voyage.
--I seek Information.
--Some Music.
--The Trouble begins.
--Tall Talk.
--The Child of Calamity.
--Ground and lofty Tumbling.
--The Wash-up.
--Business and Statistics.
--Mysterious Band.
--Thunder and Lightning.
--The Captain speaks.
--Allbright weeps.
--The Mystery settled.
--Chaff.
--I am Discovered.
--Some Art-work proposed.
--I give an Account of Myself.
--Released.
CHAPTER IV.
The Boys' Ambition.
--Village Scenes.
--Steamboat Pictures.
--A Heavy Swell.
--A Runaway.
CHAPTER V. A Traveller.
--A Lively Talker.
--A Wild-cat Victim CHAPTER VI.
Besieging the Pilot.
--Taken along.
--Spoiling a Nap.
--Fishing for a Plantation.
--"Points" on the River.
--A Gorgeous Pilot-house.
CHAPTER VII.
River Inspectors.
--Cottonwoods and Plum Point.
--Hat-Island Crossing.
--Touch and Go.
--It is a Go.
--A Lightning Pilot CHAPTER VIII.
A Heavy-loaded Big Gun.
--Sharp Sights in Darkness.
--Abandoned to his Fate.
--Scraping the Banks.
--Learn him or Kill him.
CHAPTER IX.
Shake the Reef.
--Reason Dethroned.
--The Face of the Water.
--A Bewitching Scene.
-Romance and Beauty.
CHAPTER X. Putting on Airs.
--Taken down a bit.
--Learn it as it is.
--The River Rising.
CHAPTER XI.
In thg Tract Business.
--Effects of the Rise.
--Plantations gone.
--A Measureless Sea.
--A Somnambulist Pilot.
--Supernatural Piloting.
--Nobody there.
--All Saved.
CHAPTER XII.
Low Water.
--Yawl sounding.
--Buoys and Lanterns.
--Cubs and Soundings.
--The Boat Sunk.
--Seeking the Wrecked.
CHAPTER XIII.
A Pilot's Memory.
--Wages soaring.
--A Universal Grasp.
--Skill and Nerve.
--Testing a "Cub".
--"Back her for Life".
--A Good Lesson.
CHAPTER XIV.
Pilots and Captains.
--High-priced Pilots.
--Pilots in Demand.
--A Whistler.
--A cheap Trade.
--Two-hundred-and-fifty-dollar Speed.
CHAPTER XV.
New Pilots undermining the Pilots' Association.
--Crutches and Wages.
--Putting on Airs.
--The Captains Weaken.
--The Association Laughs.
--The Secret Sign.
--An Admirable System.
--Rough on Outsiders.
--A Tight Monopoly.
--No Loophole.
--The Railroads and the War.
CHAPTER XVI.
All Aboard.
--A Glorious Start.
--Loaded to Win.
--Bands and Bugles.
--Boats and Boats.
--Racers and Racing.
CHAPTER XVII.
Cut-offs.
--Ditching and Shooting.
--Mississippi Changes.
--A Wild Night.
--Swearing and Guessing.
--Stephen in Debt.
--He Confuses his Creditors.
--He makes a New Deal.
--Will Pay them Alphabetically.
CHAPTER XVIII.
Sharp Schooling.
--Shadows.
--I am Inspected.
--Where did you get them Shoes?
--Pull her Down.
--I want to kill Brown.
--I try to run her.
--I am Complimented.
CHAPTER XIX.
A Question of Veracity.
--A Little Unpleasantness.
--I have an Audience with the Captain.
--Mr. Brown Retires.
CHAPTER XX.
I become a Passenger.
--We hear the News.
--A Thunderous Crash.
--They Stand to their Posts.
--In the Blazing Sun.
--A Grewsome Spectacle.
--His Hour has Struck.
CHAPTER XXI.
I get my License.
--The War Begins.
--I become a Jack-of-all-trades.
CHAPTER XXII.
I try the Alias Business.
--Region of Goatees--Boots begin to Appear.
--The River Man is Missing.
--The Young Man is Discouraged.
-- Specimen Water.
--A Fine Quality of Smoke.
--A Supreme Mistake.
--We Inspect the Town.
--Desolation Way-traffic.
--A Wood-yard.
CHAPTER XXIII.
Old French Settlements.
--We start for Memphis.
--Young Ladies and Russia-leather Bags.
CHAPTER XXIV.
I receive some Information.
--Alligator Boats.
--Alligator Talk.
--She was a Rattler to go.
--I am Found Out.
CHAPTER XXV.
The Devil's Oven and Table.
--A Bombshell falls.
--No Whitewash.
--Thirty Years on the River.
-Mississippi Uniforms.
--Accidents and Casualties.
--Two hundred Wrecks.
--A Loss to Literature.
--Sunday- Schools and Brick Masons.
CHAPTER XXVI.
War Talk.
--I Tilt over Backwards.
--Fifteen Shot-holes.
--A Plain Story.
--Wars and Feuds.
--Darnell versus Watson.
--A Gang and a Woodpile.
--Western Grammar.
--River Changes.
--New Madrid.
--Floods and Falls.
CHAPTER XXVII.
Tourists and their Note-books.
--Captain Hall.
--Mrs. Trollope's Emotions.
--Hon.
Charles Augustus Murray's Sentiment.
--Captain Marryat's Sensations.
--Alexander Mackay's Feelings.
--Mr. Parkman Reports CHAPTER XXVIII.
Swinging down the River.
--Named for Me.
--Plum Point again.
--Lights and Snag Boats.
--Infinite Changes.
--A Lawless River.
--Changes and Jetties.
--Uncle Mumford Testifies.
--Pegging the River.
--What the Government does.
--The Commission.
--Men and Theories.
--"Had them Bad".
--Jews and Prices.
CHAPTER XXIX.
Murel's Gang.
--A Consummate Villain.
--Getting Rid of Witnesses.
--Stewart turns Traitor.
--I Start a Rebellion.
--I get a New Suit of Clothes.
--We Cover our Tracks.
--Pluck and Capacity.
--A Good Samaritan City.
--The Old and the New.
CHAPTER XXX.
A Melancholy Picture.
--On the Move.
--River Gossip.
--She Went By a-Sparklin'.
--Amenities of Life.
--A World of Misinformation.
-- Eloquence of Silence.
--Striking a Snag.
--Photographically Exact.
--Plank Side-walks.
CHAPTER XXXI.
Mutinous Language.
--The Dead-house.
--Cast-iron German and Flexible English.
--A Dying Man's Confession.
--I am Bound and Gagged.
--I get Myself Free.
--I Begin my Search.
--The Man with one Thumb.
--Red Paint and White Paper.
--He Dropped on his Knees.
--Fright and Gratitude.
--I Fled through the Woods.
--A Grisly Spectacle.
--Shout, Man, Shout.
--A look of Surprise and Triumph.
--The Muffled Gurgle of a Mocking Laugh.
--How strangely Things happen.
--The Hidden Money.
CHAPTER XXXII.
Ritter's Narrative.
--A Question of Money.
--Napoleon.
--Somebody is Serious.
--Where the Prettiest Girl used to Live.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
A Question of Division.
--A Place where there was no License.
--The Calhoun Land Company.
--A Cotton-planter's Estimate.
--Halifax and Watermelons.
--Jewelled-up Bar-keepers.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
An Austere Man.
--A Mosquito Policy.
--Facts dressed in Tights.
--A swelled Left Ear.
CHAPTER XXXV.
Signs and Scars.
--Cannon-thunder Rages.
--Cave-dwellers.
--A Continual Sunday.
--A ton of Iron and no Glass.
--The Ardent is Saved.
--Mule Meat--A National Cemetery.
--A Dog and a Shell.
--Railroads and Wealth.
--Wharfage Economy.
--Vicksburg versus The "Gold Dust".
--A Narrative in Anticipation.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
The Professor Spins a Yarn.
--An Enthusiast in Cattle.
--He makes a Proposition.
--Loading Beeves at Acapulco.
--He was n't Raised to it.
--He is Roped In.
--His Dull Eyes Lit Up.
--Four Aces, you Ass!
--He does n't Care for the Gores.
CHAPTER XXXVII.
A Terrible Disaster.
--The "Gold Dust" explodes her Boilers.
--The End of a Good Man.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
Mr. Dickens has a Word.
--Best Dwellings and their Furniture.
--Albums and Music.
--Pantelettes and Conch-shells.
--Sugar-candy Rabbits and Photographs.
--Horse-hair Sofas and Snuffers.
--Rag Carpets and Bridal Chambers.
CHAPTER XXXIX.
Rowdies and Beauty.
--Ice as Jewelry.
--Ice Manufacture.
--More Statistics.
--Some Drummers.
--Oleomargarine versus Butter.
--Olive Oil versus Cotton Seed.
--The Answer was not Caught.
--A Terrific Episode.
--A Sulphurous Canopy.
--The Demons of War.
--The Terrible Gauntlet.
CHAPTER XL.
In Flowers, like a Bride.
--A White-washed Castle.
--A Southern Prospectus.
--Pretty Pictures.
--An Alligator's Meal.
CHAPTER XLI.
The Approaches to New Orleans.
--A Stirring Street.
--Sanitary Improvements.
--Journalistic Achievements.
--Cisterns and Wells.
CHAPTER XLII.
Beautiful Grave-yards.
--Chameleons and Panaceas.
--Inhumation and Infection.
--Mortality and Epidemics.
--The Cost of Funerals.
CHAPTER XLIII.
I meet an Acquaintance.
--Coffins and Swell Houses.
--Mrs. O'Flaherty goes One Better.
--Epidemics and Embamming.
--Six hundred for a Good Case.
--Joyful High Spirits.
CHAPTER XLIV.
French and Spanish Parts of the City.
--Mr. Cable and the Ancient Quarter.
--Cabbages and Bouquets.
--Cows and Children.
--The Shell Road.
The West End.
--A Good Square Meal.
--The Pompano.
--The Broom- Brigade.
--Historical Painting.
--Southern Speech.
--Lagniappe.
CHAPTER XLV.
"Waw" Talk.
--Cock-Fighting.
--Too Much to Bear.
--Fine Writing.
--Mule Racing.
CHAPTER XLVI.
Mardi-Gras.
--The Mystic Crewe.
--Rex and Relics.
--Sir Walter Scott.
--A World Set Back.
--Titles and Decorations.
--A Change.
CHAPTER XLVII.
Uncle Remus.
--The Children Disappointed.
--We Read Aloud.
--Mr. Cable and Jean au Poquelin.
--Involuntary Trespass.
--The Gilded Age.
--An Impossible Combination.
--The Owner Materializes and Protests.
CHAPTER XLVIII.
Tight Curls and Springy Steps.
--Steam-plows.
--"No.
I." Sugar.
--A Frankenstein Laugh.
--Spiritual Postage.
--A Place where there are no Butchers or Plumbers.
--Idiotic Spasms.
CHAPTER XLIX.
Pilot-Farmers.
--Working on Shares.
--Consequences.
--Men who Stick to their Posts.
--He saw what he would do.
--A Day after the Fair.
CHAPTER L. A Patriarch.
--Leaves from a Diary.
--A Tongue-stopper.
--The Ancient Mariner.
--Pilloried in Print.
--Petrified Truth.
CHAPTER LI.
A Fresh "Cub" at the Wheel.
--A Valley Storm.
--Some Remarks on Construction.
--Sock and Buskin.
--The Man who never played Hamlet.
--I got Thirsty.
--Sunday Statistics.
CHAPTER LII.
I Collar an Idea.
--A Graduate of Harvard.
--A Penitent Thief.
--His Story in the Pulpit.
--Something Symmetrical.
--A Literary Artist.
--A Model Epistle.
--Pumps again Working.
--The "Nub" of the Note.
CHAPTER LIII.
A Masterly Retreat.
--A Town at Rest.
--Boyhood's Pranks.
--Friends of my Youth.
--The Refuge for Imbeciles.
--I am Presented with my Measure.
CHAPTER LIV.
A Special Judgment.
--Celestial Interest.
--A Night of Agony.
--Another Bad Attack.
--I become Convalescent.
--I address a Sunday-school.
--A Model Boy.
CHAPTER LV.
A second Generation.
--A hundred thousand Tons of Saddles.
--A Dark and Dreadful Secret.
--A Large Family.
--A Golden-haired Darling.
--The Mysterious Cross.
--My Idol is Broken.
--A Bad Season of Chills and Fever.
--An Interesting Cave.
CHAPTER LVI.
Perverted History--A Guilty Conscience.
--A Supposititious Case.
--A Habit to be Cultivated.
--I Drop my Burden.
--Difference in Time.
CHAPTER LVII.
A Model Town.
--A Town that Comes up to Blow in the Summer.
--The Scare-crow Dean.
--Spouting Smoke and Flame.
--An Atmosphere that tastes good.
--The Sunset Land.
CHAPTER LVIII.
An Independent Race.
--Twenty-four-hour Towns.
--Enchanting Scenery.
--The Home of the Plow.
--Black Hawk.
--Fluctuating Securities.
--A Contrast.
--Electric Lights.
CHAPTER LIX.
Indian Traditions and Rattlesnakes.
--A Three-ton Word.
--Chimney Rock.
--The Panorama Man.
--A Good Jump.
--The Undying Head.
--Peboan and Seegwun.
CHAPTER LX.
The Head of Navigation.
--From Roses to Snow.
--Climatic Vaccination.
--A Long Ride.
--Bones of Poverty.
--The Pioneer of Civilization.
--Jug of Empire.
--Siamese Twins.
--The Sugar-bush.
--He Wins his Bride.
--The Mystery about the Blanket.
--A City that is always a Novelty.
--Home again.
APPENDIX.
A B C D THE 'BODY OF THE NATION' BUT the basin of the Mississippi is the _Body of The Nation_.
All the other parts are but members, important in themselves, yet more important in their relations to this.
Exclusive of the Lake basin and of 300,000 square miles in Texas and New Mexico, which in many aspects form a part of it, this basin contains about 1,250,000 square miles.
In extent it is the second great valley of the world, being exceeded only by that of the Amazon.
The valley of the frozen Obi approaches it in extent; that of La Plata comes next in space, and probably in habitable capacity, having about eight-ninths of its area; then comes that of the Yenisei, with about seven-ninths; the Lena, Amoor, Hoang-ho,
It exceeds in extent the whole of Europe, exclusive of Russia, Norway, and Sweden.
_It would contain austria four times, germany or spain five times, france six times, the british islands or italy ten times.
_ Conceptions formed from the river-basins of Western Europe are rudely shocked when we consider the extent of the valley of the Mississippi; nor are those formed from the sterile basins of the great rivers of Siberia, the lofty plateaus of Central Asia,
Latitude, elevation, and rainfall all combine to render every part of the Mississippi Valley capable of supporting a dense population.
_As a dwelling-place for civilized man it is by far the first upon our globe_.
EDITOR'S TABLE, HARPER'S MAGAZINE, FEBRUARY 1863 CHAPTER 1 The River and Its History THE Mississippi is well worth reading about.
It is not a commonplace river, but on the contrary is in all ways remarkable.
Considering the Missouri its main branch, it is the longest river in the world--four thousand three hundred miles.
It seems safe to say that it is also the crookedest river in the world, since in one part of its journey it uses up one thousand three hundred miles to cover the same ground that the crow would fly over in six hundred and seventy-five.
It discharges three times as much water as the St. Lawrence, twenty-five times as much as the Rhine, and three hundred and thirty-eight times as much as the Thames.
No other river has so vast a drainage-basin: it draws its water supply from twenty-eight States and Territories; from Delaware, on the Atlantic seaboard, and from all the country between that and Idaho on the Pacific slope--a spread of forty-five degrees
The Mississippi receives and carries to the Gulf water from fifty-four subordinate rivers that are navigable by steamboats, and from some hundreds that are navigable by flats and keels.
The area of its drainage-basin is as great as the combined areas of England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, France, Spain, Portugal, Germany, Austria, Italy, and Turkey; and almost all this wide region is fertile; the Mississippi valley, proper, is
It is a remarkable river in this: that instead of widening toward its mouth, it grows narrower; grows narrower and deeper.
From the junction of the Ohio to a point half way down to the sea, the width averages a mile in high water: thence to the sea the width steadily diminishes, until, at the 'Passes,' above the mouth, it is but little over half a mile.
At the junction of the Ohio the Mississippi's depth is eighty-seven feet; the depth increases gradually, reaching one hundred and twenty-nine just above the mouth.
The difference in rise and fall is also remarkable--not in the upper, but in the lower river.
The rise is tolerably uniform down to Natchez (three hundred and sixty miles above the mouth)--about fifty feet.
But at Bayou La Fourche the river rises only twenty-four feet; at New Orleans only fifteen, and just above the mouth only two and one half.
An article in the New Orleans 'Times-Democrat,' based upon reports of able engineers, states that the river annually empties four hundred and six million tons of mud into the Gulf of Mexico--which brings to mind Captain Marryat's rude name for the
' This mud, solidified, would make a mass a mile square and two hundred and forty-one feet high.
The mud deposit gradually extends the land--but only gradually; it has extended it not quite a third of a mile in the two hundred years which have elapsed since the river took its place in history.
The belief of the scientific people is, that the mouth used to be at Baton Rouge, where the hills cease, and that the two hundred miles of land between there and the Gulf was built by the river.
This gives us the age of that piece of country, without any trouble at all--one hundred and twenty thousand years.
Yet it is much the youthfullest batch of country that lies around there anywhere.
The Mississippi is remarkable in still another way--its disposition to make prodigious jumps by cutting through narrow necks of land, and thus straightening and shortening itself.
More than once it has shortened itself thirty miles at a single jump!
These cut-offs have had curious effects: they have thrown several river towns out into the rural districts, and built up sand bars and forests in front of them.
The town of Delta used to be three miles below Vicksburg: a recent cutoff has radically changed the position, and Delta is now _two miles above_ Vicksburg.
Both of these river towns have been retired to the country by that cut-off.
A cut-off plays havoc with boundary lines and jurisdictions: for instance, a man is living in the State of Mississippi to-day, a cut-off occurs to-night, and to-morrow the man finds himself and his land over on the other side of the river, within the
Such a thing, happening in the upper river in the old times, could have transferred a slave from Missouri to Illinois and made a free man of him.
The Mississippi does not alter its locality by cut-offs alone: it is always changing its habitat _bodily_--is always moving bodily _sidewise_.
At Hard Times, La.
, the river is two miles west of the region it used to occupy.
As a result, the original _site _of that settlement is not now in Louisiana at all, but on the other side of the river, in the State of Mississippi.
_Nearly the whole of that one thousand three hundred miles of old mississippi river which la salle floated down in his canoes, two hundred years ago, is good solid dry ground now_.
The river lies to the right of it, in places, and to the left of it in other places.
Although the Mississippi's mud builds land but slowly, down at the mouth, where the Gulfs billows interfere with its work, it builds fast enough in better protected regions higher up: for instance, Prophet's Island contained one thousand five hundred acres
But enough of these examples of the mighty stream's eccentricities for the present--I will give a few more of them further along in the book.
Let us drop the Mississippi's physical history, and say a word about its historical history--so to speak.
We can glance briefly at its slumbrous first epoch in a couple of short chapters; at its second and wider-awake epoch in a couple more; at its flushest and widest-awake epoch in a good many succeeding chapters; and then talk about its comparatively
The world and the books are so accustomed to use, and over-use, the word 'new' in connection with our country, that we early get and permanently retain the impression that there is nothing old about it.
We do of course know that there are several comparatively old dates in American history, but the mere figures convey to our minds no just idea, no distinct realization, of the stretch of time which they represent.
To say that De Soto, the first white man who ever saw the Mississippi River, saw it in 1542, is a remark which states a fact without interpreting it: it is something like giving the dimensions of a sunset by astronomical measurements, and cataloguing the
It would have been better to paint a picture of it.
The date 1542, standing by itself, means little or nothing to us; but when one groups a few neighboring historical dates and facts around it, he adds perspective and color, and then realizes that this is one of the American dates which is quite respectable
For instance, when the Mississippi was first seen by a white man, less than a quarter of a century had elapsed since Francis I.'s defeat at Pavia; the death of Raphael; the death of Bayard, _Sans Peur Et Sans Reproche_; the driving out of the
When De Soto took his glimpse of the river, Ignatius Loyola was an obscure name; the order of the Jesuits was not yet a year old; Michael Angelo's paint was not yet dry on the Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel; Mary Queen of Scots was not yet born, but
Catherine de Medici was a child; Elizabeth of England was not yet in her teens; Calvin, Benvenuto Cellini, and the Emperor Charles V. were at the top of their fame, and each was manufacturing history after his own peculiar fashion; Margaret of Navarre was
In fact, all around, religion was in a peculiarly blooming condition: the Council of Trent was being called; the Spanish Inquisition was roasting, and racking, and burning, with a free hand; elsewhere on the continent the nations were being persuaded to
had suppressed the monasteries, burnt Fisher and another bishop or two, and was getting his English reformation and his harem effectively started.
When De Soto stood on the banks of the Mississippi, it was still two years before Luther's death; eleven years before the burning of Servetus; thirty years before the St. Bartholomew slaughter; Rabelais was not yet published; 'Don Quixote' was not yet
Unquestionably the discovery of the Mississippi is a datable fact which considerably mellows and modifies the shiny newness of our country, and gives her a most respectable outside-aspect of rustiness and antiquity.
De Soto merely glimpsed the river, then died and was buried in it by his priests and soldiers.
One would expect the priests and the soldiers to multiply the river's dimensions by ten--the Spanish custom of the day--and thus move other adventurers to go at once and explore it.
On the contrary, their narratives when they reached home, did not excite that amount of curiosity.
The Mississippi was left unvisited by whites during a term of years which seems incredible in our energetic days.
One may 'sense' the interval to his mind, after a fashion, by dividing it up in this way: After De Soto glimpsed the river, a fraction short of a quarter of a century elapsed, and then Shakespeare was born; lived a trifle more than half a century, then
In our day we don't allow a hundred and thirty years to elapse between glimpses of a marvel.
If somebody should discover a creek in the county next to the one that the North Pole is in, Europe and America would start fifteen costly expeditions thither: one to explore the creek, and the other fourteen to hunt for each other.
For more than a hundred and fifty years there had been white settlements on our Atlantic coasts.
These people were in intimate communication with the Indians: in the south the Spaniards were robbing, slaughtering, enslaving and converting them; higher up, the English were trading beads and blankets to them for a consideration, and throwing in
Necessarily, then, these various clusters of whites must have heard of the great river of the far west; and indeed, they did hear of it vaguely,--so vaguely and indefinitely, that its course, proportions, and locality were hardly even guessable.
The mere mysteriousness of the matter ought to have fired curiosity and compelled exploration; but this did not occur.
Apparently nobody happened to want such a river, nobody needed it, nobody was curious about it; so, for a century and a half the Mississippi remained out of the market and undisturbed.
When De Soto found it, he was not hunting for a river, and had no present occasion for one; consequently he did not value it or even take any particular notice of it.
But at last La Salle the Frenchman conceived the idea of seeking out that river and exploring it.
It always happens that when a man seizes upon a neglected and important idea, people inflamed with the same notion crop up all around.
It happened so in this instance.
Naturally the question suggests itself, Why did these people want the river now when nobody had wanted it in the five preceding generations?
Apparently it was because at this late day they thought they had discovered a way to make it useful; for it had come to be believed that the Mississippi emptied into the Gulf of California, and therefore afforded a short cut from Canada to China.
Previously the supposition had been that it emptied into the Atlantic, or Sea of Virginia.
CHAPTER 2 The River and Its Explorers LA SALLE himself sued for certain high privileges, and they were graciously accorded him by Louis XIV of inflated memory.
Chief among them was the privilege to explore, far and wide, and build forts, and stake out continents, and hand the same over to the king, and pay the expenses himself; receiving, in return, some little advantages of one sort or another; among them the
He spent several years and about all of his money, in making perilous and painful trips between Montreal and a fort which he had built on the Illinois, before he at last succeeded in getting his expedition in such a shape that he could strike for the
And meantime other parties had had better fortune.
In 1673 Joliet the merchant, and Marquette the priest, crossed the country and reached the banks of the Mississippi.
They went by way of the Great Lakes; and from Green Bay, in canoes, by way of Fox River and the Wisconsin.
Marquette had solemnly contracted, on the feast of the Immaculate Conception, that if the Virgin would permit him to discover the great river, he would name it Conception, in her honor.
He kept his word.
In that day, all explorers traveled with an outfit of priests.
De Soto had twenty-four with him.
La Salle had several, also.
The expeditions were often out of meat, and scant of clothes, but they always had the furniture and other requisites for the mass; they were always prepared, as one of the quaint chroniclers of the time phrased it, to 'explain hell to the savages.
' On the 17th of June, 1673, the canoes of Joliet and Marquette and their five subordinates reached the junction of the Wisconsin with the Mississippi.
Mr. Parkman says: 'Before them a wide and rapid current coursed athwart their way, by the foot of lofty heights wrapped thick in forests.
' He continues: 'Turning southward, they paddled down the stream, through a solitude unrelieved by the faintest trace of man.
' A big cat-fish collided with Marquette's canoe, and startled him; and reasonably enough, for he had been warned by the Indians that he was on a foolhardy journey, and even a fatal one, for the river contained a demon 'whose roar could be heard at a great
' I have seen a Mississippi cat-fish that was more than six feet long, and weighed two hundred and fifty pounds; and if Marquette's fish was the fellow to that one, he had a fair right to think the river's roaring demon was come.
'At length the buffalo began to appear, grazing in herds on the great prairies which then bordered the river; and Marquette describes the fierce and stupid look of the old bulls as they stared at the intruders through the tangled mane which nearly blinded
' The voyagers moved cautiously: 'Landed at night and made a fire to cook their evening meal; then extinguished it, embarked again, paddled some way farther, and anchored in the stream, keeping a man on the watch till morning.
' They did this day after day and night after night; and at the end of two weeks they had not seen a human being.
The river was an awful solitude, then.
And it is now, over most of its stretch.
But at the close of the fortnight they one day came upon the footprints of men in the mud of the western bank--a Robinson Crusoe experience which carries an electric shiver with it yet, when one stumbles on it in print.
They had been warned that the river Indians were as ferocious and pitiless as the river demon, and destroyed all comers without waiting for provocation; but no matter, Joliet and Marquette struck into the country to hunt up the proprietors of the tracks.
They found them, by and by, and were hospitably received and well treated--if to be received by an Indian chief who has taken off his last rag in order to appear at his level best is to be received hospitably; and if to be treated abundantly to fish,
In the morning the chief and six hundred of his tribesmen escorted the Frenchmen to the river and bade them a friendly farewell.
On the rocks above the present city of Alton they found some rude and fantastic Indian paintings, which they describe.
A short distance below 'a torrent of yellow mud rushed furiously athwart the calm blue current of the Mississippi, boiling and surging and sweeping in its course logs, branches, and uprooted trees.
' This was the mouth of the Missouri, 'that savage river,' which 'descending from its mad career through a vast unknown of barbarism, poured its turbid floods into the bosom of its gentle sister.
' By and by they passed the mouth of the Ohio; they passed cane-brakes; they fought mosquitoes; they floated along, day after day, through the deep silence and loneliness of the river, drowsing in the scant shade of makeshift awnings, and broiling with the
They had proved to their satisfaction, that the Mississippi did not empty into the Gulf of California, or into the Atlantic.
They believed it emptied into the Gulf of Mexico.
They turned back, now, and carried their great news to Canada.
But belief is not proof.
It was reserved for La Salle to furnish the proof.
He was provokingly delayed, by one misfortune after another, but at last got his expedition under way at the end of the year 1681.
In the dead of winter he and Henri de Tonty, son of Lorenzo Tonty, who invented the tontine, his lieutenant, started down the Illinois, with a following of eighteen Indians brought from New England, and twenty-three Frenchmen.
They moved in procession down the surface of the frozen river, on foot, and dragging their canoes after them on sledges.
At Peoria Lake they struck open water, and paddled thence to the Mississippi and turned their prows southward.
They plowed through the fields of floating ice, past the mouth of the Missouri; past the mouth of the Ohio, by-and-by; 'and, gliding by the wastes of bordering swamp, landed on the 24th of February near the Third Chickasaw Bluffs,' where they halted and
'Again,' says Mr. Parkman, 'they embarked; and with every stage of their adventurous progress, the mystery of this vast new world was more and more unveiled.
More and more they entered the realms of spring.
The hazy sunlight, the warm and drowsy air, the tender foliage, the opening flowers, betokened the reviving life of nature.
' Day by day they floated down the great bends, in the shadow of the dense forests, and in time arrived at the mouth of the Arkansas.
First, they were greeted by the natives of this locality as Marquette had before been greeted by them--with the booming of the war drum and the flourish of arms.
The Virgin composed the difficulty in Marquette's case; the pipe of peace did the same office for La Salle.
The white man and the red man struck hands and entertained each other during three days.
Then, to the admiration of the savages, La Salle set up a cross with the arms of France on it, and took possession of the whole country for the king--the cool fashion of the time--while the priest piously consecrated the robbery with a hymn.
The priest explained the mysteries of the faith 'by signs,' for the saving of the savages; thus compensating them with possible possessions in Heaven for the certain ones on earth which they had just been robbed of.
And also, by signs, La Salle drew from these simple children of the forest acknowledgments of fealty to Louis the Putrid, over the water.
Nobody smiled at these colossal ironies.
These performances took place on the site of the future town of Napoleon, Arkansas, and there the first confiscation-cross was raised on the banks of the great river.
Marquette's and Joliet's voyage of discovery ended at the same spot--the site of the future town of Napoleon.
When De Soto took his fleeting glimpse of the river, away back in the dim early days, he took it from that same spot--the site of the future town of Napoleon, Arkansas.
Therefore, three out of the four memorable events connected with the discovery and exploration of the mighty river, occurred, by accident, in one and the same place.
It is a most curious distinction, when one comes to look at it and think about it.
France stole that vast country on that spot, the future Napoleon; and by and by Napoleon himself was to give the country back again!
--make restitution, not to the owners, but to their white American heirs.
The voyagers journeyed on, touching here and there; 'passed the sites, since become historic, of Vicksburg and Grand Gulf,' and visited an imposing Indian monarch in the Teche country, whose capital city was a substantial one of sun-baked bricks mixed with
The chiefs house contained an audience room forty feet square; and there he received Tonty in State, surrounded by sixty old men clothed in white cloaks.
There was a temple in the town, with a mud wall about it ornamented with skulls of enemies sacrificed to the sun.
The voyagers visited the Natchez Indians, near the site of the present city of that name, where they found a 'religious and political despotism, a privileged class descended from the sun, a temple and a sacred fire.
' It must have been like getting home again; it was home with an advantage, in fact, for it lacked Louis XIV.
A few more days swept swiftly by, and La Salle stood in the shadow of his confiscating cross, at the meeting of the waters from Delaware, and from Itaska, and from the mountain ranges close upon the Pacific, with the waters of the Gulf of Mexico, his task
Mr. Parkman, in closing his fascinating narrative, thus sums up: 'On that day, the realm of France received on parchment a stupendous accession.
The fertile plains of Texas; the vast basin of the Mississippi, from its frozen northern springs to the sultry borders of the Gulf; from the woody ridges of the Alleghanies to the bare peaks of the Rocky Mountains--a region of savannas and forests,
' CHAPTER 3 Frescoes from the Past APPARENTLY the river was ready for business, now.
But no, the distribution of a population along its banks was as calm and deliberate and time-devouring a process as the discovery and exploration had been.
Seventy years elapsed, after the exploration, before the river's borders had a white population worth considering; and nearly fifty more before the river had a commerce.
Between La Salle's opening of the river and the time when it may be said to have become the vehicle of anything like a regular and active commerce, seven sovereigns had occupied the throne of England, America had become an independent nation, Louis XIV.
and Louis XV.
had rotted and died, the French monarchy had gone down in the red tempest of the revolution, and Napoleon was a name that was beginning to be talked about.
Truly, there were snails in those days.
The river's earliest commerce was in great barges--keelboats, broadhorns.
They floated and sailed from the upper rivers to New Orleans, changed cargoes there, and were tediously warped and poled back by hand.
A voyage down and back sometimes occupied nine months.
In time this commerce increased until it gave employment to hordes of rough and hardy men; rude, uneducated, brave, suffering terrific hardships with sailor-like stoicism; heavy drinkers, coarse frolickers in moral sties like the Natchez-under-the-hill of
By and by the steamboat intruded.
Then for fifteen or twenty years, these men continued to run their keelboats down-stream, and the steamers did all of the upstream business, the keelboatmen selling their boats in New Orleans, and returning home as deck passengers in the steamers.
But after a while the steamboats so increased in number and in speed that they were able to absorb the entire commerce; and then keelboating died a permanent death.
The keelboatman became a deck hand, or a mate, or a pilot on the steamer; and when steamer-berths were not open to him, he took a berth on a Pittsburgh coal-flat, or on a pine-raft constructed in the forests up toward the sources of the Mississippi.
In the heyday of the steamboating prosperity, the river from end to end was flaked with coal-fleets and timber rafts, all managed by hand, and employing hosts of the rough characters whom I have been trying to describe.
I remember the annual processions of mighty rafts that used to glide by Hannibal when I was a boy,--an acre or so of white, sweet-smelling boards in each raft, a crew of two dozen men or more, three or four wigwams scattered about the raft's vast level
By way of illustrating keelboat talk and manners, and that now-departed and hardly-remembered raft-life, I will throw in, in this place, a chapter from a book which I have been working at, by fits and starts, during the past five or six years, and may
The book is a story which details some passages in the life of an ignorant village boy, Huck Finn, son of the town drunkard of my time out west, there.
He has run away from his persecuting father, and from a persecuting good widow who wishes to make a nice, truth-telling, respectable boy of him; and with him a slave of the widow's has also escaped.
They have found a fragment of a lumber raft (it is high water and dead summer time), and are floating down the river by night, and hiding in the willows by day,--bound for Cairo,--whence the negro will seek freedom in the heart of the free States.
But in a fog, they pass Cairo without knowing it.
By and by they begin to suspect the truth, and Huck Finn is persuaded to end the dismal suspense by swimming down to a huge raft which they have seen in the distance ahead of them, creeping aboard under cover of the darkness, and gathering the needed
We talked it over, and by and by Jim said it was such a black night, now, that it wouldn't be no risk to swim down to the big raft and crawl aboard and listen--they would talk about Cairo, because they would be calculating to go ashore there for a spree,
Jim had a wonderful level head, for a nigger: he could most always start a good plan when you wanted one.
I stood up and shook my rags off and jumped into the river, and struck out for the raft's light.
By and by, when I got down nearly to her, I eased up and went slow and cautious.
But everything was all right--nobody at the sweeps.
So I swum down along the raft till I was most abreast the camp fire in the middle, then I crawled aboard and inched along and got in amongst some bundles of shingles on the weather side of the fire.
There was thirteen men there--they was the watch on deck of course.
And a mighty rough-looking lot, too.
They had a jug, and tin cups, and they kept the jug moving.
One man was singing--roaring, you may say; and it wasn't a nice song--for a parlor anyway.
He roared through his nose, and strung out the last word of every line very long.
When he was done they all fetched a kind of Injun war-whoop, and then another was sung.
It begun:-- 'There was a woman in our towdn, In our towdn did dwed'l (dwell,) She loved her husband dear-i-lee, But another man twysteas wed'l.
Singing too, riloo, riloo, riloo, Ri-too, riloo, rilay--She loved her husband dear-i-lee, But another man twyste as wed'l.
And so on--fourteen verses.
It was kind of poor, and when he was going to start on the next verse one of them said it was the tune the old cow died on; and another one said, 'Oh, give us a rest.
' And another one told him to take a walk.
They made fun of him till he got mad and jumped up and begun to cuss the crowd, and said he could lame any thief in the lot.
They was all about to make a break for him, but the biggest man there jumped up and says-- 'Set whar you are, gentlemen.
Leave him to me; he's my meat.
' Then he jumped up in the air three times and cracked his heels together every time.
He flung off a buckskin coat that was all hung with fringes, and says, 'You lay thar tell the chawin-up's done;' and flung his hat down, which was all over ribbons, and says, 'You lay thar tell his sufferin's is over.
' Then he jumped up in the air and cracked his heels together again and shouted out-- 'Whoo-oop!
I'm the old original iron-jawed, brass-mounted, copper-bellied corpse-maker from the wilds of Arkansaw!
--Look at me!
I'm the man they call Sudden Death and General Desolation!
Sired by a hurricane, dam'd by an earthquake, half-brother to the cholera, nearly related to the small-pox on the mother's side!
Look at me!
I take nineteen alligators and a bar'l of whiskey for breakfast when I'm in robust health, and a bushel of rattlesnakes and a dead body when I'm ailing!
I split the everlasting rocks with my glance, and I squench the thunder when I speak!
Whoo-oop!
Stand back and give me room according to my strength!
Blood's my natural drink, and the wails of the dying is music to my ear!
Cast your eye on me, gentlemen!
--and lay low and hold your breath, for I'm bout to turn myself loose!
' All the time he was getting this off, he was shaking his head and looking fierce, and kind of swelling around in a little circle, tucking up his wrist-bands, and now and then straightening up and beating his breast with his fist, saying, 'Look at me,
' When he got through, he jumped up and cracked his heels together three times, and let off a roaring 'Whoo-oop!
I'm the bloodiest son of a wildcat that lives!
' Then the man that had started the row tilted his old slouch hat down over his right eye; then he bent stooping forward, with his back sagged and his south end sticking out far, and his fists a-shoving out and drawing in in front of him, and so went
Then he straightened, and jumped up and cracked his heels together three times, before he lit again (that made them cheer), and he begun to shout like this-- 'Whoo-oop!
bow your neck and spread, for the kingdom of sorrow's a-coming!
Hold me down to the earth, for I feel my powers a-working!
whoo-oop!
I'm a child of sin, don't let me get a start!
Smoked glass, here, for all!
Don't attempt to look at me with the naked eye, gentlemen!
When I'm playful I use the meridians of longitude and parallels of latitude for a seine, and drag the Atlantic Ocean for whales!
I scratch my head with the lightning, and purr myself to sleep with the thunder!
When I'm cold, I bile the Gulf of Mexico and bathe in it; when I'm hot I fan myself with an equinoctial storm; when I'm thirsty I reach up and suck a cloud dry like a sponge; when I range the earth hungry, famine follows in my tracks!
Whoo-oop!
Bow your neck and spread!
I put my hand on the sun's face and make it night in the earth; I bite a piece out of the moon and hurry the seasons; I shake myself and crumble the mountains!
Contemplate me through leather--don't use the naked eye!
I'm the man with a petrified heart and biler-iron bowels!
The massacre of isolated communities is the pastime of my idle moments, the destruction of nationalities the serious business of my life!
The boundless vastness of the great American desert is my enclosed property, and I bury my dead on my own premises!
' He jumped up and cracked his heels together three times before he lit (they cheered him again), and as he come down he shouted out: 'Whoo-oop!
bow your neck and spread, for the pet child of calamity's a-coming!
' Then the other one went to swelling around and blowing again--the first one--the one they called Bob; next, the Child of Calamity chipped in again, bigger than ever; then they both got at it at the same time, swelling round and round each other and
The Child said no man was willinger than he was for that time to come, and he would give Bob fair warning, now, never to cross his path again, for he could never rest till he had waded in his blood, for such was his nature, though he was sparing him now on
Both of them was edging away in different directions, growling and shaking their heads and going on about what they was going to do; but a little black-whiskered chap skipped up and says-- 'Come back here, you couple of chicken-livered cowards, and I'll
' And he done it, too.
He snatched them, he jerked them this way and that, he booted them around, he knocked them sprawling faster than they could get up.
Why, it warn't two minutes till they begged like dogs--and how the other lot did yell and laugh and clap their hands all the way through, and shout 'Sail in, Corpse-Maker!
' 'Hi!
at him again, Child of Calamity!
' 'Bully for you, little Davy!
' Well, it was a perfect pow-wow for a while.
Bob and the Child had red noses and black eyes when they got through.
Little Davy made them own up that they were sneaks and cowards and not fit to eat with a dog or drink with a nigger; then Bob and the Child shook hands with each other, very solemn, and said they had always respected each other and was willing to let
So then they washed their faces in the river; and just then there was a loud order to stand by for a crossing, and some of them went forward to man the sweeps there, and the rest went aft to handle the after-sweeps.
I laid still and waited for fifteen minutes, and had a smoke out of a pipe that one of them left in reach; then the crossing was finished, and they stumped back and had a drink around and went to talking and singing again.
Next they got out an old fiddle, and one played and another patted juba, and the rest turned themselves loose on a regular old-fashioned keel-boat break-down.
They couldn't keep that up very long without getting winded, so by and by they settled around the jug again.
They sung 'jolly, jolly raftman's the life for me,' with a rousing chorus, and then they got to talking about differences betwixt hogs, and their different kind of habits; and next about women and their different ways: and next about the best ways to put
The man they called Ed said the muddy Mississippi water was wholesomer to drink than the clear water of the Ohio; he said if you let a pint of this yaller Mississippi water settle, you would have about a half to three-quarters of an inch of mud in the
The Child of Calamity said that was so; he said there was nutritiousness in the mud, and a man that drunk Mississippi water could grow corn in his stomach if he wanted to.
He says-- 'You look at the graveyards; that tells the tale.
Trees won't grow worth chucks in a Cincinnati graveyard, but in a Sent Louis graveyard they grow upwards of eight hundred foot high.
It's all on account of the water the people drunk before they laid up.
A Cincinnati corpse don't richen a soil any.
' And they talked about how Ohio water didn't like to mix with Mississippi water.
Ed said if you take the Mississippi on a rise when the Ohio is low, you'll find a wide band of clear water all the way down the east side of the Mississippi for a hundred mile or more, and the minute you get out a quarter of a mile from shore and pass the
Then they talked about how to keep tobacco from getting moldy, and from that they went into ghosts and told about a lot that other folks had seen; but Ed says-- 'Why don't you tell something that you've seen yourselves?
Now let me have a say.
Five years ago I was on a raft as big as this, and right along here it was a bright moonshiny night, and I was on watch and boss of the stabboard oar forrard, and one of my pards was a man named Dick Allbright, and he come along to where I was sitting,
'"Yes," says I, "it is--why".
He laid his pipe down and leant his head on his hand, and says-- '"I thought we'd be furder down".
I says-- '"I thought it too, when I went off watch"--we was standing six hours on and six off--"but the boys told me," I says, "that the raft didn't seem to hardly move, for the last hour," says I, "though she's a slipping along all right, now," says I. He
'Well, he raised up two or three times, and looked away off and around on the water.
That started me at it, too.
A body is always doing what he sees somebody else doing, though there mayn't be no sense in it.
Pretty soon I see a black something floating on the water away off to stabboard and quartering behind us.
I see he was looking at it, too.
I says-- '"What's that"?
He says, sort of pettish,-- '"Tain't nothing but an old empty bar'l".
'"An empty bar'l"!
says I, "why," says I, "a spy-glass is a fool to your eyes.
How can you tell it's an empty bar'l"?
He says-- '"I don't know; I reckon it ain't a bar'l, but I thought it might be," says he.
'"Yes," I says, "so it might be, and it might be anything else, too; a body can't tell nothing about it, such a distance as that," I says.
'We hadn't nothing else to do, so we kept on watching it.
By and by I says-- '"Why looky-here, Dick Allbright, that thing's a-gaining on us, I believe".
'He never said nothing.
The thing gained and gained, and I judged it must be a dog that was about tired out.
Well, we swung down into the crossing, and the thing floated across the bright streak of the moonshine, and, by George, it was bar'l.
Says I-- '"Dick Allbright, what made you think that thing was a bar'l, when it was a half a mile off," says I. Says he-- '"I don't know".
Says I-- '"You tell me, Dick Allbright".
He says-- '"Well, I knowed it was a bar'l; I've seen it before; lots has seen it; they says it's a haunted bar'l".
'I called the rest of the watch, and they come and stood there, and I told them what Dick said.
It floated right along abreast, now, and didn't gain any more.
It was about twenty foot off.
Some was for having it aboard, but the rest didn't want to.
Dick Allbright said rafts that had fooled with it had got bad luck by it.
The captain of the watch said he didn't believe in it.
He said he reckoned the bar'l gained on us because it was in a little better current than what we was.
He said it would leave by and by.
'So then we went to talking about other things, and we had a song, and then a breakdown; and after that the captain of the watch called for another song; but it was clouding up, now, and the bar'l stuck right thar in the same place, and the song didn't
Then everybody tried to talk at once, and one chap got off a joke, but it warn't no use, they didn't laugh, and even the chap that made the joke didn't laugh at it, which ain't usual.
We all just settled down glum, and watched the bar'l, and was oneasy and oncomfortable.
Well, sir, it shut down black and still, and then the wind begin to moan around, and next the lightning begin to play and the thunder to grumble.
And pretty soon there was a regular storm, and in the middle of it a man that was running aft stumbled and fell and sprained his ankle so that he had to lay up.
This made the boys shake their heads.
And every time the lightning come, there was that bar'l with the blue lights winking around it.
We was always on the look-out for it.
But by and by, towards dawn, she was gone.
When the day come we couldn't see her anywhere, and we warn't sorry, neither.
'But next night about half-past nine, when there was songs and high jinks going on, here she comes again, and took her old roost on the stabboard side.
There warn't no more high jinks.
Everybody got solemn; nobody talked; you couldn't get anybody to do anything but set around moody and look at the bar'l.
It begun to cloud up again.
When the watch changed, the off watch stayed up, 'stead of turning in.
The storm ripped and roared around all night, and in the middle of it another man tripped and sprained his ankle, and had to knock off.
The bar'l left towards day, and nobody see it go.
'Everybody was sober and down in the mouth all day.
I don't mean the kind of sober that comes of leaving liquor alone--not that.
They was quiet, but they all drunk more than usual--not together--but each man sidled off and took it private, by himself.
'After dark the off watch didn't turn in; nobody sung, nobody talked; the boys didn't scatter around, neither; they sort of huddled together, forrard; and for two hours they set there, perfectly still, looking steady in the one direction, and heaving a
And then, here comes the bar'l again.
She took up her old place.
She staid there all night; nobody turned in.
The storm come on again, after midnight.
It got awful dark; the rain poured down; hail, too; the thunder boomed and roared and bellowed; the wind blowed a hurricane; and the lightning spread over everything in big sheets of glare, and showed the whole raft as plain as day; and the river lashed up
The captain ordered the watch to man the after sweeps for a crossing, and nobody would go--no more sprained ankles for them, they said.
They wouldn't even walk aft.
Well then, just then the sky split wide open, with a crash, and the lightning killed two men of the after watch, and crippled two more.
Crippled them how, says you?
Why, sprained their ankles!
'The bar'l left in the dark betwixt lightnings, towards dawn.
Well, not a body eat a bite at breakfast that morning.
After that the men loafed around, in twos and threes, and talked low together.
But none of them herded with Dick Allbright.
They all give him the cold shake.
If he come around where any of the men was, they split up and sidled away.
They wouldn't man the sweeps with him.
The captain had all the skiffs hauled up on the raft, alongside of his wigwam, and wouldn't let the dead men be took ashore to be planted; he didn't believe a man that got ashore would come back; and he was right.
'After night come, you could see pretty plain that there was going to be trouble if that bar'l come again; there was such a muttering going on.
A good many wanted to kill Dick Allbright, because he'd seen the bar'l on other trips, and that had an ugly look.
Some wanted to put him ashore.
Some said, let's all go ashore in a pile, if the bar'l comes again.
'This kind of whispers was still going on, the men being bunched together forrard watching for the bar'l, when, lo and behold you, here she comes again.
Down she comes, slow and steady, and settles into her old tracks.
You could a heard a pin drop.
Then up comes the captain, and says:-- '"Boys, don't be a pack of children and fools; I don't want this bar'l to be dogging us all the way to Orleans, and _you _don't; well, then, how's the best way to stop it?
Burn it up,--that's the way.
I'm going to fetch it aboard," he says.
And before anybody could say a word, in he went.
'He swum to it, and as he come pushing it to the raft, the men spread to one side.
But the old man got it aboard and busted in the head, and there was a baby in it!
Yes, sir, a stark naked baby.
It was Dick Allbright's baby; he owned up and said so.
'"Yes," he says, a-leaning over it, "yes, it is my own lamented darling, my poor lost Charles William Allbright deceased," says he,--for he could curl his tongue around the bulliest words in the language when he was a mind to, and lay them before you
Yes, he said he used to live up at the head of this bend, and one night he choked his child, which was crying, not intending to kill it,--which was prob'ly a lie,--and then he was scared, and buried it in a bar'l, before his wife got home, and off he went,
He said the bad luck always begun light, and lasted till four men was killed, and then the bar'l didn't come any more after that.
He said if the men would stand it one more night,--and was a-going on like that,--but the men had got enough.
They started to get out a boat to take him ashore and lynch him, but he grabbed the little child all of a sudden and jumped overboard with it hugged up to his breast and shedding tears, and we never see him again in this life, poor old suffering soul, nor
' '_Who _was shedding tears?
' says Bob; 'was it Allbright or the baby?
' 'Why, Allbright, of course; didn't I tell you the baby was dead.
Been dead three years--how could it cry?
' 'Well, never mind how it could cry--how could it _keep _all that time?
' says Davy.
'You answer me that.
' 'I don't know how it done it,' says Ed.
'It done it though--that's all I know about it.
' 'Say--what did they do with the bar'l?
' says the Child of Calamity.
'Why, they hove it overboard, and it sunk like a chunk of lead.
' 'Edward, did the child look like it was choked?
' says one.
'Did it have its hair parted?
' says another.
'What was the brand on that bar'l, Eddy?
' says a fellow they called Bill.
'Have you got the papers for them statistics, Edmund?
' says Jimmy.
'Say, Edwin, was you one of the men that was killed by the lightning.
' says Davy.
'Him?
O, no, he was both of 'em,' says Bob.
Then they all haw-hawed.
'Say, Edward, don't you reckon you'd better take a pill?
You look bad--don't you feel pale?
' says the Child of Calamity.
'O, come, now, Eddy,' says Jimmy, 'show up; you must a kept part of that bar'l to prove the thing by.
Show us the bunghole--do--and we'll all believe you.
' 'Say, boys,' says Bill, 'less divide it up.
Thar's thirteen of us.
I can swaller a thirteenth of the yarn, if you can worry down the rest.
' Ed got up mad and said they could all go to some place which he ripped out pretty savage, and then walked off aft cussing to himself, and they yelling and jeering at him, and roaring and laughing so you could hear them a mile.
'Boys, we'll split a watermelon on that,' says the Child of Calamity; and he come rummaging around in the dark amongst the shingle bundles where I was, and put his hand on me.
I was warm and soft and naked; so he says 'Ouch!
' and jumped back.
'Fetch a lantern or a chunk of fire here, boys--there's a snake here as big as a cow!
' So they run there with a lantern and crowded up and looked in on me.
'Come out of that, you beggar!
' says one.
'Who are you?
' says another.
'What are you after here?
Speak up prompt, or overboard you go.
'Snake him out, boys.
Snatch him out by the heels.
' I began to beg, and crept out amongst them trembling.
They looked me over, wondering, and the Child of Calamity says-- 'A cussed thief!
Lend a hand and less heave him overboard!
' 'No,' says Big Bob, 'less get out the paint-pot and paint him a sky blue all over from head to heel, and then heave him over!
' 'Good, that 's it.
Go for the paint, Jimmy.
' When the paint come, and Bob took the brush and was just going to begin, the others laughing and rubbing their hands, I begun to cry, and that sort of worked on Davy, and he says-- ''Vast there!
He 's nothing but a cub.
'I'll paint the man that tetches him!
' So I looked around on them, and some of them grumbled and growled, and Bob put down the paint, and the others didn't take it up.
'Come here to the fire, and less see what you're up to here,' says Davy.
'Now set down there and give an account of yourself.
How long have you been aboard here?
' 'Not over a quarter of a minute, sir,' says I. 'How did you get dry so quick?
' 'I don't know, sir.
I'm always that way, mostly.
' 'Oh, you are, are you.
What's your name?
' I warn't going to tell my name.
I didn't know what to say, so I just says-- 'Charles William Allbright, sir.
' Then they roared--the whole crowd; and I was mighty glad I said that, because maybe laughing would get them in a better humor.
When they got done laughing, Davy says-- 'It won't hardly do, Charles William.
You couldn't have growed this much in five year, and you was a baby when you come out of the bar'l, you know, and dead at that.
Come, now, tell a straight story, and nobody'll hurt you, if you ain't up to anything wrong.
What _is_ your name?
' 'Aleck Hopkins, sir.
Aleck James Hopkins.
' 'Well, Aleck, where did you come from, here?
' 'From a trading scow.
She lays up the bend yonder.
I was born on her.
Pap has traded up and down here all his life; and he told me to swim off here, because when you went by he said he would like to get some of you to speak to a Mr. Jonas Turner, in Cairo, and tell him--' 'Oh, come!
' 'Yes, sir; it's as true as the world; Pap he says--' 'Oh, your grandmother!
' They all laughed, and I tried again to talk, but they broke in on me and stopped me.
'Now, looky-here,' says Davy; 'you're scared, and so you talk wild.
Honest, now, do you live in a scow, or is it a lie?
' 'Yes, sir, in a trading scow.
She lays up at the head of the bend.
But I warn't born in her.
It's our first trip.
' 'Now you're talking!
What did you come aboard here, for?
To steal?
' 'No, sir, I didn't.
--It was only to get a ride on the raft.
All boys does that.
' 'Well, I know that.
But what did you hide for?
' 'Sometimes they drive the boys off.
' 'So they do.
They might steal.
Looky-here; if we let you off this time, will you keep out of these kind of scrapes hereafter?
' ''Deed I will, boss.
You try me.
' 'All right, then.
You ain't but little ways from shore.
Overboard with you, and don't you make a fool of yourself another time this way.
--Blast it, boy, some raftsmen would rawhide you till you were black and blue!
' I didn't wait to kiss good-bye, but went overboard and broke for shore.
When Jim come along by and by, the big raft was away out of sight around the point.
I swum out and got aboard, and was mighty glad to see home again.
The boy did not get the information he was after, but his adventure has furnished the glimpse of the departed raftsman and keelboatman which I desire to offer in this place.
I now come to a phase of the Mississippi River life of the flush times of steamboating, which seems to me to warrant full examination--the marvelous science of piloting, as displayed there.
I believe there has been nothing like it elsewhere in the world.
CHAPTER 4 The Boys' Ambition WHEN I was a boy, there was but one permanent ambition among my comrades in our village {footnote [1.
Hannibal, Missouri]} on the west bank of the Mississippi River.
That was, to be a steamboatman.
We had transient ambitions of other sorts, but they were only transient.
When a circus came and went, it left us all burning to become clowns; the first negro minstrel show that came to our section left us all suffering to try that kind of life; now and then we had a hope that if we lived and were good, God would permit us to
These ambitions faded out, each in its turn; but the ambition to be a steamboatman always remained.
Once a day a cheap, gaudy packet arrived upward from St. Louis, and another downward from Keokuk.
Before these events, the day was glorious with expectancy; after them, the day was a dead and empty thing.
Not only the boys, but the whole village, felt this.
After all these years I can picture that old time to myself now, just as it was then: the white town drowsing in the sunshine of a summer's morning; the streets empty, or pretty nearly so; one or two clerks sitting in front of the Water Street stores, with
Presently a film of dark smoke appears above one of those remote 'points;' instantly a negro drayman, famous for his quick eye and prodigious voice, lifts up the cry, 'S-t-e-a-m-boat a-comin'!
' and the scene changes!
The town drunkard stirs, the clerks wake up, a furious clatter of drays follows, every house and store pours out a human contribution, and all in a twinkling the dead town is alive and moving.
Drays, carts, men, boys, all go hurrying from many quarters to a common center, the wharf.
Assembled there, the people fasten their eyes upon the coming boat as upon a wonder they are seeing for the first time.
And the boat _is_ rather a handsome sight, too.
She is long and sharp and trim and pretty; she has two tall, fancy-topped chimneys, with a gilded device of some kind swung between them; a fanciful pilot-house, a glass and 'gingerbread', perched on top of the 'texas' deck behind them; the paddle-boxes
Then such a scramble as there is to get aboard, and to get ashore, and to take in freight and to discharge freight, all at one and the same time; and such a yelling and cursing as the mates facilitate it all with!
Ten minutes later the steamer is under way again, with no flag on the jack-staff and no black smoke issuing from the chimneys.
After ten more minutes the town is dead again, and the town drunkard asleep by the skids once more.
My father was a justice of the peace, and I supposed he possessed the power of life and death over all men and could hang anybody that offended him.
This was distinction enough for me as a general thing; but the desire to be a steamboatman kept intruding, nevertheless.
I first wanted to be a cabin-boy, so that I could come out with a white apron on and shake a tablecloth over the side, where all my old comrades could see me; later I thought I would rather be the deckhand who stood on the end of the stage-plank with the
But these were only day-dreams,--they were too heavenly to be contemplated as real possibilities.
By and by one of our boys went away.
He was not heard of for a long time.
At last he turned up as apprentice engineer or 'striker' on a steamboat.
This thing shook the bottom out of all my Sunday-school teachings.
That boy had been notoriously worldly, and I just the reverse; yet he was exalted to this eminence, and I left in obscurity and misery.
There was nothing generous about this fellow in his greatness.
He would always manage to have a rusty bolt to scrub while his boat tarried at our town, and he would sit on the inside guard and scrub it, where we could all see him and envy him and loathe him.
And whenever his boat was laid up he would come home and swell around the town in his blackest and greasiest clothes, so that nobody could help remembering that he was a steamboatman; and he used all sorts of steamboat technicalities in his talk, as if he
He would speak of the 'labboard' side of a horse in an easy, natural way that would make one wish he was dead.
And he was always talking about 'St. Looy' like an old citizen; he would refer casually to occasions when he 'was coming down Fourth Street,' or when he was 'passing by the Planter's House,' or when there was a fire and he took a turn on the brakes of 'the
Two or three of the boys had long been persons of consideration among us because they had been to St. Louis once and had a vague general knowledge of its wonders, but the day of their glory was over now.
They lapsed into a humble silence, and learned to disappear when the ruthless 'cub'-engineer approached.
This fellow had money, too, and hair oil.
Also an ignorant silver watch and a showy brass watch chain.
He wore a leather belt and used no suspenders.
If ever a youth was cordially admired and hated by his comrades, this one was.
No girl could withstand his charms.
He 'cut out' every boy in the village.
When his boat blew up at last, it diffused a tranquil contentment among us such as we had not known for months.
But when he came home the next week, alive, renowned, and appeared in church all battered up and bandaged, a shining hero, stared at and wondered over by everybody, it seemed to us that the partiality of Providence for an undeserving reptile had reached a
This creature's career could produce but one result, and it speedily followed.
Boy after boy managed to get on the river.
The minister's son became an engineer.
The doctor's and the post-master's sons became 'mud clerks;' the wholesale liquor dealer's son became a barkeeper on a boat; four sons of the chief merchant, and two sons of the county judge, became pilots.
Pilot was the grandest position of all.
The pilot, even in those days of trivial wages, had a princely salary--from a hundred and fifty to two hundred and fifty dollars a month, and no board to pay.
Two months of his wages would pay a preacher's salary for a year.
Now some of us were left disconsolate.
We could not get on the river--at least our parents would not let us.
So by and by I ran away.
I said I never would come home again till I was a pilot and could come in glory.
But somehow I could not manage it.
I went meekly aboard a few of the boats that lay packed together like sardines at the long St. Louis wharf, and very humbly inquired for the pilots, but got only a cold shoulder and short words from mates and clerks.
I had to make the best of this sort of treatment for the time being, but I had comforting daydreams of a future when I should be a great and honored pilot, with plenty of money, and could kill some of these mates and clerks and pay for them.
CHAPTER 5 I Want to be a Cub-pilot MONTHS afterward the hope within me struggled to a reluctant death, and I found myself without an ambition.
But I was ashamed to go home.
I was in Cincinnati, and I set to work to map out a new career.
I had been reading about the recent exploration of the river Amazon by an expedition sent out by our government.
It was said that the expedition, owing to difficulties, had not thoroughly explored a part of the country lying about the head-waters, some four thousand miles from the mouth of the river.
It was only about fifteen hundred miles from Cincinnati to New Orleans, where I could doubtless get a ship.
I had thirty dollars left; I would go and complete the exploration of the Amazon.
This was all the thought I gave to the subject.
I never was great in matters of detail.
I packed my valise, and took passage on an ancient tub called the 'Paul Jones,' for New Orleans.
For the sum of sixteen dollars I had the scarred and tarnished splendors of 'her' main saloon principally to myself, for she was not a creature to attract the eye of wiser travelers.
When we presently got under way and went poking down the broad Ohio, I became a new being, and the subject of my own admiration.
I was a traveler!
A word never had tasted so good in my mouth before.
I had an exultant sense of being bound for mysterious lands and distant climes which I never have felt in so uplifting a degree since.
I was in such a glorified condition that all ignoble feelings departed out of me, and I was able to look down and pity the untraveled with a compassion that had hardly a trace of contempt in it.
Still, when we stopped at villages and wood-yards, I could not help lolling carelessly upon the railings of the boiler deck to enjoy the envy of the country boys on the bank.
If they did not seem to discover me, I presently sneezed to attract their attention, or moved to a position where they could not help seeing me.
And as soon as I knew they saw me I gaped and stretched, and gave other signs of being mightily bored with traveling.
I kept my hat off all the time, and stayed where the wind and the sun could strike me, because I wanted to get the bronzed and weather-beaten look of an old traveler.
Before the second day was half gone I experienced a joy which filled me with the purest gratitude; for I saw that the skin had begun to blister and peel off my face and neck.
I wished that the boys and girls at home could see me now.
We reached Louisville in time--at least the neighborhood of it.
We stuck hard and fast on the rocks in the middle of the river, and lay there four days.
I was now beginning to feel a strong sense of being a part of the boat's family, a sort of infant son to the captain and younger brother to the officers.
There is no estimating the pride I took in this grandeur, or the affection that began to swell and grow in me for those people.
I could not know how the lordly steamboatman scorns that sort of presumption in a mere landsman.
I particularly longed to acquire the least trifle of notice from the big stormy mate, and I was on the alert for an opportunity to do him a service to that end.
It came at last.
The riotous powwow of setting a spar was going on down on the forecastle, and I went down there and stood around in the way--or mostly skipping out of it--till the mate suddenly roared a general order for somebody to bring him a capstan bar.
I sprang to his side and said: 'Tell me where it is--I'll fetch it!
' If a rag-picker had offered to do a diplomatic service for the Emperor of Russia, the monarch could not have been more astounded than the mate was.
He even stopped swearing.
He stood and stared down at me.
It took him ten seconds to scrape his disjointed remains together again.
Then he said impressively: 'Well, if this don't beat hell!
' and turned to his work with the air of a man who had been confronted with a problem too abstruse for solution.
I crept away, and courted solitude for the rest of the day.
I did not go to dinner; I stayed away from supper until everybody else had finished.
I did not feel so much like a member of the boat's family now as before.
However, my spirits returned, in installments, as we pursued our way down the river.
I was sorry I hated the mate so, because it was not in (young) human nature not to admire him.
He was huge and muscular, his face was bearded and whiskered all over; he had a red woman and a blue woman tattooed on his right arm,--one on each side of a blue anchor with a red rope to it; and in the matter of profanity he was sublime.
When he was getting out cargo at a landing, I was always where I could see and hear.
He felt all the majesty of his great position, and made the world feel it, too.
When he gave even the simplest order, he discharged it like a blast of lightning, and sent a long, reverberating peal of profanity thundering after it.
I could not help contrasting the way in which the average landsman would give an order, with the mate's way of doing it.
If the landsman should wish the gang-plank moved a foot farther forward, he would probably say: 'James, or William, one of you push that plank forward, please;' but put the mate in his place and he would roar out: 'Here, now, start that gang-plank for'ard!
Lively, now!
_what_'re you about!
Snatch it!
SNATCH it!
There!
there!
Aft again!
aft again!
don't you hear me.
Dash it to dash!
are you going to _sleep _over it!
'_Vast _heaving.
'Vast heaving, I tell you!
Going to heave it clear astern?
_Where_'re you going with that barrel!
_For'ard_ with it 'fore I make you swallow it, you dash-dash-dash-_dashed _split between a tired mud-turtle and a crippled hearse-horse!
' I wished I could talk like that.
When the soreness of my adventure with the mate had somewhat worn off, I began timidly to make up to the humblest official connected with the boat--the night watchman.
He snubbed my advances at first, but I presently ventured to offer him a new chalk pipe; and that softened him.
So he allowed me to sit with him by the big bell on the hurricane deck, and in time he melted into conversation.
He could not well have helped it, I hung with such homage on his words and so plainly showed that I felt honored by his notice.
He told me the names of dim capes and shadowy islands as we glided by them in the solemnity of the night, under the winking stars, and by and by got to talking about himself.
He seemed over-sentimental for a man whose salary was six dollars a week--or rather he might have seemed so to an older person than I. But I drank in his words hungrily, and with a faith that might have moved mountains if it had been applied judiciously.
What was it to me that he was soiled and seedy and fragrant with gin?
What was it to me that his grammar was bad, his construction worse, and his profanity so void of art that it was an element of weakness rather than strength in his conversation?
He was a wronged man, a man who had seen trouble, and that was enough for me.
As he mellowed into his plaintive history his tears dripped upon the lantern in his lap, and I cried, too, from sympathy.
He said he was the son of an English nobleman--either an earl or an alderman, he could not remember which, but believed was both; his father, the nobleman, loved him, but his mother hated him from the cradle; and so while he was still a little boy he was
After his mother shook him, members of the nobility with whom he was acquainted used their influence to get him the position of 'loblolly-boy in a ship;' and from that point my watchman threw off all trammels of date and locality and branched out into a
It was a sore blight to find out afterwards that he was a low, vulgar, ignorant, sentimental, half-witted humbug, an untraveled native of the wilds of Illinois, who had absorbed wildcat literature and appropriated its marvels, until in time he had woven
CHAPTER 6 A Cub-pilot's Experience WHAT with lying on the rocks four days at Louisville, and some other delays, the poor old 'Paul Jones' fooled away about two weeks in making the voyage from Cincinnati to New Orleans.
This gave me a chance to get acquainted with one of the pilots, and he taught me how to steer the boat, and thus made the fascination of river life more potent than ever for me.
It also gave me a chance to get acquainted with a youth who had taken deck passage--more's the pity; for he easily borrowed six dollars of me on a promise to return to the boat and pay it back to me the day after we should arrive.
But he probably died or forgot, for he never came.
It was doubtless the former, since he had said his parents were wealthy, and he only traveled deck passage because it was cooler.
{footnote [1.
'Deck' Passage, i.
e.
steerage passage.
]} I soon discovered two things.
One was that a vessel would not be likely to sail for the mouth of the Amazon under ten or twelve years; and the other was that the nine or ten dollars still left in my pocket would not suffice for so imposing an exploration as I had planned, even if I
Therefore it followed that I must contrive a new career.
The 'Paul Jones' was now bound for St. Louis.
I planned a siege against my pilot, and at the end of three hard days he surrendered.
He agreed to teach me the Mississippi River from New Orleans to St. Louis for five hundred dollars, payable out of the first wages I should receive after graduating.
I entered upon the small enterprise of 'learning' twelve or thirteen hundred miles of the great Mississippi River with the easy confidence of my time of life.
If I had really known what I was about to require of my faculties, I should not have had the courage to begin.
I supposed that all a pilot had to do was to keep his boat in the river, and I did not consider that that could be much of a trick, since it was so wide.
The boat backed out from New Orleans at four in the afternoon, and it was 'our watch' until eight.
Mr. Bixby, my chief, 'straightened her up,' plowed her along past the sterns of the other boats that lay at the Levee, and then said, 'Here, take her; shave those steamships as close as you'd peel an apple.
' I took the wheel, and my heart-beat fluttered up into the hundreds; for it seemed to me that we were about to scrape the side off every ship in the line, we were so close.
I held my breath and began to claw the boat away from the danger; and I had my own opinion of the pilot who had known no better than to get us into such peril, but I was too wise to express it.
In half a minute I had a wide margin of safety intervening between the 'Paul Jones' and the ships; and within ten seconds more I was set aside in disgrace, and Mr. Bixby was going into danger again and flaying me alive with abuse of my cowardice.
I was stung, but I was obliged to admire the easy confidence with which my chief loafed from side to side of his wheel, and trimmed the ships so closely that disaster seemed ceaselessly imminent.
When he had cooled a little he told me that the easy water was close ashore and the current outside, and therefore we must hug the bank, up-stream, to get the benefit of the former, and stay well out, down-stream, to take advantage of the latter.
In my own mind I resolved to be a down-stream pilot and leave the up-streaming to people dead to prudence.
Now and then Mr. Bixby called my attention to certain things.
Said he, 'This is Six-Mile Point.
' I assented.
It was pleasant enough information, but I could not see the bearing of it.
I was not conscious that it was a matter of any interest to me.
Another time he said, 'This is Nine-Mile Point.
' Later he said, 'This is Twelve-Mile Point.
' They were all about level with the water's edge; they all looked about alike to me; they were monotonously unpicturesque.
I hoped Mr. Bixby would change the subject.
But no; he would crowd up around a point, hugging the shore with affection, and then say: 'The slack water ends here, abreast this bunch of China-trees; now we cross over.
' So he crossed over.
He gave me the wheel once or twice, but I had no luck.
I either came near chipping off the edge of a sugar plantation, or I yawed too far from shore, and so dropped back into disgrace again and got abused.
The watch was ended at last, and we took supper and went to bed.
At midnight the glare of a lantern shone in my eyes, and the night watchman said-- 'Come!
turn out!
' And then he left.
I could not understand this extraordinary procedure; so I presently gave up trying to, and dozed off to sleep.
Pretty soon the watchman was back again, and this time he was gruff.
I was annoyed.
I said:-- 'What do you want to come bothering around here in the middle of the night for.
Now as like as not I'll not get to sleep again to-night.
' The watchman said-- 'Well, if this an't good, I'm blest.
' The 'off-watch' was just turning in, and I heard some brutal laughter from them, and such remarks as 'Hello, watchman!
an't the new cub turned out yet?
He's delicate, likely.
Give him some sugar in a rag and send for the chambermaid to sing rock-a-by-baby to him.
' About this time Mr. Bixby appeared on the scene.
Something like a minute later I was climbing the pilot-house steps with some of my clothes on and the rest in my arms.
Mr. Bixby was close behind, commenting.
Here was something fresh--this thing of getting up in the middle of the night to go to work.
It was a detail in piloting that had never occurred to me at all.
I knew that boats ran all night, but somehow I had never happened to reflect that somebody had to get up out of a warm bed to run them.
I began to fear that piloting was not quite so romantic as I had imagined it was; there was something very real and work-like about this new phase of it.
It was a rather dingy night, although a fair number of stars were out.
The big mate was at the wheel, and he had the old tub pointed at a star and was holding her straight up the middle of the river.
The shores on either hand were not much more than half a mile apart, but they seemed wonderfully far away and ever so vague and indistinct.
The mate said:-- 'We've got to land at Jones's plantation, sir.
' The vengeful spirit in me exulted.
I said to myself, I wish you joy of your job, Mr. Bixby; you'll have a good time finding Mr. Jones's plantation such a night as this; and I hope you never _will _find it as long as you live.
Mr. Bixby said to the mate:-- 'Upper end of the plantation, or the lower?
' 'Upper.
' 'I can't do it.
The stumps there are out of water at this stage: It's no great distance to the lower, and you'll have to get along with that.
' 'All right, sir.
If Jones don't like it he'll have to lump it, I reckon.
' And then the mate left.
My exultation began to cool and my wonder to come up.
Here was a man who not only proposed to find this plantation on such a night, but to find either end of it you preferred.
I dreadfully wanted to ask a question, but I was carrying about as many short answers as my cargo-room would admit of, so I held my peace.
All I desired to ask Mr. Bixby was the simple question whether he was ass enough to really imagine he was going to find that plantation on a night when all plantations were exactly alike and all the same color.
But I held in.
I used to have fine inspirations of prudence in those days.
Mr. Bixby made for the shore and soon was scraping it, just the same as if it had been daylight.
And not only that, but singing-- 'Father in heaven, the day is declining,' etc.
It seemed to me that I had put my life in the keeping of a peculiarly reckless outcast.
Presently he turned on me and said:-- 'What's the name of the first point above New Orleans?
' I was gratified to be able to answer promptly, and I did.
I said I didn't know.
'Don't _know_?
' This manner jolted me.
I was down at the foot again, in a moment.
But I had to say just what I had said before.
'Well, you're a smart one,' said Mr. Bixby.
'What's the name of the _next_ point?
' Once more I didn't know.
'Well, this beats anything.
Tell me the name of _any _point or place I told you.
' I studied a while and decided that I couldn't.
'Look here!
What do you start out from, above Twelve-Mile Point, to cross over?
' 'I--I--don't know.
' 'You--you--don't know?
' mimicking my drawling manner of speech.
'What _do_ you know?
' 'I--I--nothing, for certain.
' 'By the great Caesar's ghost, I believe you!
You're the stupidest dunderhead I ever saw or ever heard of, so help me Moses!
The idea of you being a pilot--you!
Why, you don't know enough to pilot a cow down a lane.
' Oh, but his wrath was up!
He was a nervous man, and he shuffled from one side of his wheel to the other as if the floor was hot.
He would boil a while to himself, and then overflow and scald me again.
'Look here!
What do you suppose I told you the names of those points for?
' I tremblingly considered a moment, and then the devil of temptation provoked me to say:-- 'Well--to--to--be entertaining, I thought.
' This was a red rag to the bull.
He raged and stormed so (he was crossing the river at the time) that I judge it made him blind, because he ran over the steering-oar of a trading-scow.
Of course the traders sent up a volley of red-hot profanity.
Never was a man so grateful as Mr. Bixby was: because he was brim full, and here were subjects who would _talk back_.
He threw open a window, thrust his head out, and such an irruption followed as I never had heard before.
The fainter and farther away the scowmen's curses drifted, the higher Mr. Bixby lifted his voice and the weightier his adjectives grew.
When he closed the window he was empty.
You could have drawn a seine through his system and not caught curses enough to disturb your mother with.
Presently he said to me in the gentlest way-- 'My boy, you must get a little memorandum book, and every time I tell you a thing, put it down right away.
There's only one way to be a pilot, and that is to get this entire river by heart.
You have to know it just like A B C.' That was a dismal revelation to me; for my memory was never loaded with anything but blank cartridges.
However, I did not feel discouraged long.
I judged that it was best to make some allowances, for doubtless Mr. Bixby was 'stretching.
' Presently he pulled a rope and struck a few strokes on the big bell.
The stars were all gone now, and the night was as black as ink.
I could hear the wheels churn along the bank, but I was not entirely certain that I could see the shore.
The voice of the invisible watchman called up from the hurricane deck-- 'What's this, sir?
' 'Jones's plantation.
' I said to myself, I wish I might venture to offer a small bet that it isn't.
But I did not chirp.
I only waited to see.
Mr. Bixby handled the engine bells, and in due time the boat's nose came to the land, a torch glowed from the forecastle, a man skipped ashore, a darky's voice on the bank said, 'Gimme de k'yarpet-bag, Mars' Jones,' and the next moment we were standing up
I reflected deeply awhile, and then said--but not aloud--'Well, the finding of that plantation was the luckiest accident that ever happened; but it couldn't happen again in a hundred years.
' And I fully believed it was an accident, too.
By the time we had gone seven or eight hundred miles up the river, I had learned to be a tolerably plucky up-stream steersman, in daylight, and before we reached St. Louis I had made a trifle of progress in night-work, but only a trifle.
I had a note-book that fairly bristled with the names of towns, 'points,' bars, islands, bends, reaches, etc.
; but the information was to be found only in the notebook--none of it was in my head.
It made my heart ache to think I had only got half of the river set down; for as our watch was four hours off and four hours on, day and night, there was a long four-hour gap in my book for every time I had slept since the voyage began.
My chief was presently hired to go on a big New Orleans boat, and I packed my satchel and went with him.
She was a grand affair.
When I stood in her pilot-house I was so far above the water that I seemed perched on a mountain; and her decks stretched so far away, fore and aft, below me, that I wondered how I could ever have considered the little 'Paul Jones' a large craft.
There were other differences, too.
The 'Paul Jones's' pilot-house was a cheap, dingy, battered rattle-trap, cramped for room: but here was a sumptuous glass temple; room enough to have a dance in; showy red and gold window-curtains; an imposing sofa; leather cushions and a back to the high
Now this was 'something like,' and so I began to take heart once more to believe that piloting was a romantic sort of occupation after all.
The moment we were under way I began to prowl about the great steamer and fill myself with joy.
She was as clean and as dainty as a drawing-room; when I looked down her long, gilded saloon, it was like gazing through a splendid tunnel; she had an oil-picture, by some gifted sign-painter, on every stateroom door; she glittered with no end of
The boiler deck (i.
e.
the second story of the boat, so to speak) was as spacious as a church, it seemed to me; so with the forecastle; and there was no pitiful handful of deckhands, firemen, and roustabouts down there, but a whole battalion of men.
The fires were fiercely glaring from a long row of furnaces, and over them were eight huge boilers!
This was unutterable pomp.
The mighty engines--but enough of this.
I had never felt so fine before.
And when I found that the regiment of natty servants respectfully 'sir'd' me, my satisfaction was complete.
CHAPTER 7 A Daring Deed WHEN I returned to the pilot-house St. Louis was gone and I was lost.
Here was a piece of river which was all down in my book, but I could make neither head nor tail of it: you understand, it was turned around.
I had seen it when coming up-stream, but I had never faced about to see how it looked when it was behind me.
My heart broke again, for it was plain that I had got to learn this troublesome river _both ways_.
The pilot-house was full of pilots, going down to 'look at the river.
' What is called the 'upper river' (the two hundred miles between St. Louis and Cairo, where the Ohio comes in) was low; and the Mississippi changes its channel so constantly that the pilots used to always find it necessary to run down to Cairo to take a
A deal of this 'looking at the river' was done by poor fellows who seldom had a berth, and whose only hope of getting one lay in their being always freshly posted and therefore ready to drop into the shoes of some reputable pilot, for a single trip, on
And a good many of them constantly ran up and down inspecting the river, not because they ever really hoped to get a berth, but because (they being guests of the boat) it was cheaper to 'look at the river' than stay ashore and pay board.
In time these fellows grew dainty in their tastes, and only infested boats that had an established reputation for setting good tables.
All visiting pilots were useful, for they were always ready and willing, winter or summer, night or day, to go out in the yawl and help buoy the channel or assist the boat's pilots in any way they could.
They were likewise welcome because all pilots are tireless talkers, when gathered together, and as they talk only about the river they are always understood and are always interesting.
Your true pilot cares nothing about anything on earth but the river, and his pride in his occupation surpasses the pride of kings.
We had a fine company of these river-inspectors along, this trip.
There were eight or ten; and there was abundance of room for them in our great pilot-house.
Two or three of them wore polished silk hats, elaborate shirt-fronts, diamond breast-pins, kid gloves, and patent-leather boots.
They were choice in their English, and bore themselves with a dignity proper to men of solid means and prodigious reputation as pilots.
The others were more or less loosely clad, and wore upon their heads tall felt cones that were suggestive of the days of the Commonwealth.
I was a cipher in this august company, and felt subdued, not to say torpid.
I was not even of sufficient consequence to assist at the wheel when it was necessary to put the tiller hard down in a hurry; the guest that stood nearest did that when occasion required--and this was pretty much all the time, because of the crookedness of
I stood in a corner; and the talk I listened to took the hope all out of me.
One visitor said to another-- 'Jim, how did you run Plum Point, coming up?
' 'It was in the night, there, and I ran it the way one of the boys on the "Diana" told me; started out about fifty yards above the wood pile on the false point, and held on the cabin under Plum Point till I raised the reef--quarter less twain--then
' 'Pretty square crossing, an't it?
' 'Yes, but the upper bar 's working down fast.
' Another pilot spoke up and said-- 'I had better water than that, and ran it lower down; started out from the false point--mark twain--raised the second reef abreast the big snag in the bend, and had quarter less twain.
' One of the gorgeous ones remarked-- 'I don't want to find fault with your leadsmen, but that's a good deal of water for Plum Point, it seems to me.
' There was an approving nod all around as this quiet snub dropped on the boaster and 'settled' him.
And so they went on talk-talk-talking.
Meantime, the thing that was running in my mind was, 'Now if my ears hear aright, I have not only to get the names of all the towns and islands and bends, and so on, by heart, but I must even get up a warm personal acquaintanceship with every old snag and
' At dusk Mr. Bixby tapped the big bell three times (the signal to land), and the captain emerged from his drawing-room in the forward end of the texas, and looked up inquiringly.
Mr. Bixby said-- 'We will lay up here all night, captain.
' 'Very well, sir.
' That was all.
The boat came to shore and was tied up for the night.
It seemed to me a fine thing that the pilot could do as he pleased, without asking so grand a captain's permission.
I took my supper and went immediately to bed, discouraged by my day's observations and experiences.
My late voyage's note-booking was but a confusion of meaningless names.
It had tangled me all up in a knot every time I had looked at it in the daytime.
I now hoped for respite in sleep; but no, it reveled all through my head till sunrise again, a frantic and tireless nightmare.
Next morning I felt pretty rusty and low-spirited.
We went booming along, taking a good many chances, for we were anxious to 'get out of the river' (as getting out to Cairo was called) before night should overtake us.
But Mr. Bixby's partner, the other pilot, presently grounded the boat, and we lost so much time in getting her off that it was plain that darkness would overtake us a good long way above the mouth.
This was a great misfortune, especially to certain of our visiting pilots, whose boats would have to wait for their return, no matter how long that might be.
It sobered the pilot-house talk a good deal.
Coming up-stream, pilots did not mind low water or any kind of darkness; nothing stopped them but fog.
But down-stream work was different; a boat was too nearly helpless, with a stiff current pushing behind her; so it was not customary to run down-stream at night in low water.
There seemed to be one small hope, however: if we could get through the intricate and dangerous Hat Island crossing before night, we could venture the rest, for we would have plainer sailing and better water.
But it would be insanity to attempt Hat Island at night.
So there was a deal of looking at watches all the rest of the day, and a constant ciphering upon the speed we were making; Hat Island was the eternal subject; sometimes hope was high and sometimes we were delayed in a bad crossing, and down it went again.
For hours all hands lay under the burden of this suppressed excitement; it was even communicated to me, and I got to feeling so solicitous about Hat Island, and under such an awful pressure of responsibility, that I wished I might have five minutes on
We were standing no regular watches.
Each of our pilots ran such portions of the river as he had run when coming up-stream, because of his greater familiarity with it; but both remained in the pilot house constantly.
An hour before sunset, Mr. Bixby took the wheel and Mr. W----stepped aside.
For the next thirty minutes every man held his watch in his hand and was restless, silent, and uneasy.
At last somebody said, with a doomful sigh-- 'Well, yonder's Hat Island--and we can't make it.
' All the watches closed with a snap, everybody sighed and muttered something about its being 'too bad, too bad--ah, if we could only have got here half an hour sooner!
' and the place was thick with the atmosphere of disappointment.
Some started to go out, but loitered, hearing no bell-tap to land.
The sun dipped behind the horizon, the boat went on.
Inquiring looks passed from one guest to another; and one who had his hand on the door-knob and had turned it, waited, then presently took away his hand and let the knob turn back again.
We bore steadily down the bend.
More looks were exchanged, and nods of surprised admiration--but no words.
Insensibly the men drew together behind Mr. Bixby, as the sky darkened and one or two dim stars came out.
The dead silence and sense of waiting became oppressive.
Mr. Bixby pulled the cord, and two deep, mellow notes from the big bell floated off on the night.
Then a pause, and one more note was struck.
The watchman's voice followed, from the hurricane deck-- 'Labboard lead, there!
Stabboard lead!
' The cries of the leadsmen began to rise out of the distance, and were gruffly repeated by the word-passers on the hurricane deck.
'M-a-r-k three!
...
M-a-r-k three!
...
Quarter-less three!
...
Half twain!
...
Quarter twain!
...
M-a-r-k twain!
...
Quarter-less--' Mr. Bixby pulled two bell-ropes, and was answered by faint jinglings far below in the engine room, and our speed slackened.
The steam began to whistle through the gauge-cocks.
The cries of the leadsmen went on--and it is a weird sound, always, in the night.
Every pilot in the lot was watching now, with fixed eyes, and talking under his breath.
Nobody was calm and easy but Mr. Bixby.
He would put his wheel down and stand on a spoke, and as the steamer swung into her (to me) utterly invisible marks--for we seemed to be in the midst of a wide and gloomy sea--he would meet and fasten her there.
Out of the murmur of half-audible talk, one caught a coherent sentence now and then--such as-- 'There; she's over the first reef all right!
' After a pause, another subdued voice-- 'Her stern's coming down just exactly right, by George!
' 'Now she's in the marks; over she goes!
' Somebody else muttered-- 'Oh, it was done beautiful--_beautiful_!
' Now the engines were stopped altogether, and we drifted with the current.
Not that I could see the boat drift, for I could not, the stars being all gone by this time.
This drifting was the dismalest work; it held one's heart still.
Presently I discovered a blacker gloom than that which surrounded us.
It was the head of the island.
We were closing right down upon it.
We entered its deeper shadow, and so imminent seemed the peril that I was likely to suffocate; and I had the strongest impulse to do _something_, anything, to save the vessel.
But still Mr. Bixby stood by his wheel, silent, intent as a cat, and all the pilots stood shoulder to shoulder at his back.
'She'll not make it!
' somebody whispered.
The water grew shoaler and shoaler, by the leadsman's cries, till it was down to-- 'Eight-and-a-half!
...
.
E-i-g-h-t feet!
...
.
E-i-g-h-t feet!
...
.
Seven-and--' Mr. Bixby said warningly through his speaking tube to the engineer-- 'Stand by, now!
' 'Aye-aye, sir!
' 'Seven-and-a-half!
Seven feet!
Six-and--' We touched bottom!
Instantly Mr. Bixby set a lot of bells ringing, shouted through the tube, 'NOW, let her have it--every ounce you've got!
' then to his partner, 'Put her hard down!
snatch her!
snatch her!
' The boat rasped and ground her way through the sand, hung upon the apex of disaster a single tremendous instant, and then over she went!
And such a shout as went up at Mr. Bixby's back never loosened the roof of a pilot-house before!
There was no more trouble after that.
Mr. Bixby was a hero that night; and it was some little time, too, before his exploit ceased to be talked about by river men.
Fully to realize the marvelous precision required in laying the great steamer in her marks in that murky waste of water, one should know that not only must she pick her intricate way through snags and blind reefs, and then shave the head of the island so
The last remark I heard that night was a compliment to Mr. Bixby, uttered in soliloquy and with unction by one of our guests.
He said-- 'By the Shadow of Death, but he's a lightning pilot!
' CHAPTER 8 Perplexing Lessons At the end of what seemed a tedious while, I had managed to pack my head full of islands, towns, bars, 'points,' and bends; and a curiously inanimate mass of lumber it was, too.
However, inasmuch as I could shut my eyes and reel off a good long string of these names without leaving out more than ten miles of river in every fifty, I began to feel that I could take a boat down to New Orleans if I could make her skip those little
But of course my complacency could hardly get start enough to lift my nose a trifle into the air, before Mr. Bixby would think of something to fetch it down again.
One day he turned on me suddenly with this settler-- 'What is the shape of Walnut Bend?
' He might as well have asked me my grandmother's opinion of protoplasm.
I reflected respectfully, and then said I didn't know it had any particular shape.
My gunpowdery chief went off with a bang, of course, and then went on loading and firing until he was out of adjectives.
I had learned long ago that he only carried just so many rounds of ammunition, and was sure to subside into a very placable and even remorseful old smooth-bore as soon as they were all gone.
That word 'old' is merely affectionate; he was not more than thirty-four.
I waited.
By and by he said-- 'My boy, you've got to know the _shape _of the river perfectly.
It is all there is left to steer by on a very dark night.
Everything else is blotted out and gone.
But mind you, it hasn't the same shape in the night that it has in the day-time.
' 'How on earth am I ever going to learn it, then?
' 'How do you follow a hall at home in the dark.
Because you know the shape of it.
You can't see it.
' 'Do you mean to say that I've got to know all the million trifling variations of shape in the banks of this interminable river as well as I know the shape of the front hall at home?
' 'On my honor, you've got to know them _better _than any man ever did know the shapes of the halls in his own house.
' 'I wish I was dead!
' 'Now I don't want to discourage you, but--' 'Well, pile it on me; I might as well have it now as another time.
' 'You see, this has got to be learned; there isn't any getting around it.
A clear starlight night throws such heavy shadows that if you didn't know the shape of a shore perfectly you would claw away from every bunch of timber, because you would take the black shadow of it for a solid cape; and you see you would be getting scared
You would be fifty yards from shore all the time when you ought to be within fifty feet of it.
You can't see a snag in one of those shadows, but you know exactly where it is, and the shape of the river tells you when you are coming to it.
Then there's your pitch-dark night; the river is a very different shape on a pitch-dark night from what it is on a starlight night.
All shores seem to be straight lines, then, and mighty dim ones, too; and you'd _run _them for straight lines only you know better.
You boldly drive your boat right into what seems to be a solid, straight wall (you knowing very well that in reality there is a curve there), and that wall falls back and makes way for you.
Then there's your gray mist.
You take a night when there's one of these grisly, drizzly, gray mists, and then there isn't any particular shape to a shore.
A gray mist would tangle the head of the oldest man that ever lived.
Well, then, different kinds of _moonlight _change the shape of the river in different ways.
You see--' 'Oh, don't say any more, please!
Have I got to learn the shape of the river according to all these five hundred thousand different ways?
If I tried to carry all that cargo in my head it would make me stoop-shouldered.
' '_No_!
you only learn _the _shape of the river, and you learn it with such absolute certainty that you can always steer by the shape that's _in your head_, and never mind the one that's before your eyes.
' 'Very well, I'll try it; but after I have learned it can I depend on it.
Will it keep the same form and not go fooling around?
' Before Mr. Bixby could answer, Mr. W---- came in to take the watch, and he said-- 'Bixby, you'll have to look out for President's Island and all that country clear away up above the Old Hen and Chickens.
The banks are caving and the shape of the shores changing like everything.
Why, you wouldn't know the point above 40.
You can go up inside the old sycamore-snag, now.
{footnote [1.
It may not be necessary, but still it can do no harm to explain that 'inside' means between the snag and the shore.
--M.T.]} So that question was answered.
Here were leagues of shore changing shape.
My spirits were down in the mud again.
Two things seemed pretty apparent to me.
One was, that in order to be a pilot a man had got to learn more than any one man ought to be allowed to know; and the other was, that he must learn it all over again in a different way every twenty-four hours.
That night we had the watch until twelve.
Now it was an ancient river custom for the two pilots to chat a bit when the watch changed.
While the relieving pilot put on his gloves and lit his cigar, his partner, the retiring pilot, would say something like this-- 'I judge the upper bar is making down a little at Hale's Point; had quarter twain with the lower lead and mark twain {footnote
'Quarter twain' is two-and-a-quarter fathoms, thirteen-and-a-half feet.
'Mark three' is three fathoms.
]} with the other.
' 'Yes, I thought it was making down a little, last trip.
Meet any boats?
' 'Met one abreast the head of 21, but she was away over hugging the bar, and I couldn't make her out entirely.
I took her for the "Sunny South"--hadn't any skylights forward of the chimneys.
' And so on.
And as the relieving pilot took the wheel his partner {footnote ['Partner' is a technical term for 'the other pilot'.
]} would mention that we were in such-and-such a bend, and say we were abreast of such-and-such a man's wood-yard or plantation.
This was courtesy; I supposed it was necessity.
But Mr. W---- came on watch full twelve minutes late on this particular night,--a tremendous breach of etiquette; in fact, it is the unpardonable sin among pilots.
So Mr. Bixby gave him no greeting whatever, but simply surrendered the wheel and marched out of the pilot-house without a word.
I was appalled; it was a villainous night for blackness, we were in a particularly wide and blind part of the river, where there was no shape or substance to anything, and it seemed incredible that Mr. Bixby should have left that poor fellow to kill the
But I resolved that I would stand by him any way.
He should find that he was not wholly friendless.
So I stood around, and waited to be asked where we were.
But Mr. W---- plunged on serenely through the solid firmament of black cats that stood for an atmosphere, and never opened his mouth.
Here is a proud devil, thought I; here is a limb of Satan that would rather send us all to destruction than put himself under obligations to me, because I am not yet one of the salt of the earth and privileged to snub captains and lord it over everything
I presently climbed up on the bench; I did not think it was safe to go to sleep while this lunatic was on watch.
However, I must have gone to sleep in the course of time, because the next thing I was aware of was the fact that day was breaking, Mr. W---- gone, and Mr. Bixby at the wheel again.
So it was four o'clock and all well--but me; I felt like a skinful of dry bones and all of them trying to ache at once.
Mr. Bixby asked me what I had stayed up there for.
I confessed that it was to do Mr. W---- a benevolence,--tell him where he was.
It took five minutes for the entire preposterousness of the thing to filter into Mr. Bixby's system, and then I judge it filled him nearly up to the chin; because he paid me a compliment--and not much of a one either.
He said, 'Well, taking you by-and-large, you do seem to be more different kinds of an ass than any creature I ever saw before.
What did you suppose he wanted to know for?
' I said I thought it might be a convenience to him.
'Convenience D-nation!
Didn't I tell you that a man's got to know the river in the night the same as he'd know his own front hall?
' 'Well, I can follow the front hall in the dark if I know it _is_ the front hall; but suppose you set me down in the middle of it in the dark and not tell me which hall it is; how am I to know?
' 'Well you've _got _to, on the river!
' 'All right.
Then I'm glad I never said anything to Mr. W---- ' 'I should say so.
Why, he'd have slammed you through the window and utterly ruined a hundred dollars' worth of window-sash and stuff.
' I was glad this damage had been saved, for it would have made me unpopular with the owners.
They always hated anybody who had the name of being careless, and injuring things.
I went to work now to learn the shape of the river; and of all the eluding and ungraspable objects that ever I tried to get mind or hands on, that was the chief.
I would fasten my eyes upon a sharp, wooded point that projected far into the river some miles ahead of me, and go to laboriously photographing its shape upon my brain; and just as I was beginning to succeed to my satisfaction, we would draw up toward it
If there had been a conspicuous dead tree standing upon the very point of the cape, I would find that tree inconspicuously merged into the general forest, and occupying the middle of a straight shore, when I got abreast of it!
No prominent hill would stick to its shape long enough for me to make up my mind what its form really was, but it was as dissolving and changeful as if it had been a mountain of butter in the hottest corner of the tropics.
Nothing ever had the same shape when I was coming downstream that it had borne when I went up.
I mentioned these little difficulties to Mr. Bixby.
He said-- 'That's the very main virtue of the thing.
If the shapes didn't change every three seconds they wouldn't be of any use.
Take this place where we are now, for instance.
As long as that hill over yonder is only one hill, I can boom right along the way I'm going; but the moment it splits at the top and forms a V, I know I've got to scratch to starboard in a hurry, or I'll bang this boat's brains out against a rock; and then
If that hill didn't change its shape on bad nights there would be an awful steamboat grave-yard around here inside of a year.
' It was plain that I had got to learn the shape of the river in all the different ways that could be thought of,--upside down, wrong end first, inside out, fore-and-aft, and 'thortships,'--and then know what to do on gray nights when it hadn't any shape
So I set about it.
In the course of time I began to get the best of this knotty lesson, and my self-complacency moved to the front once more.
Mr. Bixby was all fixed, and ready to start it to the rear again.
He opened on me after this fashion-- 'How much water did we have in the middle crossing at Hole-in-the-Wall, trip before last?
' I considered this an outrage.
I said-- 'Every trip, down and up, the leadsmen are singing through that tangled place for three-quarters of an hour on a stretch.
How do you reckon I can remember such a mess as that?
' 'My boy, you've got to remember it.
You've got to remember the exact spot and the exact marks the boat lay in when we had the shoalest water, in everyone of the five hundred shoal places between St. Louis and New Orleans; and you mustn't get the shoal soundings and marks of one trip mixed up
You must keep them separate.
' When I came to myself again, I said-- 'When I get so that I can do that, I'll be able to raise the dead, and then I won't have to pilot a steamboat to make a living.
I want to retire from this business.
I want a slush-bucket and a brush; I'm only fit for a roustabout.
I haven't got brains enough to be a pilot; and if I had I wouldn't have strength enough to carry them around, unless I went on crutches.
' 'Now drop that!
When I say I'll learn {footnote ['Teach' is not in the river vocabulary.
]} a man the river, I mean it.
And you can depend on it, I'll learn him or kill him.
' CHAPTER 9 Continued Perplexities THERE was no use in arguing with a person like this.
I promptly put such a strain on my memory that by and by even the shoal water and the countless crossing-marks began to stay with me.
But the result was just the same.
I never could more than get one knotty thing learned before another presented itself.
Now I had often seen pilots gazing at the water and pretending to read it as if it were a book; but it was a book that told me nothing.
A time came at last, however, when Mr. Bixby seemed to think me far enough advanced to bear a lesson on water-reading.
So he began-- 'Do you see that long slanting line on the face of the water?
Now, that's a reef.
Moreover, it's a bluff reef.
There is a solid sand-bar under it that is nearly as straight up and down as the side of a house.
There is plenty of water close up to it, but mighty little on top of it.
If you were to hit it you would knock the boat's brains out.
Do you see where the line fringes out at the upper end and begins to fade away?
' 'Yes, sir.
' 'Well, that is a low place; that is the head of the reef.
You can climb over there, and not hurt anything.
Cross over, now, and follow along close under the reef--easy water there--not much current.
' I followed the reef along till I approached the fringed end.
Then Mr. Bixby said-- 'Now get ready.
Wait till I give the word.
She won't want to mount the reef; a boat hates shoal water.
Stand by--wait--WAIT--keep her well in hand.
NOW cramp her down!
Snatch her!
snatch her!
' He seized the other side of the wheel and helped to spin it around until it was hard down, and then we held it so.
The boat resisted, and refused to answer for a while, and next she came surging to starboard, mounted the reef, and sent a long, angry ridge of water foaming away from her bows.
'Now watch her; watch her like a cat, or she'll get away from you.
When she fights strong and the tiller slips a little, in a jerky, greasy sort of way, let up on her a trifle; it is the way she tells you at night that the water is too shoal; but keep edging her up, little by little, toward the point.
You are well up on the bar, now; there is a bar under every point, because the water that comes down around it forms an eddy and allows the sediment to sink.
Do you see those fine lines on the face of the water that branch out like the ribs of a fan.
Well, those are little reefs; you want to just miss the ends of them, but run them pretty close.
Now look out--look out!
Don't you crowd that slick, greasy-looking place; there ain't nine feet there; she won't stand it.
She begins to smell it; look sharp, I tell you!
Oh blazes, there you go!
Stop the starboard wheel!
Quick!
Ship up to back!
Set her back!
The engine bells jingled and the engines answered promptly, shooting white columns of steam far aloft out of the 'scape pipes, but it was too late.
The boat had 'smelt' the bar in good earnest; the foamy ridges that radiated from her bows suddenly disappeared, a great dead swell came rolling forward and swept ahead of her, she careened far over to larboard, and went tearing away toward the other shore
We were a good mile from where we ought to have been, when we finally got the upper hand of her again.
During the afternoon watch the next day, Mr. Bixby asked me if I knew how to run the next few miles.
I said-- 'Go inside the first snag above the point, outside the next one, start out from the lower end of Higgins's wood-yard, make a square crossing and--' 'That's all right.
I'll be back before you close up on the next point.
' But he wasn't.
He was still below when I rounded it and entered upon a piece of river which I had some misgivings about.
I did not know that he was hiding behind a chimney to see how I would perform.
I went gaily along, getting prouder and prouder, for he had never left the boat in my sole charge such a length of time before.
I even got to 'setting' her and letting the wheel go, entirely, while I vaingloriously turned my back and inspected the stem marks and hummed a tune, a sort of easy indifference which I had prodigiously admired in Bixby and other great pilots.
Once I inspected rather long, and when I faced to the front again my heart flew into my mouth so suddenly that if I hadn't clapped my teeth together I should have lost it.
One of those frightful bluff reefs was stretching its deadly length right across our bows!
My head was gone in a moment; I did not know which end I stood on; I gasped and could not get my breath; I spun the wheel down with such rapidity that it wove itself together like a spider's web; the boat answered and turned square away from the reef, but
I fled, and still it followed, still it kept--right across my bows!
I never looked to see where I was going, I only fled.
The awful crash was imminent--why didn't that villain come!
If I committed the crime of ringing a bell, I might get thrown overboard.
But better that than kill the boat.
So in blind desperation I started such a rattling 'shivaree' down below as never had astounded an engineer in this world before, I fancy.
Amidst the frenzy of the bells the engines began to back and fill in a furious way, and my reason forsook its throne--we were about to crash into the woods on the other side of the river.
Just then Mr. Bixby stepped calmly into view on the hurricane deck.
My soul went out to him in gratitude.
My distress vanished; I would have felt safe on the brink of Niagara, with Mr. Bixby on the hurricane deck.
He blandly and sweetly took his tooth-pick out of his mouth between his fingers, as if it were a cigar--we were just in the act of climbing an overhanging big tree, and the passengers were scudding astern like rats--and lifted up these commands to me ever
Stop the larboard.
Set her back on both.
' The boat hesitated, halted, pressed her nose among the boughs a critical instant, then reluctantly began to back away.
'Stop the larboard.
Come ahead on it.
Stop the starboard.
Come ahead on it.
Point her for the bar.
' I sailed away as serenely as a summer's morning.
Mr. Bixby came in and said, with mock simplicity-- 'When you have a hail, my boy, you ought to tap the big bell three times before you land, so that the engineers can get ready.
' I blushed under the sarcasm, and said I hadn't had any hail.
'Ah!
Then it was for wood, I suppose.
The officer of the watch will tell you when he wants to wood up.
' I went on consuming and said I wasn't after wood.
'Indeed?
Why, what could you want over here in the bend, then?
Did you ever know of a boat following a bend up-stream at this stage of the river?
' 'No sir,--and I wasn't trying to follow it.
I was getting away from a bluff reef.
' 'No, it wasn't a bluff reef; there isn't one within three miles of where you were.
' 'But I saw it.
It was as bluff as that one yonder.
' 'Just about.
Run over it!
' 'Do you give it as an order?
' 'Yes.
Run over it.
' 'If I don't, I wish I may die.
' 'All right; I am taking the responsibility.
' I was just as anxious to kill the boat, now, as I had been to save her before.
I impressed my orders upon my memory, to be used at the inquest, and made a straight break for the reef.
As it disappeared under our bows I held my breath; but we slid over it like oil.
'Now don't you see the difference?
It wasn't anything but a _wind _reef.
The wind does that.
' 'So I see.
But it is exactly like a bluff reef.
How am I ever going to tell them apart?
' 'I can't tell you.
It is an instinct.
By and by you will just naturally _know _one from the other, but you never will be able to explain why or how you know them apart' It turned out to be true.
The face of the water, in time, became a wonderful book--a book that was a dead language to the uneducated passenger, but which told its mind to me without reserve, delivering its most cherished secrets as clearly as if it uttered them with a voice.
And it was not a book to be read once and thrown aside, for it had a new story to tell every day.
Throughout the long twelve hundred miles there was never a page that was void of interest, never one that you could leave unread without loss, never one that you would want to skip, thinking you could find higher enjoyment in some other thing.
There never was so wonderful a book written by man; never one whose interest was so absorbing, so unflagging, so sparkingly renewed with every reperusal.
The passenger who could not read it was charmed with a peculiar sort of faint dimple on its surface (on the rare occasions when he did not overlook it altogether); but to the pilot that was an _italicized _passage; indeed, it was more than that, it was a
It is the faintest and simplest expression the water ever makes, and the most hideous to a pilot's eye.
In truth, the passenger who could not read this book saw nothing but all manner of pretty pictures in it painted by the sun and shaded by the clouds, whereas to the trained eye these were not pictures at all, but the grimmest and most dead-earnest of
Now when I had mastered the language of this water and had come to know every trifling feature that bordered the great river as familiarly as I knew the letters of the alphabet, I had made a valuable acquisition.
But I had lost something, too.
I had lost something which could never be restored to me while I lived.
All the grace, the beauty, the poetry had gone out of the majestic river!
I still keep in mind a certain wonderful sunset which I witnessed when steamboating was new to me.
A broad expanse of the river was turned to blood; in the middle distance the red hue brightened into gold, through which a solitary log came floating, black and conspicuous; in one place a long, slanting mark lay sparkling upon the water; in another the
There were graceful curves, reflected images, woody heights, soft distances; and over the whole scene, far and near, the dissolving lights drifted steadily, enriching it, every passing moment, with new marvels of coloring.
I stood like one bewitched.
I drank it in, in a speechless rapture.
The world was new to me, and I had never seen anything like this at home.
But as I have said, a day came when I began to cease from noting the glories and the charms which the moon and the sun and the twilight wrought upon the river's face; another day came when I ceased altogether to note them.
Then, if that sunset scene had been repeated, I should have looked upon it without rapture, and should have commented upon it, inwardly, after this fashion: This sun means that we are going to have wind to-morrow; that floating log means that the river is
No, the romance and the beauty were all gone from the river.
All the value any feature of it had for me now was the amount of usefulness it could furnish toward compassing the safe piloting of a steamboat.
Since those days, I have pitied doctors from my heart.
What does the lovely flush in a beauty's cheek mean to a doctor but a 'break' that ripples above some deadly disease.
Are not all her visible charms sown thick with what are to him the signs and symbols of hidden decay?
Does he ever see her beauty at all, or doesn't he simply view her professionally, and comment upon her unwholesome condition all to himself?
And doesn't he sometimes wonder whether he has gained most or lost most by learning his trade?
CHAPTER 10 Completing My Education WHOSOEVER has done me the courtesy to read my chapters which have preceded this may possibly wonder that I deal so minutely with piloting as a science.
It was the prime purpose of those chapters; and I am not quite done yet.
I wish to show, in the most patient and painstaking way, what a wonderful science it is.
Ship channels are buoyed and lighted, and therefore it is a comparatively easy undertaking to learn to run them; clear-water rivers, with gravel bottoms, change their channels very gradually, and therefore one needs to learn them but once; but piloting
{footnote [True at the time referred to; not true now (1882).
]} I feel justified in enlarging upon this great science for the reason that I feel sure no one has ever yet written a paragraph about it who had piloted a steamboat himself, and so had a practical knowledge of the subject.
If the theme were hackneyed, I should be obliged to deal gently with the reader; but since it is wholly new, I have felt at liberty to take up a considerable degree of room with it.
When I had learned the name and position of every visible feature of the river; when I had so mastered its shape that I could shut my eyes and trace it from St. Louis to New Orleans; when I had learned to read the face of the water as one would cull the
Mr. Bixby had his eye on these airs.
One day he said-- 'What is the height of that bank yonder, at Burgess's?
' 'How can I tell, sir.
It is three-quarters of a mile away.
' 'Very poor eye--very poor.
Take the glass.
' I took the glass, and presently said--'I can't tell.
I suppose that that bank is about a foot and a half high.
' 'Foot and a half!
That's a six-foot bank.
How high was the bank along here last trip?
' 'I don't know; I never noticed.
' 'You didn't?
Well, you must always do it hereafter.
' 'Why?
' 'Because you'll have to know a good many things that it tells you.
For one thing, it tells you the stage of the river--tells you whether there's more water or less in the river along here than there was last trip.
' 'The leads tell me that.
' I rather thought I had the advantage of him there.
'Yes, but suppose the leads lie?
The bank would tell you so, and then you'd stir those leadsmen up a bit.
There was a ten-foot bank here last trip, and there is only a six-foot bank now.
What does that signify?
' 'That the river is four feet higher than it was last trip.
' 'Very good.
Is the river rising or falling?
' 'Rising.
' 'No it ain't.
' 'I guess I am right, sir.
Yonder is some drift-wood floating down the stream.
' 'A rise starts the drift-wood, but then it keeps on floating a while after the river is done rising.
Now the bank will tell you about this.
Wait till you come to a place where it shelves a little.
Now here; do you see this narrow belt of fine sediment That was deposited while the water was higher.
You see the driftwood begins to strand, too.
The bank helps in other ways.
Do you see that stump on the false point?
' 'Ay, ay, sir.
' 'Well, the water is just up to the roots of it.
You must make a note of that.
' 'Why?
' 'Because that means that there's seven feet in the chute of 103.
' 'But 103 is a long way up the river yet.
' 'That's where the benefit of the bank comes in.
There is water enough in 103 _now_, yet there may not be by the time we get there; but the bank will keep us posted all along.
You don't run close chutes on a falling river, up-stream, and there are precious few of them that you are allowed to run at all down-stream.
There's a law of the United States against it.
The river may be rising by the time we get to 103, and in that case we'll run it.
We are drawing--how much?
' 'Six feet aft,--six and a half forward.
' 'Well, you do seem to know something.
' 'But what I particularly want to know is, if I have got to keep up an everlasting measuring of the banks of this river, twelve hundred miles, month in and month out?
' 'Of course!
' My emotions were too deep for words for a while.
Presently I said--' And how about these chutes.
Are there many of them?
' 'I should say so.
I fancy we shan't run any of the river this trip as you've ever seen it run before--so to speak.
If the river begins to rise again, we'll go up behind bars that you've always seen standing out of the river, high and dry like the roof of a house; we'll cut across low places that you've never noticed at all, right through the middle of bars that cover
' 'Then I've got to go to work and learn just as much more river as I already know.
' 'Just about twice as much more, as near as you can come at it.
' 'Well, one lives to find out.
I think I was a fool when I went into this business.
' 'Yes, that is true.
And you are yet.
But you'll not be when you've learned it.
' 'Ah, I never can learn it.
' 'I will see that you _do_.
' By and by I ventured again-- 'Have I got to learn all this thing just as I know the rest of the river--shapes and all--and so I can run it at night?
' 'Yes.
And you've got to have good fair marks from one end of the river to the other, that will help the bank tell you when there is water enough in each of these countless places--like that stump, you know.
When the river first begins to rise, you can run half a dozen of the deepest of them; when it rises a foot more you can run another dozen; the next foot will add a couple of dozen, and so on: so you see you have to know your banks and marks to a dead moral
There are about fifty of these cracks which you can't run at all except when the river is brim full and over the banks.
' 'This new lesson is a cheerful prospect.
' 'Cheerful enough.
And mind what I've just told you; when you start into one of those places you've got to go through.
They are too narrow to turn around in, too crooked to back out of, and the shoal water is always up at the head; never elsewhere.
And the head of them is always likely to be filling up, little by little, so that the marks you reckon their depth by, this season, may not answer for next.
' 'Learn a new set, then, every year?
' 'Exactly.
Cramp her up to the bar!
What are you standing up through the middle of the river for?
' The next few months showed me strange things.
On the same day that we held the conversation above narrated, we met a great rise coming down the river.
The whole vast face of the stream was black with drifting dead logs, broken boughs, and great trees that had caved in and been washed away.
It required the nicest steering to pick one's way through this rushing raft, even in the day-time, when crossing from point to point; and at night the difficulty was mightily increased; every now and then a huge log, lying deep in the water, would suddenly
Now and then we would hit one of these sunken logs a rattling bang, dead in the center, with a full head of steam, and it would stun the boat as if she had hit a continent.
Sometimes this log would lodge, and stay right across our nose, and back the Mississippi up before it; we would have to do a little craw-fishing, then, to get away from the obstruction.
We often hit _white _logs, in the dark, for we could not see them till we were right on them; but a black log is a pretty distinct object at night.
A white snag is an ugly customer when the daylight is gone.
Of course, on the great rise, down came a swarm of prodigious timber-rafts from the head waters of the Mississippi, coal barges from Pittsburgh, little trading scows from everywhere, and broad-horns from 'Posey County,' Indiana, freighted with 'fruit and
Pilots bore a mortal hatred to these craft; and it was returned with usury.
The law required all such helpless traders to keep a light burning, but it was a law that was often broken.
All of a sudden, on a murky night, a light would hop up, right under our bows, almost, and an agonized voice, with the backwoods 'whang' to it, would wail out-- 'Whar'n the ---- you goin' to!
Cain't you see nothin', you dash-dashed aig-suckin', sheep-stealin', one-eyed son of a stuffed monkey!
' Then for an instant, as we whistled by, the red glare from our furnaces would reveal the scow and the form of the gesticulating orator as if under a lightning-flash, and in that instant our firemen and deck-hands would send and receive a tempest of
And that flatboatman would be sure to go into New Orleans and sue our boat, swearing stoutly that he had a light burning all the time, when in truth his gang had the lantern down below to sing and lie and drink and gamble by, and no watch on deck.
Once, at night, in one of those forest-bordered crevices (behind an island) which steamboatmen intensely describe with the phrase 'as dark as the inside of a cow,' we should have eaten up a Posey County family, fruit, furniture, and all, but that they
These people brought up their lantern, then, of course; and as we backed and filled to get away, the precious family stood in the light of it--both sexes and various ages--and cursed us till everything turned blue.
Once a coalboatman sent a bullet through our pilot-house, when we borrowed a steering oar of him in a very narrow place.
CHAPTER 11 The River Rises DURING this big rise these small-fry craft were an intolerable nuisance.
We were running chute after chute,--a new world to me,--and if there was a particularly cramped place in a chute, we would be pretty sure to meet a broad-horn there; and if he failed to be there, we would find him in a still worse locality, namely, the
And then there would be no end of profane cordialities exchanged.
Sometimes, in the big river, when we would be feeling our way cautiously along through a fog, the deep hush would suddenly be broken by yells and a clamor of tin pans, and all in instant a log raft would appear vaguely through the webby veil, close upon
One doesn't hit a rock or a solid log craft with a steamboat when he can get excused.
You will hardly believe it, but many steamboat clerks always carried a large assortment of religious tracts with them in those old departed steamboating days.
Indeed they did.
Twenty times a day we would be cramping up around a bar, while a string of these small-fry rascals were drifting down into the head of the bend away above and beyond us a couple of miles.
Now a skiff would dart away from one of them, and come fighting its laborious way across the desert of water.
It would 'ease all,' in the shadow of our forecastle, and the panting oarsmen would shout, 'Gimme a pa-a-per!
' as the skiff drifted swiftly astern.
The clerk would throw over a file of New Orleans journals.
If these were picked up without comment, you might notice that now a dozen other skiffs had been drifting down upon us without saying anything.
You understand, they had been waiting to see how No.
1 was going to fare.
No.
1 making no comment, all the rest would bend to their oars and come on, now; and as fast as they came the clerk would heave over neat bundles of religious tracts, tied to shingles.
The amount of hard swearing which twelve packages of religious literature will command when impartially divided up among twelve raftsmen's crews, who have pulled a heavy skiff two miles on a hot day to get them, is simply incredible.
As I have said, the big rise brought a new world under my vision.
By the time the river was over its banks we had forsaken our old paths and were hourly climbing over bars that had stood ten feet out of water before; we were shaving stumpy shores, like that at the foot of Madrid Bend, which I had always seen avoided
Some of these chutes were utter solitudes.
The dense, untouched forest overhung both banks of the crooked little crack, and one could believe that human creatures had never intruded there before.
The swinging grape-vines, the grassy nooks and vistas glimpsed as we swept by, the flowering creepers waving their red blossoms from the tops of dead trunks, and all the spendthrift richness of the forest foliage, were wasted and thrown away there.
The chutes were lovely places to steer in; they were deep, except at the head; the current was gentle; under the 'points' the water was absolutely dead, and the invisible banks so bluff that where the tender willow thickets projected you could bury your
Behind other islands we found wretched little farms, and wretcheder little log-cabins; there were crazy rail fences sticking a foot or two above the water, with one or two jeans-clad, chills-racked, yellow-faced male miserables roosting on the top-rail,
In this flat-boat the family would have to cook and eat and sleep for a lesser or greater number of days (or possibly weeks), until the river should fall two or three feet and let them get back to their log-cabin and their chills again--chills being a
And this sort of watery camping out was a thing which these people were rather liable to be treated to a couple of times a year: by the December rise out of the Ohio, and the June rise out of the Mississippi.
And yet these were kindly dispensations, for they at least enabled the poor things to rise from the dead now and then, and look upon life when a steamboat went by.
They appreciated the blessing, too, for they spread their mouths and eyes wide open and made the most of these occasions.
Now what _could _these banished creatures find to do to keep from dying of the blues during the low-water season!
Once, in one of these lovely island chutes, we found our course completely bridged by a great fallen tree.
This will serve to show how narrow some of the chutes were.
The passengers had an hour's recreation in a virgin wilderness, while the boat-hands chopped the bridge away; for there was no such thing as turning back, you comprehend.
From Cairo to Baton Rouge, when the river is over its banks, you have no particular trouble in the night, for the thousand-mile wall of dense forest that guards the two banks all the way is only gapped with a farm or wood-yard opening at intervals, and so
The river is more than a mile wide, and very deep--as much as two hundred feet, in places.
Both banks, for a good deal over a hundred miles, are shorn of their timber and bordered by continuous sugar plantations, with only here and there a scattering sapling or row of ornamental China-trees.
The timber is shorn off clear to the rear of the plantations, from two to four miles.
When the first frost threatens to come, the planters snatch off their crops in a hurry.
When they have finished grinding the cane, they form the refuse of the stalks (which they call _bagasse_) into great piles and set fire to them, though in other sugar countries the bagasse is used for fuel in the furnaces of the sugar mills.
Now the piles of damp bagasse burn slowly, and smoke like Satan's own kitchen.
An embankment ten or fifteen feet high guards both banks of the Mississippi all the way down that lower end of the river, and this embankment is set back from the edge of the shore from ten to perhaps a hundred feet, according to circumstances; say thirty
Fill that whole region with an impenetrable gloom of smoke from a hundred miles of burning bagasse piles, when the river is over the banks, and turn a steamboat loose along there at midnight and see how she will feel.
And see how you will feel, too!
You find yourself away out in the midst of a vague dim sea that is shoreless, that fades out and loses itself in the murky distances; for you cannot discern the thin rib of embankment, and you are always imagining you see a straggling tree when you don't.
The plantations themselves are transformed by the smoke, and look like a part of the sea.
All through your watch you are tortured with the exquisite misery of uncertainty.
You hope you are keeping in the river, but you do not know.
All that you are sure about is that you are likely to be within six feet of the bank and destruction, when you think you are a good half-mile from shore.
And you are sure, also, that if you chance suddenly to fetch up against the embankment and topple your chimneys overboard, you will have the small comfort of knowing that it is about what you were expecting to do.
One of the great Vicksburg packets darted out into a sugar plantation one night, at such a time, and had to stay there a week.
But there was no novelty about it; it had often been done before.
I thought I had finished this chapter, but I wish to add a curious thing, while it is in my mind.
It is only relevant in that it is connected with piloting.
There used to be an excellent pilot on the river, a Mr. X., who was a somnambulist.
It was said that if his mind was troubled about a bad piece of river, he was pretty sure to get up and walk in his sleep and do strange things.
He was once fellow-pilot for a trip or two with George Ealer, on a great New Orleans passenger packet.
During a considerable part of the first trip George was uneasy, but got over it by and by, as X. seemed content to stay in his bed when asleep.
Late one night the boat was approaching Helena, Arkansas; the water was low, and the crossing above the town in a very blind and tangled condition.
X. had seen the crossing since Ealer had, and as the night was particularly drizzly, sullen, and dark, Ealer was considering whether he had not better have X. called to assist in running the place, when the door opened and X. walked in.
Now on very dark nights, light is a deadly enemy to piloting; you are aware that if you stand in a lighted room, on such a night, you cannot see things in the street to any purpose; but if you put out the lights and stand in the gloom you can make out
So, on very dark nights, pilots do not smoke; they allow no fire in the pilot-house stove if there is a crack which can allow the least ray to escape; they order the furnaces to be curtained with huge tarpaulins and the sky-lights to be closely blinded.
Then no light whatever issues from the boat.
The undefinable shape that now entered the pilot-house had Mr. X.'s voice.
This said-- 'Let me take her, George; I've seen this place since you have, and it is so crooked that I reckon I can run it myself easier than I could tell you how to do it.
' 'It is kind of you, and I swear _I_ am willing.
I haven't got another drop of perspiration left in me.
I have been spinning around and around the wheel like a squirrel.
It is so dark I can't tell which way she is swinging till she is coming around like a whirligig.
' So Ealer took a seat on the bench, panting and breathless.
The black phantom assumed the wheel without saying anything, steadied the waltzing steamer with a turn or two, and then stood at ease, coaxing her a little to this side and then to that, as gently and as sweetly as if the time had been noonday.
When Ealer observed this marvel of steering, he wished he had not confessed!
He stared, and wondered, and finally said-- 'Well, I thought I knew how to steer a steamboat, but that was another mistake of mine.
' X. said nothing, but went serenely on with his work.
He rang for the leads; he rang to slow down the steam; he worked the boat carefully and neatly into invisible marks, then stood at the center of the wheel and peered blandly out into the blackness, fore and aft, to verify his position; as the leads shoaled
Ealer let his long-pent breath pour out in a great, relieving sigh, and said-- 'That's the sweetest piece of piloting that was ever done on the Mississippi River!
I wouldn't believed it could be done, if I hadn't seen it.
' There was no reply, and he added-- 'Just hold her five minutes longer, partner, and let me run down and get a cup of coffee.
' A minute later Ealer was biting into a pie, down in the 'texas,' and comforting himself with coffee.
Just then the night watchman happened in, and was about to happen out again, when he noticed Ealer and exclaimed-- 'Who is at the wheel, sir?
' 'X.
' 'Dart for the pilot-house, quicker than lightning!
' The next moment both men were flying up the pilot-house companion way, three steps at a jump!
Nobody there!
The great steamer was whistling down the middle of the river at her own sweet will!
The watchman shot out of the place again; Ealer seized the wheel, set an engine back with power, and held his breath while the boat reluctantly swung away from a 'towhead' which she was about to knock into the middle of the Gulf of Mexico!
By and by the watchman came back and said-- 'Didn't that lunatic tell you he was asleep, when he first came up here?
' '_No_.
' 'Well, he was.
I found him walking along on top of the railings just as unconcerned as another man would walk a pavement; and I put him to bed; now just this minute there he was again, away astern, going through that sort of tight-rope deviltry the same as before.
' 'Well, I think I'll stay by, next time he has one of those fits.
But I hope he'll have them often.
You just ought to have seen him take this boat through Helena crossing.
I never saw anything so gaudy before.
And if he can do such gold-leaf, kid-glove, diamond-breastpin piloting when he is sound asleep, what _couldn't_ he do if he was dead!
' CHAPTER 12 Sounding WHEN the river is very low, and one's steamboat is 'drawing all the water' there is in the channel,--or a few inches more, as was often the case in the old times,--one must be painfully circumspect in his piloting.
We used to have to 'sound' a number of particularly bad places almost every trip when the river was at a very low stage.
Sounding is done in this way.
The boat ties up at the shore, just above the shoal crossing; the pilot not on watch takes his 'cub' or steersman and a picked crew of men (sometimes an officer also), and goes out in the yawl--provided the boat has not that rare and sumptuous luxury, a
The whistle signals are seldom necessary, however; never, perhaps, except when the wind confuses the significant ripples upon the water's surface.
When the yawl has reached the shoal place, the speed is slackened, the pilot begins to sound the depth with a pole ten or twelve feet long, and the steersman at the tiller obeys the order to 'hold her up to starboard;' or, 'let her fall off to
' When the measurements indicate that the yawl is approaching the shoalest part of the reef, the command is given to 'ease all!
' Then the men stop rowing and the yawl drifts with the current.
The next order is, 'Stand by with the buoy!
' The moment the shallowest point is reached, the pilot delivers the order, 'Let go the buoy!
' and over she goes.
If the pilot is not satisfied, he sounds the place again; if he finds better water higher up or lower down, he removes the buoy to that place.
Being finally satisfied, he gives the order, and all the men stand their oars straight up in the air, in line; a blast from the boat's whistle indicates that the signal has been seen; then the men 'give way' on their oars and lay the yawl alongside the
Or maybe she doesn't; maybe she 'strikes and swings.
' Then she has to while away several hours (or days) sparring herself off.
Sometimes a buoy is not laid at all, but the yawl goes ahead, hunting the best water, and the steamer follows along in its wake.
Often there is a deal of fun and excitement about sounding, especially if it is a glorious summer day, or a blustering night.
But in winter the cold and the peril take most of the fun out of it.
A buoy is nothing but a board four or five feet long, with one end turned up; it is a reversed school-house bench, with one of the supports left and the other removed.
It is anchored on the shoalest part of the reef by a rope with a heavy stone made fast to the end of it.
But for the resistance of the turned-up end of the reversed bench, the current would pull the buoy under water.
At night, a paper lantern with a candle in it is fastened on top of the buoy, and this can be seen a mile or more, a little glimmering spark in the waste of blackness.
Nothing delights a cub so much as an opportunity to go out sounding.
There is such an air of adventure about it; often there is danger; it is so gaudy and man-of-war-like to sit up in the stern-sheets and steer a swift yawl; there is something fine about the exultant spring of the boat when an experienced old sailor crew
It is such grandeur, too, to the cub, to get a chance to give an order; for often the pilot will simply say, 'Let her go about!
' and leave the rest to the cub, who instantly cries, in his sternest tone of command, 'Ease starboard!
Strong on the larboard!
Starboard give way!
With a will, men!
' The cub enjoys sounding for the further reason that the eyes of the passengers are watching all the yawl's movements with absorbing interest if the time be daylight; and if it be night he knows that those same wondering eyes are fastened upon the yawl's
One trip a pretty girl of sixteen spent her time in our pilot-house with her uncle and aunt, every day and all day long.
I fell in love with her.
So did Mr. Thornburg's cub, Tom G----.
Tom and I had been bosom friends until this time; but now a coolness began to arise.
I told the girl a good many of my river adventures, and made myself out a good deal of a hero; Tom tried to make himself appear to be a hero, too, and succeeded to some extent, but then he always had a way of embroidering.
However, virtue is its own reward, so I was a barely perceptible trifle ahead in the contest.
About this time something happened which promised handsomely for me: the pilots decided to sound the crossing at the head of 21.
This would occur about nine or ten o'clock at night, when the passengers would be still up; it would be Mr. Thornburg's watch, therefore my chief would have to do the sounding.
We had a perfect love of a sounding-boat--long, trim, graceful, and as fleet as a greyhound; her thwarts were cushioned; she carried twelve oarsmen; one of the mates was always sent in her to transmit orders to her crew, for ours was a steamer where no end
We tied up at the shore above 21, and got ready.
It was a foul night, and the river was so wide, there, that a landsman's uneducated eyes could discern no opposite shore through such a gloom.
The passengers were alert and interested; everything was satisfactory.
As I hurried through the engine-room, picturesquely gotten up in storm toggery, I met Tom, and could not forbear delivering myself of a mean speech-- 'Ain't you glad _you _don't have to go out sounding?
' Tom was passing on, but he quickly turned, and said-- 'Now just for that, you can go and get the sounding-pole yourself.
I was going after it, but I'd see you in Halifax, now, before I'd do it.
' 'Who wants you to get it?
I don't.
It's in the sounding-boat.
' 'It ain't, either.
It's been new-painted; and it's been up on the ladies' cabin guards two days, drying.
' I flew back, and shortly arrived among the crowd of watching and wondering ladies just in time to hear the command: 'Give way, men!
' I looked over, and there was the gallant sounding-boat booming away, the unprincipled Tom presiding at the tiller, and my chief sitting by him with the sounding-pole which I had been sent on a fool's errand to fetch.
Then that young girl said to me-- 'Oh, how awful to have to go out in that little boat on such a night!
Do you think there is any danger?
' I would rather have been stabbed.
I went off, full of venom, to help in the pilot-house.
By and by the boat's lantern disappeared, and after an interval a wee spark glimmered upon the face of the water a mile away.
Mr. Thornburg blew the whistle, in acknowledgment, backed the steamer out, and made for it.
We flew along for a while, then slackened steam and went cautiously gliding toward the spark.
Presently Mr. Thornburg exclaimed-- 'Hello, the buoy-lantern's out!
' He stopped the engines.
A moment or two later he said-- 'Why, there it is again!
' So he came ahead on the engines once more, and rang for the leads.
Gradually the water shoaled up, and then began to deepen again!
Mr. Thornburg muttered-- 'Well, I don't understand this.
I believe that buoy has drifted off the reef.
Seems to be a little too far to the left.
No matter, it is safest to run over it anyhow.
' So, in that solid world of darkness we went creeping down on the light.
Just as our bows were in the act of plowing over it, Mr. Thornburg seized the bell-ropes, rang a startling peal, and exclaimed-- 'My soul, it's the sounding-boat!
' A sudden chorus of wild alarms burst out far below--a pause--and then the sound of grinding and crashing followed.
Mr. Thornburg exclaimed-- 'There!
the paddle-wheel has ground the sounding-boat to lucifer matches!
Run!
See who is killed!
' I was on the main deck in the twinkling of an eye.
My chief and the third mate and nearly all the men were safe.
They had discovered their danger when it was too late to pull out of the way; then, when the great guards overshadowed them a moment later, they were prepared and knew what to do; at my chiefs order they sprang at the right instant, seized the guard, and
The next moment the sounding-yawl swept aft to the wheel and was struck and splintered to atoms.
Two of the men and the cub Tom, were missing--a fact which spread like wildfire over the boat.
The passengers came flocking to the forward gangway, ladies and all, anxious-eyed, white-faced, and talked in awed voices of the dreadful thing.
And often and again I heard them say, 'Poor fellows!
poor boy, poor boy!
' By this time the boat's yawl was manned and away, to search for the missing.
Now a faint call was heard, off to the left.
The yawl had disappeared in the other direction.
Half the people rushed to one side to encourage the swimmer with their shouts; the other half rushed the other way to shriek to the yawl to turn about.
By the callings, the swimmer was approaching, but some said the sound showed failing strength.
The crowd massed themselves against the boiler-deck railings, leaning over and staring into the gloom; and every faint and fainter cry wrung from them such words as, 'Ah, poor fellow, poor fellow!
is there no way to save him?
' But still the cries held out, and drew nearer, and presently the voice said pluckily-- 'I can make it!
Stand by with a rope!
' What a rousing cheer they gave him!
The chief mate took his stand in the glare of a torch-basket, a coil of rope in his hand, and his men grouped about him.
The next moment the swimmer's face appeared in the circle of light, and in another one the owner of it was hauled aboard, limp and drenched, while cheer on cheer went up.
It was that devil Tom.
The yawl crew searched everywhere, but found no sign of the two men.
They probably failed to catch the guard, tumbled back, and were struck by the wheel and killed.
Tom had never jumped for the guard at all, but had plunged head-first into the river and dived under the wheel.
It was nothing; I could have done it easy enough, and I said so; but everybody went on just the same, making a wonderful to do over that ass, as if he had done something great.
That girl couldn't seem to have enough of that pitiful 'hero' the rest of the trip; but little I cared; I loathed her, any way.
The way we came to mistake the sounding-boat's lantern for the buoy-light was this.
My chief said that after laying the buoy he fell away and watched it till it seemed to be secure; then he took up a position a hundred yards below it and a little to one side of the steamer's course, headed the sounding-boat up-stream, and waited.
Having to wait some time, he and the officer got to talking; he looked up when he judged that the steamer was about on the reef; saw that the buoy was gone, but supposed that the steamer had already run over it; he went on with his talk; he noticed that
' and the next instant the jump was made.
CHAPTER 13 A Pilot's Needs BUT I am wandering from what I was intending to do, that is, make plainer than perhaps appears in the previous chapters, some of the peculiar requirements of the science of piloting.
First of all, there is one faculty which a pilot must incessantly cultivate until he has brought it to absolute perfection.
Nothing short of perfection will do.
That faculty is memory.
He cannot stop with merely thinking a thing is so and so; he must know it; for this is eminently one of the 'exact' sciences.
With what scorn a pilot was looked upon, in the old times, if he ever ventured to deal in that feeble phrase 'I think,' instead of the vigorous one 'I know!
' One cannot easily realize what a tremendous thing it is to know every trivial detail of twelve hundred miles of river and know it with absolute exactness.
If you will take the longest street in New York, and travel up and down it, conning its features patiently until you know every house and window and door and lamp-post and big and little sign by heart, and know them so accurately that you can instantly
And then if you will go on until you know every street crossing, the character, size, and position of the crossing-stones, and the varying depth of mud in each of those numberless places, you will have some idea of what the pilot must know in order to keep
Next, if you will take half of the signs in that long street, and _change their places_ once a month, and still manage to know their new positions accurately on dark nights, and keep up with these repeated changes without making any mistakes, you will
I think a pilot's memory is about the most wonderful thing in the world.
To know the Old and New Testaments by heart, and be able to recite them glibly, forward or backward, or begin at random anywhere in the book and recite both ways and never trip or make a mistake, is no extravagant mass of knowledge, and no marvelous
I make this comparison deliberately, and believe I am not expanding the truth when I do it.
Many will think my figure too strong, but pilots will not.
And how easily and comfortably the pilot's memory does its work; how placidly effortless is its way; how _unconsciously _it lays up its vast stores, hour by hour, day by day, and never loses or mislays a single valuable package of them all!
Take an instance.
Let a leadsman cry, 'Half twain!
half twain!
half twain!
half twain!
half twain!
' until it become as monotonous as the ticking of a clock; let conversation be going on all the time, and the pilot be doing his share of the talking, and no longer consciously listening to the leadsman; and in the midst of this endless string of half
' be interjected, without emphasis, and then the half twain cry go on again, just as before: two or three weeks later that pilot can describe with precision the boat's position in the river when that quarter twain was uttered, and give you such a lot of
The cry of 'quarter twain' did not really take his mind from his talk, but his trained faculties instantly photographed the bearings, noted the change of depth, and laid up the important details for future reference without requiring any assistance from
If you were walking and talking with a friend, and another friend at your side kept up a monotonous repetition of the vowel sound A, for a couple of blocks, and then in the midst interjected an R, thus, A, A, A, A, A, R, A, A, A, etc.
, and gave the R no emphasis, you would not be able to state, two or three weeks afterward, that the R had been put in, nor be able to tell what objects you were passing at the moment it was done.
But you could if your memory had been patiently and laboriously trained to do that sort of thing mechanically.
Give a man a tolerably fair memory to start with, and piloting will develop it into a very colossus of capability.
But _only in the matters it is daily drilled in_.
A time would come when the man's faculties could not help noticing landmarks and soundings, and his memory could not help holding on to them with the grip of a vise; but if you asked that same man at noon what he had had for breakfast, it would be ten
Astonishing things can be done with the human memory if you will devote it faithfully to one particular line of business.
At the time that wages soared so high on the Missouri River, my chief, Mr. Bixby, went up there and learned more than a thousand miles of that stream with an ease and rapidity that were astonishing.
When he had seen each division once in the daytime and once at night, his education was so nearly complete that he took out a 'daylight' license; a few trips later he took out a full license, and went to piloting day and night--and he ranked A 1, too.
Mr. Bixby placed me as steersman for a while under a pilot whose feats of memory were a constant marvel to me.
However, his memory was born in him, I think, not built.
For instance, somebody would mention a name.
Instantly Mr. Brown would break in-- 'Oh, I knew _him_.
Sallow-faced, red-headed fellow, with a little scar on the side of his throat, like a splinter under the flesh.
He was only in the Southern trade six months.
That was thirteen years ago.
I made a trip with him.
There was five feet in the upper river then; the "Henry Blake" grounded at the foot of Tower Island drawing four and a half; the "George Elliott" unshipped her rudder on the wreck of the "Sunflower"--' 'Why, the "Sunflower" didn't sink until--' 'I know
Captain Hardy stuck a nail in his foot the 6th of July of the next year, and died of the lockjaw on the 15th.
His brother died two years after 3rd of March,--erysipelas.
I never saw either of the Hardys,--they were Alleghany River men,--but people who knew them told me all these things.
And they said Captain Hardy wore yarn socks winter and summer just the same, and his first wife's name was Jane Shook--she was from New England--and his second one died in a lunatic asylum.
It was in the blood.
She was from Lexington, Kentucky.
Name was Horton before she was married.
' And so on, by the hour, the man's tongue would go.
He could _not _forget any thing.
It was simply impossible.
The most trivial details remained as distinct and luminous in his head, after they had lain there for years, as the most memorable events.
His was not simply a pilot's memory; its grasp was universal.
If he were talking about a trifling letter he had received seven years before, he was pretty sure to deliver you the entire screed from memory.
And then without observing that he was departing from the true line of his talk, he was more than likely to hurl in a long-drawn parenthetical biography of the writer of that letter; and you were lucky indeed if he did not take up that writer's relatives,
Such a memory as that is a great misfortune.
To it, all occurrences are of the same size.
Its possessor cannot distinguish an interesting circumstance from an uninteresting one.
As a talker, he is bound to clog his narrative with tiresome details and make himself an insufferable bore.
Moreover, he cannot stick to his subject.
He picks up every little grain of memory he discerns in his way, and so is led aside.
Mr. Brown would start out with the honest intention of telling you a vastly funny anecdote about a dog.
He would be 'so full of laugh' that he could hardly begin; then his memory would start with the dog's breed and personal appearance; drift into a history of his owner; of his owner's family, with descriptions of weddings and burials that had occurred in
Pork and hay would suggest corn and fodder; corn and fodder would suggest cows and horses; cows and horses would suggest the circus and certain celebrated bare-back riders; the transition from the circus to the menagerie was easy and natural; from the
And the original first mention would be all you had learned about that dog, after all this waiting and hungering.
A pilot must have a memory; but there are two higher qualities which he must also have.
He must have good and quick judgment and decision, and a cool, calm courage that no peril can shake.
Give a man the merest trifle of pluck to start with, and by the time he has become a pilot he cannot be unmanned by any danger a steamboat can get into; but one cannot quite say the same for judgment.
Judgment is a matter of brains, and a man must _start _with a good stock of that article or he will never succeed as a pilot.
The growth of courage in the pilot-house is steady all the time, but it does not reach a high and satisfactory condition until some time after the young pilot has been 'standing his own watch,' alone and under the staggering weight of all the
When an apprentice has become pretty thoroughly acquainted with the river, he goes clattering along so fearlessly with his steamboat, night or day, that he presently begins to imagine that it is _his _courage that animates him; but the first time the pilot
He discovers that the article has been left out of his own cargo altogether.
The whole river is bristling with exigencies in a moment; he is not prepared for them; he does not know how to meet them; all his knowledge forsakes him; and within fifteen minutes he is as white as a sheet and scared almost to death.
Therefore pilots wisely train these cubs by various strategic tricks to look danger in the face a little more calmly.
A favorite way of theirs is to play a friendly swindle upon the candidate.
Mr. Bixby served me in this fashion once, and for years afterward I used to blush even in my sleep when I thought of it.
I had become a good steersman; so good, indeed, that I had all the work to do on our watch, night and day; Mr. Bixby seldom made a suggestion to me; all he ever did was to take the wheel on particularly bad nights or in particularly bad crossings, land the
The lower river was about bank-full, and if anybody had questioned my ability to run any crossing between Cairo and New Orleans without help or instruction, I should have felt irreparably hurt.
The idea of being afraid of any crossing in the lot, in the _day-time_, was a thing too preposterous for contemplation.
Well, one matchless summer's day I was bowling down the bend above island 66, brimful of self-conceit and carrying my nose as high as a giraffe's, when Mr. Bixby said-- 'I am going below a while.
I suppose you know the next crossing?
' This was almost an affront.
It was about the plainest and simplest crossing in the whole river.
One couldn't come to any harm, whether he ran it right or not; and as for depth, there never had been any bottom there.
I knew all this, perfectly well.
'Know how to _run _it?
Why, I can run it with my eyes shut.
' 'How much water is there in it?
' 'Well, that is an odd question.
I couldn't get bottom there with a church steeple.
' 'You think so, do you?
' The very tone of the question shook my confidence.
That was what Mr. Bixby was expecting.
He left, without saying anything more.
I began to imagine all sorts of things.
Mr. Bixby, unknown to me, of course, sent somebody down to the forecastle with some mysterious instructions to the leadsmen, another messenger was sent to whisper among the officers, and then Mr. Bixby went into hiding behind a smoke-stack where he could
Presently the captain stepped out on the hurricane deck; next the chief mate appeared; then a clerk.
Every moment or two a straggler was added to my audience; and before I got to the head of the island I had fifteen or twenty people assembled down there under my nose.
I began to wonder what the trouble was.
As I started across, the captain glanced aloft at me and said, with a sham uneasiness in his voice-- 'Where is Mr. Bixby?
' 'Gone below, sir.
' But that did the business for me.
My imagination began to construct dangers out of nothing, and they multiplied faster than I could keep the run of them.
All at once I imagined I saw shoal water ahead!
The wave of coward agony that surged through me then came near dislocating every joint in me.
All my confidence in that crossing vanished.
I seized the bell-rope; dropped it, ashamed; seized it again; dropped it once more; clutched it tremblingly one again, and pulled it so feebly that I could hardly hear the stroke myself.
Captain and mate sang out instantly, and both together-- 'Starboard lead there!
and quick about it!
' This was another shock.
I began to climb the wheel like a squirrel; but I would hardly get the boat started to port before I would see new dangers on that side, and away I would spin to the other; only to find perils accumulating to starboard, and be crazy to get to port again.
Then came the leadsman's sepulchral cry-- 'D-e-e-p four!
' Deep four in a bottomless crossing!
The terror of it took my breath away.
'M-a-r-k three!
...
M-a-r-k three...
Quarter less three!
...
Half twain!
' This was frightful!
I seized the bell-ropes and stopped the engines.
'Quarter twain!
Quarter twain!
_Mark _twain!
' I was helpless.
I did not know what in the world to do.
I was quaking from head to foot, and I could have hung my hat on my eyes, they stuck out so far.
'Quarter _less _twain!
Nine and a _half_!
' We were _drawing _nine!
My hands were in a nerveless flutter.
I could not ring a bell intelligibly with them.
I flew to the speaking-tube and shouted to the engineer-- 'Oh, Ben, if you love me, _back _her!
Quick, Ben!
Oh, back the immortal _soul_ out of her!
' I heard the door close gently.
I looked around, and there stood Mr. Bixby, smiling a bland, sweet smile.
Then the audience on the hurricane deck sent up a thundergust of humiliating laughter.
I saw it all, now, and I felt meaner than the meanest man in human history.
I laid in the lead, set the boat in her marks, came ahead on the engines, and said-- 'It was a fine trick to play on an orphan, _wasn't_ it?
I suppose I'll never hear the last of how I was ass enough to heave the lead at the head of 66.
' 'Well, no, you won't, maybe.
In fact I hope you won't; for I want you to learn something by that experience.
Didn't you _know _there was no bottom in that crossing?
' 'Yes, sir, I did.
' 'Very well, then.
You shouldn't have allowed me or anybody else to shake your confidence in that knowledge.
Try to remember that.
And another thing: when you get into a dangerous place, don't turn coward.
That isn't going to help matters any.
' It was a good enough lesson, but pretty hardly learned.
Yet about the hardest part of it was that for months I so often had to hear a phrase which I had conceived a particular distaste for.
It was, 'Oh, Ben, if you love me, back her!
' CHAPTER 14 Rank and Dignity of Piloting IN my preceding chapters I have tried, by going into the minutiae of the science of piloting, to carry the reader step by step to a comprehension of what the science consists of; and at the same time I have tried
If I have seemed to love my subject, it is no surprising thing, for I loved the profession far better than any I have followed since, and I took a measureless pride in it.
The reason is plain: a pilot, in those days, was the only unfettered and entirely independent human being that lived in the earth.
Kings are but the hampered servants of parliament and people; parliaments sit in chains forged by their constituency; the editor of a newspaper cannot be independent, but must work with one hand tied behind him by party and patrons, and be content to utter
We write frankly and fearlessly, but then we 'modify' before we print.
In truth, every man and woman and child has a master, and worries and frets in servitude; but in the day I write of, the Mississippi pilot had none.
The captain could stand upon the hurricane deck, in the pomp of a very brief authority, and give him five or six orders while the vessel backed into the stream, and then that skipper's reign was over.
The moment that the boat was under way in the river, she was under the sole and unquestioned control of the pilot.
He could do with her exactly as he pleased, run her when and whither he chose, and tie her up to the bank whenever his judgment said that that course was best.
His movements were entirely free; he consulted no one, he received commands from nobody, he promptly resented even the merest suggestions.
Indeed, the law of the United States forbade him to listen to commands or suggestions, rightly considering that the pilot necessarily knew better how to handle the boat than anybody could tell him.
So here was the novelty of a king without a keeper, an absolute monarch who was absolute in sober truth and not by a fiction of words.
I have seen a boy of eighteen taking a great steamer serenely into what seemed almost certain destruction, and the aged captain standing mutely by, filled with apprehension but powerless to interfere.
His interference, in that particular instance, might have been an excellent thing, but to permit it would have been to establish a most pernicious precedent.
It will easily be guessed, considering the pilot's boundless authority, that he was a great personage in the old steamboating days.
He was treated with marked courtesy by the captain and with marked deference by all the officers and servants; and this deferential spirit was quickly communicated to the passengers, too.
I think pilots were about the only people I ever knew who failed to show, in some degree, embarrassment in the presence of traveling foreign princes.
But then, people in one's own grade of life are not usually embarrassing objects.
By long habit, pilots came to put all their wishes in the form of commands.
It 'gravels' me, to this day, to put my will in the weak shape of a request, instead of launching it in the crisp language of an order.
In those old days, to load a steamboat at St. Louis, take her to New Orleans and back, and discharge cargo, consumed about twenty-five days, on an average.
Seven or eight of these days the boat spent at the wharves of St. Louis and New Orleans, and every soul on board was hard at work, except the two pilots; they did nothing but play gentleman up town, and receive the same wages for it as if they had been on
The moment the boat touched the wharf at either city, they were ashore; and they were not likely to be seen again till the last bell was ringing and everything in readiness for another voyage.
When a captain got hold of a pilot of particularly high reputation, he took pains to keep him.
When wages were four hundred dollars a month on the Upper Mississippi, I have known a captain to keep such a pilot in idleness, under full pay, three months at a time, while the river was frozen up.
And one must remember that in those cheap times four hundred dollars was a salary of almost inconceivable splendor.
Few men on shore got such pay as that, and when they did they were mightily looked up to.
When pilots from either end of the river wandered into our small Missouri village, they were sought by the best and the fairest, and treated with exalted respect.
Lying in port under wages was a thing which many pilots greatly enjoyed and appreciated; especially if they belonged in the Missouri River in the heyday of that trade (Kansas times), and got nine hundred dollars a trip, which was equivalent to about
Here is a conversation of that day.
A chap out of the Illinois River, with a little stern-wheel tub, accosts a couple of ornate and gilded Missouri River pilots-- 'Gentlemen, I've got a pretty good trip for the upcountry, and shall want you about a month.
How much will it be?
' 'Eighteen hundred dollars apiece.
' 'Heavens and earth!
You take my boat, let me have your wages, and I'll divide!
' I will remark, in passing, that Mississippi steamboatmen were important in landsmen's eyes (and in their own, too, in a degree) according to the dignity of the boat they were on.
For instance, it was a proud thing to be of the crew of such stately craft as the 'Aleck Scott' or the 'Grand Turk.
' Negro firemen, deck hands, and barbers belonging to those boats were distinguished personages in their grade of life, and they were well aware of that fact too.
A stalwart darkey once gave offense at a negro ball in New Orleans by putting on a good many airs.
Finally one of the managers bustled up to him and said-- 'Who _is_ you, any way?
Who is you?
dat's what I wants to know!
' The offender was not disconcerted in the least, but swelled himself up and threw that into his voice which showed that he knew he was not putting on all those airs on a stinted capital.
'Who _is_ I?
Who _is _I?
I let you know mighty quick who I is!
I want you niggers to understan' dat I fires de middle do'{footnote [Door]} on de "Aleck Scott"!
' That was sufficient.
The barber of the 'Grand Turk' was a spruce young negro, who aired his importance with balmy complacency, and was greatly courted by the circle in which he moved.
The young colored population of New Orleans were much given to flirting, at twilight, on the banquettes of the back streets.
Somebody saw and heard something like the following, one evening, in one of those localities.
A middle-aged negro woman projected her head through a broken pane and shouted (very willing that the neighbors should hear and envy), 'You Mary Ann, come in de house dis minute!
Stannin' out dah foolin' 'long wid dat low trash, an' heah's de barber offn de "Gran' Turk" wants to conwerse wid you!
' My reference, a moment ago, to the fact that a pilot's peculiar official position placed him out of the reach of criticism or command, brings Stephen W---- naturally to my mind.
He was a gifted pilot, a good fellow, a tireless talker, and had both wit and humor in him.
He had a most irreverent independence, too, and was deliciously easy-going and comfortable in the presence of age, official dignity, and even the most august wealth.
He always had work, he never saved a penny, he was a most persuasive borrower, he was in debt to every pilot on the river, and to the majority of the captains.
He could throw a sort of splendor around a bit of harum-scarum, devil-may-care piloting, that made it almost fascinating--but not to everybody.
He made a trip with good old Captain Y----once, and was 'relieved' from duty when the boat got to New Orleans.
Somebody expressed surprise at the discharge.
Captain Y---- shuddered at the mere mention of Stephen.
Then his poor, thin old voice piped out something like this:-- 'Why, bless me!
I wouldn't have such a wild creature on my boat for the world--not for the whole world!
He swears, he sings, he whistles, he yells--I never saw such an Injun to yell.
All times of the night--it never made any difference to him.
He would just yell that way, not for anything in particular, but merely on account of a kind of devilish comfort he got out of it.
I never could get into a sound sleep but he would fetch me out of bed, all in a cold sweat, with one of those dreadful war-whoops.
A queer being--very queer being; no respect for anything or anybody.
Sometimes he called me "Johnny".
And he kept a fiddle, and a cat.
He played execrably.
This seemed to distress the cat, and so the cat would howl.
Nobody could sleep where that man--and his family--was.
And reckless.
There never was anything like it.
Now you may believe it or not, but as sure as I am sitting here, he brought my boat a-tilting down through those awful snags at Chicot under a rattling head of steam, and the wind a-blowing like the very nation, at that!
My officers will tell you so.
They saw it.
And, sir, while he was a-tearing right down through those snags, and I a-shaking in my shoes and praying, I wish I may never speak again if he didn't pucker up his mouth and go to _whistling_!
Yes, sir; whistling "Buffalo gals, can't you come out tonight, can't you come out to-night, can't you come out to-night;" and doing it as calmly as if we were attending a funeral and weren't related to the corpse.
And when I remonstrated with him about it, he smiled down on me as if I was his child, and told me to run in the house and try to be good, and not be meddling with my superiors!
' Once a pretty mean captain caught Stephen in New Orleans out of work and as usual out of money.
He laid steady siege to Stephen, who was in a very 'close place,' and finally persuaded him to hire with him at one hundred and twenty-five dollars per month, just half wages, the captain agreeing not to divulge the secret and so bring down the contempt of
But the boat was not more than a day out of New Orleans before Stephen discovered that the captain was boasting of his exploit, and that all the officers had been told.
Stephen winced, but said nothing.
About the middle of the afternoon the captain stepped out on the hurricane deck, cast his eye around, and looked a good deal surprised.
He glanced inquiringly aloft at Stephen, but Stephen was whistling placidly, and attending to business.
The captain stood around a while in evident discomfort, and once or twice seemed about to make a suggestion; but the etiquette of the river taught him to avoid that sort of rashness, and so he managed to hold his peace.
He chafed and puzzled a few minutes longer, then retired to his apartments.
But soon he was out again, and apparently more perplexed than ever.
Presently he ventured to remark, with deference-- 'Pretty good stage of the river now, ain't it, sir?
' 'Well, I should say so!
Bank-full _is_ a pretty liberal stage.
' 'Seems to be a good deal of current here.
' 'Good deal don't describe it!
It's worse than a mill-race.
' 'Isn't it easier in toward shore than it is out here in the middle?
' 'Yes, I reckon it is; but a body can't be too careful with a steamboat.
It's pretty safe out here; can't strike any bottom here, you can depend on that.
' The captain departed, looking rueful enough.
At this rate, he would probably die of old age before his boat got to St. Louis.
Next day he appeared on deck and again found Stephen faithfully standing up the middle of the river, fighting the whole vast force of the Mississippi, and whistling the same placid tune.
This thing was becoming serious.
In by the shore was a slower boat clipping along in the easy water and gaining steadily; she began to make for an island chute; Stephen stuck to the middle of the river.
Speech was _wrung _from the captain.
He said-- 'Mr. W----, don't that chute cut off a good deal of distance?
' 'I think it does, but I don't know.
' 'Don't know!
Well, isn't there water enough in it now to go through?
' 'I expect there is, but I am not certain.
' 'Upon my word this is odd!
Why, those pilots on that boat yonder are going to try it.
Do you mean to say that you don't know as much as they do?
' '_They_!
Why, _they _are two-hundred-and-fifty-dollar pilots!
But don't you be uneasy; I know as much as any man can afford to know for a hundred and twenty-five!
' The captain surrendered.
Five minutes later Stephen was bowling through the chute and showing the rival boat a two-hundred-and-fifty-dollar pair of heels.
CHAPTER 15 The Pilots' Monopoly ONE day, on board the 'Aleck Scott,' my chief, Mr. Bixby, was crawling carefully through a close place at Cat Island, both leads going, and everybody holding his breath.
The captain, a nervous, apprehensive man, kept still as long as he could, but finally broke down and shouted from the hurricane deck-- 'For gracious' sake, give her steam, Mr. Bixby!
give her steam!
She'll never raise the reef on this headway!
' For all the effect that was produced upon Mr. Bixby, one would have supposed that no remark had been made.
But five minutes later, when the danger was past and the leads laid in, he burst instantly into a consuming fury, and gave the captain the most admirable cursing I ever listened to.
No bloodshed ensued; but that was because the captain's cause was weak; for ordinarily he was not a man to take correction quietly.
Having now set forth in detail the nature of the science of piloting, and likewise described the rank which the pilot held among the fraternity of steamboatmen, this seems a fitting place to say a few words about an organization which the pilots once
It was curious and noteworthy in this, that it was perhaps the compactest, the completest, and the strongest commercial organization ever formed among men.
For a long time wages had been two hundred and fifty dollars a month; but curiously enough, as steamboats multiplied and business increased, the wages began to fall little by little.
It was easy to discover the reason of this.
Too many pilots were being 'made.
' It was nice to have a 'cub,' a steersman, to do all the hard work for a couple of years, gratis, while his master sat on a high bench and smoked; all pilots and captains had sons or nephews who wanted to be pilots.
By and by it came to pass that nearly every pilot on the river had a steersman.
When a steersman had made an amount of progress that was satisfactory to any two pilots in the trade, they could get a pilot's license for him by signing an application directed to the United States Inspector.
Nothing further was needed; usually no questions were asked, no proofs of capacity required.
Very well, this growing swarm of new pilots presently began to undermine the wages, in order to get berths.
Too late--apparently--the knights of the tiller perceived their mistake.
Plainly, something had to be done, and quickly; but what was to be the needful thing.
A close organization.
Nothing else would answer.
To compass this seemed an impossibility; so it was talked, and talked, and then dropped.
It was too likely to ruin whoever ventured to move in the matter.
But at last about a dozen of the boldest--and some of them the best--pilots on the river launched themselves into the enterprise and took all the chances.
They got a special charter from the legislature, with large powers, under the name of the Pilots' Benevolent Association; elected their officers, completed their organization, contributed capital, put 'association' wages up to two hundred and fifty dollars
But there were two or three unnoticed trifles in their by-laws which had the seeds of propagation in them.
For instance, all idle members of the association, in good standing, were entitled to a pension of twenty-five dollars per month.
This began to bring in one straggler after another from the ranks of the new-fledged pilots, in the dull (summer) season.
Better have twenty-five dollars than starve; the initiation fee was only twelve dollars, and no dues required from the unemployed.
Also, the widows of deceased members in good standing could draw twenty-five dollars per month, and a certain sum for each of their children.
Also, the said deceased would be buried at the association's expense.
These things resurrected all the superannuated and forgotten pilots in the Mississippi Valley.
They came from farms, they came from interior villages, they came from everywhere.
They came on crutches, on drays, in ambulances,--any way, so they got there.
They paid in their twelve dollars, and straightway began to draw out twenty-five dollars a month, and calculate their burial bills.
By and by, all the useless, helpless pilots, and a dozen first-class ones, were in the association, and nine-tenths of the best pilots out of it and laughing at it.
It was the laughing-stock of the whole river.
Everybody joked about the by-law requiring members to pay ten per cent.
of their wages, every month, into the treasury for the support of the association, whereas all the members were outcast and tabooed, and no one would employ them.
Everybody was derisively grateful to the association for taking all the worthless pilots out of the way and leaving the whole field to the excellent and the deserving; and everybody was not only jocularly grateful for that, but for a result which naturally
Wages had gone up from the low figure of one hundred dollars a month to one hundred and twenty-five, and in some cases to one hundred and fifty; and it was great fun to enlarge upon the fact that this charming thing had been accomplished by a body of men
Some of the jokers used to call at the association rooms and have a good time chaffing the members and offering them the charity of taking them as steersmen for a trip, so that they could see what the forgotten river looked like.
However, the association was content; or at least it gave no sign to the contrary.
Now and then it captured a pilot who was 'out of luck,' and added him to its list; and these later additions were very valuable, for they were good pilots; the incompetent ones had all been absorbed before.
As business freshened, wages climbed gradually up to two hundred and fifty dollars--the association figure--and became firmly fixed there; and still without benefiting a member of that body, for no member was hired.
The hilarity at the association's expense burst all bounds, now.
There was no end to the fun which that poor martyr had to put up with.
However, it is a long lane that has no turning.
Winter approached, business doubled and trebled, and an avalanche of Missouri, Illinois and Upper Mississippi River boats came pouring down to take a chance in the New Orleans trade.
All of a sudden pilots were in great demand, and were correspondingly scarce.
The time for revenge was come.
It was a bitter pill to have to accept association pilots at last, yet captains and owners agreed that there was no other way.
But none of these outcasts offered!
So there was a still bitterer pill to be swallowed: they must be sought out and asked for their services.
Captain ---- was the first man who found it necessary to take the dose, and he had been the loudest derider of the organization.
He hunted up one of the best of the association pilots and said-- 'Well, you boys have rather got the best of us for a little while, so I'll give in with as good a grace as I can.
I've come to hire you; get your trunk aboard right away.
I want to leave at twelve o'clock.
' 'I don't know about that.
Who is your other pilot?
' 'I've got I. S----.
Why?
' 'I can't go with him.
He don't belong to the association.
' 'What!
' 'It's so.
' 'Do you mean to tell me that you won't turn a wheel with one of the very best and oldest pilots on the river because he don't belong to your association?
' 'Yes, I do.
' 'Well, if this isn't putting on airs!
I supposed I was doing you a benevolence; but I begin to think that I am the party that wants a favor done.
Are you acting under a law of the concern?
' 'Yes.
' 'Show it to me.
' So they stepped into the association rooms, and the secretary soon satisfied the captain, who said-- 'Well, what am I to do?
I have hired Mr. S---- for the entire season.
' 'I will provide for you,' said the secretary.
'I will detail a pilot to go with you, and he shall be on board at twelve o'clock.
' 'But if I discharge S----, he will come on me for the whole season's wages.
' 'Of course that is a matter between you and Mr. S----, captain.
We cannot meddle in your private affairs.
' The captain stormed, but to no purpose.
In the end he had to discharge S----, pay him about a thousand dollars, and take an association pilot in his place.
The laugh was beginning to turn the other way now.
Every day, thenceforward, a new victim fell; every day some outraged captain discharged a non-association pet, with tears and profanity, and installed a hated association man in his berth.
In a very little while, idle non-associationists began to be pretty plenty, brisk as business was, and much as their services were desired.
The laugh was shifting to the other side of their mouths most palpably.
These victims, together with the captains and owners, presently ceased to laugh altogether, and began to rage about the revenge they would take when the passing business 'spurt' was over.
Soon all the laughers that were left were the owners and crews of boats that had two non-association pilots.
But their triumph was not very long-lived.
For this reason: It was a rigid rule of the association that its members should never, under any circumstances whatever, give information about the channel to any 'outsider.
' By this time about half the boats had none but association pilots, and the other half had none but outsiders.
At the first glance one would suppose that when it came to forbidding information about the river these two parties could play equally at that game; but this was not so.
At every good-sized town from one end of the river to the other, there was a 'wharf-boat' to land at, instead of a wharf or a pier.
Freight was stored in it for transportation; waiting passengers slept in its cabins.
Upon each of these wharf-boats the association's officers placed a strong box fastened with a peculiar lock which was used in no other service but one--the United States mail service.
It was the letter-bag lock, a sacred governmental thing.
By dint of much beseeching the government had been persuaded to allow the association to use this lock.
Every association man carried a key which would open these boxes.
That key, or rather a peculiar way of holding it in the hand when its owner was asked for river information by a stranger--for the success of the St. Louis and New Orleans association had now bred tolerably thriving branches in a dozen neighboring
From the association's secretary each member received a package of more or less gorgeous blanks, printed like a billhead, on handsome paper, properly ruled in columns; a bill-head worded something like this-- These blanks were filled up, day by day, as the
For instance, as soon as the first crossing, out from St. Louis, was completed, the items would be entered upon the blank, under the appropriate headings, thus-- 'St. Louis.
Nine and a half (feet).
Stern on court-house, head on dead cottonwood above wood-yard, until you raise the first reef, then pull up square.
' Then under head of Remarks: 'Go just outside the wrecks; this is important.
New snag just where you straighten down; go above it.
' The pilot who deposited that blank in the Cairo box (after adding to it the details of every crossing all the way down from St. Louis) took out and read half a dozen fresh reports (from upward-bound steamers) concerning the river between Cairo and
Imagine the benefits of so admirable a system in a piece of river twelve or thirteen hundred miles long, whose channel was shifting every day!
The pilot who had formerly been obliged to put up with seeing a shoal place once or possibly twice a month, had a hundred sharp eyes to watch it for him, now, and bushels of intelligent brains to tell him how to run it.
His information about it was seldom twenty-four hours old.
If the reports in the last box chanced to leave any misgivings on his mind concerning a treacherous crossing, he had his remedy; he blew his steam-whistle in a peculiar way as soon as he saw a boat approaching; the signal was answered in a peculiar way if
The first thing a pilot did when he reached New Orleans or St. Louis was to take his final and elaborate report to the association parlors and hang it up there,--after which he was free to visit his family.
In these parlors a crowd was always gathered together, discussing changes in the channel, and the moment there was a fresh arrival, everybody stopped talking till this witness had told the newest news and settled the latest uncertainty.
Other craftsmen can 'sink the shop,' sometimes, and interest themselves in other matters.
Not so with a pilot; he must devote himself wholly to his profession and talk of nothing else; for it would be small gain to be perfect one day and imperfect the next.
He has no time or words to waste if he would keep 'posted.
' But the outsiders had a hard time of it.
No particular place to meet and exchange information, no wharf-boat reports, none but chance and unsatisfactory ways of getting news.
The consequence was that a man sometimes had to run five hundred miles of river on information that was a week or ten days old.
At a fair stage of the river that might have answered; but when the dead low water came it was destructive.
Now came another perfectly logical result.
The outsiders began to ground steamboats, sink them, and get into all sorts of trouble, whereas accidents seemed to keep entirely away from the association men.
Wherefore even the owners and captains of boats furnished exclusively with outsiders, and previously considered to be wholly independent of the association and free to comfort themselves with brag and laughter, began to feel pretty uncomfortable.
Still, they made a show of keeping up the brag, until one black day when every captain of the lot was formally ordered to immediately discharge his outsiders and take association pilots in their stead.
And who was it that had the dashing presumption to do that?
Alas, it came from a power behind the throne that was greater than the throne itself.
It was the underwriters!
It was no time to 'swap knives.
' Every outsider had to take his trunk ashore at once.
Of course it was supposed that there was collusion between the association and the underwriters, but this was not so.
The latter had come to comprehend the excellence of the 'report' system of the association and the safety it secured, and so they had made their decision among themselves and upon plain business principles.
There was weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth in the camp of the outsiders now.
But no matter, there was but one course for them to pursue, and they pursued it.
They came forward in couples and groups, and proffered their twelve dollars and asked for membership.
They were surprised to learn that several new by-laws had been long ago added.
For instance, the initiation fee had been raised to fifty dollars; that sum must be tendered, and also ten per cent.
of the wages which the applicant had received each and every month since the founding of the association.
In many cases this amounted to three or four hundred dollars.
Still, the association would not entertain the application until the money was present.
Even then a single adverse vote killed the application.
Every member had to vote 'Yes' or 'No' in person and before witnesses; so it took weeks to decide a candidacy, because many pilots were so long absent on voyages.
However, the repentant sinners scraped their savings together, and one by one, by our tedious voting process, they were added to the fold.
A time came, at last, when only about ten remained outside.
They said they would starve before they would apply.
They remained idle a long while, because of course nobody could venture to employ them.
By and by the association published the fact that upon a certain date the wages would be raised to five hundred dollars per month.
All the branch associations had grown strong, now, and the Red River one had advanced wages to seven hundred dollars a month.
Reluctantly the ten outsiders yielded, in view of these things, and made application.
There was another new by-law, by this time, which required them to pay dues not only on all the wages they had received since the association was born, but also on what they would have received if they had continued at work up to the time of their
It turned out to be a difficult matter to elect them, but it was accomplished at last.
The most virulent sinner of this batch had stayed out and allowed 'dues' to accumulate against him so long that he had to send in six hundred and twenty-five dollars with his application.
The association had a good bank account now, and was very strong.
There was no longer an outsider.
A by-law was added forbidding the reception of any more cubs or apprentices for five years; after which time a limited number would be taken, not by individuals, but by the association, upon these terms: the applicant must not be less than eighteen years
All previously-articled apprentices were now taken away from their masters and adopted by the association.
The president and secretary detailed them for service on one boat or another, as they chose, and changed them from boat to boat according to certain rules.
If a pilot could show that he was in infirm health and needed assistance, one of the cubs would be ordered to go with him.
The widow and orphan list grew, but so did the association's financial resources.
The association attended its own funerals in state, and paid for them.
When occasion demanded, it sent members down the river upon searches for the bodies of brethren lost by steamboat accidents; a search of this kind sometimes cost a thousand dollars.
The association procured a charter and went into the insurance business, also.
It not only insured the lives of its members, but took risks on steamboats.
The organization seemed indestructible.
It was the tightest monopoly in the world.
By the United States law, no man could become a pilot unless two duly licensed pilots signed his application; and now there was nobody outside of the association competent to sign.
Consequently the making of pilots was at an end.
Every year some would die and others become incapacitated by age and infirmity; there would be no new ones to take their places.
In time, the association could put wages up to any figure it chose; and as long as it should be wise enough not to carry the thing too far and provoke the national government into amending the licensing system, steamboat owners would have to submit, since
The owners and captains were the only obstruction that lay between the association and absolute power; and at last this one was removed.
Incredible as it may seem, the owners and captains deliberately did it themselves.
When the pilots' association announced, months beforehand, that on the first day of September, 1861, wages would be advanced to five hundred dollars per month, the owners and captains instantly put freights up a few cents, and explained to the farmers
It was a rather slender argument, but the farmers did not seem to detect it.
It looked reasonable to them that to add five cents freight on a bushel of corn was justifiable under the circumstances, overlooking the fact that this advance on a cargo of forty thousand sacks was a good deal more than necessary to cover the new wages.
So, straightway the captains and owners got up an association of their own, and proposed to put captains' wages up to five hundred dollars, too, and move for another advance in freights.
It was a novel idea, but of course an effect which had been produced once could be produced again.
The new association decreed (for this was before all the outsiders had been taken into the pilots' association) that if any captain employed a non-association pilot, he should be forced to discharge him, and also pay a fine of five hundred dollars.
Several of these heavy fines were paid before the captains' organization grew strong enough to exercise full authority over its membership; but that all ceased, presently.
The captains tried to get the pilots to decree that no member of their corporation should serve under a non-association captain; but this proposition was declined.
The pilots saw that they would be backed up by the captains and the underwriters anyhow, and so they wisely refrained from entering into entangling alliances.
As I have remarked, the pilots' association was now the compactest monopoly in the world, perhaps, and seemed simply indestructible.
And yet the days of its glory were numbered.
First, the new railroad stretching up through Mississippi, Tennessee, and Kentucky, to Northern railway centers, began to divert the passenger travel from the steamers; next the war came and almost entirely annihilated the steamboating industry during
CHAPTER 16 Racing Days IT was always the custom for the boats to leave New Orleans between four and five o'clock in the afternoon.
From three o'clock onward they would be burning rosin and pitch pine (the sign of preparation), and so one had the picturesque spectacle of a rank, some two or three miles long, of tall, ascending columns of coal-black smoke; a colonnade which supported a
Every outward-bound boat had its flag flying at the jack-staff, and sometimes a duplicate on the verge staff astern.
Two or three miles of mates were commanding and swearing with more than usual emphasis; countless processions of freight barrels and boxes were spinning athwart the levee and flying aboard the stage-planks, belated passengers were dodging and skipping
De Las' Sack!
'--inspired to unimaginable exaltation by the chaos of turmoil and racket that was driving everybody else mad.
By this time the hurricane and boiler decks of the steamers would be packed and black with passengers.
The 'last bells' would begin to clang, all down the line, and then the powwow seemed to double; in a moment or two the final warning came,--a simultaneous din of Chinese gongs, with the cry, 'All dat ain't goin', please to git asho'!
'--and behold, the powwow quadrupled!
People came swarming ashore, overturning excited stragglers that were trying to swarm aboard.
One more moment later a long array of stage-planks was being hauled in, each with its customary latest passenger clinging to the end of it with teeth, nails, and everything else, and the customary latest procrastinator making a wild spring shoreward over
Now a number of the boats slide backward into the stream, leaving wide gaps in the serried rank of steamers.
Citizens crowd the decks of boats that are not to go, in order to see the sight.
Steamer after steamer straightens herself up, gathers all her strength, and presently comes swinging by, under a tremendous head of steam, with flag flying, black smoke rolling, and her entire crew of firemen and deck-hands (usually swarthy negroes) massed
Steamer after steamer falls into line, and the stately procession goes winging its flight up the river.
In the old times, whenever two fast boats started out on a race, with a big crowd of people looking on, it was inspiring to hear the crews sing, especially if the time were night-fall, and the forecastle lit up with the red glare of the torch-baskets.
Racing was royal fun.
The public always had an idea that racing was dangerous; whereas the opposite was the case--that is, after the laws were passed which restricted each boat to just so many pounds of steam to the square inch.
No engineer was ever sleepy or careless when his heart was in a race.
He was constantly on the alert, trying gauge-cocks and watching things.
The dangerous place was on slow, plodding boats, where the engineers drowsed around and allowed chips to get into the 'doctor' and shut off the water supply from the boilers.
In the 'flush times' of steamboating, a race between two notoriously fleet steamers was an event of vast importance.
The date was set for it several weeks in advance, and from that time forward, the whole Mississippi Valley was in a state of consuming excitement.
Politics and the weather were dropped, and people talked only of the coming race.
As the time approached, the two steamers 'stripped' and got ready.
Every encumbrance that added weight, or exposed a resisting surface to wind or water, was removed, if the boat could possibly do without it.
The 'spars,' and sometimes even their supporting derricks, were sent ashore, and no means left to set the boat afloat in case she got aground.
When the 'Eclipse' and the 'A.
L. Shotwell' ran their great race many years ago, it was said that pains were taken to scrape the gilding off the fanciful device which hung between the 'Eclipse's' chimneys, and that for that one trip the captain left off his kid gloves and had his head
But I always doubted these things.
If the boat was known to make her best speed when drawing five and a half feet forward and five feet aft, she was carefully loaded to that exact figure--she wouldn't enter a dose of homoeopathic pills on her manifest after that.
Hardly any passengers were taken, because they not only add weight but they never will 'trim boat.
' They always run to the side when there is anything to see, whereas a conscientious and experienced steamboatman would stick to the center of the boat and part his hair in the middle with a spirit level.
No way-freights and no way-passengers were allowed, for the racers would stop only at the largest towns, and then it would be only 'touch and go.
' Coal flats and wood flats were contracted for beforehand, and these were kept ready to hitch on to the flying steamers at a moment's warning.
Double crews were carried, so that all work could be quickly done.
The chosen date being come, and all things in readiness, the two great steamers back into the stream, and lie there jockeying a moment, and apparently watching each other's slightest movement, like sentient creatures; flags drooping, the pent steam
People, people everywhere; the shores, the house-tops, the steamboats, the ships, are packed with them, and you know that the borders of the broad Mississippi are going to be fringed with humanity thence northward twelve hundred miles, to welcome these
Presently tall columns of steam burst from the 'scape-pipes of both steamers, two guns boom a good-bye, two red-shirted heroes mounted on capstans wave their small flags above the massed crews on the forecastles, two plaintive solos linger on the air a few
Brass bands bray Hail Columbia, huzza after huzza thunders from the shores, and the stately creatures go whistling by like the wind.
Those boats will never halt a moment between New Orleans and St. Louis, except for a second or two at large towns, or to hitch thirty-cord wood-boats alongside.
You should be on board when they take a couple of those wood-boats in tow and turn a swarm of men into each; by the time you have wiped your glasses and put them on, you will be wondering what has become of that wood.
Two nicely matched steamers will stay in sight of each other day after day.
They might even stay side by side, but for the fact that pilots are not all alike, and the smartest pilots will win the race.
If one of the boats has a 'lightning' pilot, whose 'partner' is a trifle his inferior, you can tell which one is on watch by noting whether that boat has gained ground or lost some during each four-hour stretch.
The shrewdest pilot can delay a boat if he has not a fine genius for steering.
Steering is a very high art.
One must not keep a rudder dragging across a boat's stem if he wants to get up the river fast.
There is a great difference in boats, of course.
For a long time I was on a boat that was so slow we used to forget what year it was we left port in.
But of course this was at rare intervals.
Ferryboats used to lose valuable trips because their passengers grew old and died, waiting for us to get by.
This was at still rarer intervals.
I had the documents for these occurrences, but through carelessness they have been mislaid.
This boat, the 'John J. Roe,' was so slow that when she finally sunk in Madrid Bend, it was five years before the owners heard of it.
That was always a confusing fact to me, but it is according to the record, any way.
She was dismally slow; still, we often had pretty exciting times racing with islands, and rafts, and such things.
One trip, however, we did rather well.
We went to St. Louis in sixteen days.
But even at this rattling gait I think we changed watches three times in Fort Adams reach, which is five miles long.
A 'reach' is a piece of straight river, and of course the current drives through such a place in a pretty lively way.
That trip we went to Grand Gulf, from New Orleans, in four days (three hundred and forty miles); the 'Eclipse' and 'Shotwell' did it in one.
We were nine days out, in the chute of 63 (seven hundred miles); the 'Eclipse' and 'Shotwell' went there in two days.
Something over a generation ago, a boat called the 'J.
M. White' went from New Orleans to Cairo in three days, six hours, and forty-four minutes.
In 1853 the 'Eclipse' made the same trip in three days, three hours, and twenty minutes.
{footnote [Time disputed.
Some authorities add 1 hour and 16 minutes to this.
]} In 1870 the 'R.
E. Lee' did it in three days and _one_ hour.
This last is called the fastest trip on record.
I will try to show that it was not.
For this reason: the distance between New Orleans and Cairo, when the 'J.
M. White' ran it, was about eleven hundred and six miles; consequently her average speed was a trifle over fourteen miles per hour.
In the 'Eclipse's' day the distance between the two ports had become reduced to one thousand and eighty miles; consequently her average speed was a shade under fourteen and three-eighths miles per hour.
In the 'R.
E. Lee's' time the distance had diminished to about one thousand and thirty miles; consequently her average was about fourteen and one-eighth miles per hour.
Therefore the 'Eclipse's' was conspicuously the fastest time that has ever been made.
CHAPTER 17 Cut-offs and Stephen THESE dry details are of importance in one particular.
They give me an opportunity of introducing one of the Mississippi's oddest peculiarities,--that of shortening its length from time to time.
If you will throw a long, pliant apple-paring over your shoulder, it will pretty fairly shape itself into an average section of the Mississippi River; that is, the nine or ten hundred miles stretching from Cairo, Illinois, southward to New Orleans, the
The two hundred-mile stretch from Cairo northward to St. Louis is by no means so crooked, that being a rocky country which the river cannot cut much.
The water cuts the alluvial banks of the 'lower' river into deep horseshoe curves; so deep, indeed, that in some places if you were to get ashore at one extremity of the horseshoe and walk across the neck, half or three quarters of a mile, you could sit
When the river is rising fast, some scoundrel whose plantation is back in the country, and therefore of inferior value, has only to watch his chance, cut a little gutter across the narrow neck of land some dark night, and turn the water into it, and in a
Watches are kept on those narrow necks, at needful times, and if a man happens to be caught cutting a ditch across them, the chances are all against his ever having another opportunity to cut a ditch.
Pray observe some of the effects of this ditching business.
Once there was a neck opposite Port Hudson, Louisiana, which was only half a mile across, in its narrowest place.
You could walk across there in fifteen minutes; but if you made the journey around the cape on a raft, you traveled thirty-five miles to accomplish the same thing.
In 1722 the river darted through that neck, deserted its old bed, and thus shortened itself thirty-five miles.
In the same way it shortened itself twenty-five miles at Black Hawk Point in 1699.
Below Red River Landing, Raccourci cut-off was made (forty or fifty years ago, I think).
This shortened the river twenty-eight miles.
In our day, if you travel by river from the southernmost of these three cut-offs to the northernmost, you go only seventy miles.
To do the same thing a hundred and seventy-six years ago, one had to go a hundred and fifty-eight miles!
--shortening of eighty-eight miles in that trifling distance.
At some forgotten time in the past, cut-offs were made above Vidalia, Louisiana; at island 92; at island 84; and at Hale's Point.
These shortened the river, in the aggregate, seventy-seven miles.
Since my own day on the Mississippi, cut-offs have been made at Hurricane Island; at island 100; at Napoleon, Arkansas; at Walnut Bend; and at Council Bend.
These shortened the river, in the aggregate, sixty-seven miles.
In my own time a cut-off was made at American Bend, which shortened the river ten miles or more.
Therefore, the Mississippi between Cairo and New Orleans was twelve hundred and fifteen miles long one hundred and seventy-six years ago.
It was eleven hundred and eighty after the cut-off of 1722.
It was one thousand and forty after the American Bend cut-off.
It has lost sixty-seven miles since.
Consequently its length is only nine hundred and seventy-three miles at present.
Now, if I wanted to be one of those ponderous scientific people, and 'let on' to prove what had occurred in the remote past by what had occurred in a given time in the recent past, or what will occur in the far future by what has occurred in late years,
Geology never had such a chance, nor such exact data to argue from!
Nor 'development of species,' either!
Glacial epochs are great things, but they are vague--vague.
Please observe:-- In the space of one hundred and seventy-six years the Lower Mississippi has shortened itself two hundred and forty-two miles.
That is an average of a trifle over one mile and a third per year.
Therefore, any calm person, who is not blind or idiotic, can see that in the Old Oolitic Silurian Period,' just a million years ago next November, the Lower Mississippi River was upwards of one million three hundred thousand miles long, and stuck out over
And by the same token any person can see that seven hundred and forty-two years from now the Lower Mississippi will be only a mile and three-quarters long, and Cairo and New Orleans will have joined their streets together, and be plodding comfortably along
There is something fascinating about science.
One gets such wholesale returns of conjecture out of such a trifling investment of fact.
When the water begins to flow through one of those ditches I have been speaking of, it is time for the people thereabouts to move.
The water cleaves the banks away like a knife.
By the time the ditch has become twelve or fifteen feet wide, the calamity is as good as accomplished, for no power on earth can stop it now.
When the width has reached a hundred yards, the banks begin to peel off in slices half an acre wide.
The current flowing around the bend traveled formerly only five miles an hour; now it is tremendously increased by the shortening of the distance.
I was on board the first boat that tried to go through the cut-off at American Bend, but we did not get through.
It was toward midnight, and a wild night it was--thunder, lightning, and torrents of rain.
It was estimated that the current in the cut-off was making about fifteen or twenty miles an hour; twelve or thirteen was the best our boat could do, even in tolerably slack water, therefore perhaps we were foolish to try the cut-off.
However, Mr. Brown was ambitious, and he kept on trying.
The eddy running up the bank, under the 'point,' was about as swift as the current out in the middle; so we would go flying up the shore like a lightning express train, get on a big head of steam, and 'stand by for a surge' when we struck the current that
But all our preparations were useless.
The instant the current hit us it spun us around like a top, the water deluged the forecastle, and the boat careened so far over that one could hardly keep his feet.
The next instant we were away down the river, clawing with might and main to keep out of the woods.
We tried the experiment four times.
I stood on the forecastle companion way to see.
It was astonishing to observe how suddenly the boat would spin around and turn tail the moment she emerged from the eddy and the current struck her nose.
The sounding concussion and the quivering would have been about the same if she had come full speed against a sand-bank.
Under the lightning flashes one could see the plantation cabins and the goodly acres tumble into the river; and the crash they made was not a bad effort at thunder.
Once, when we spun around, we only missed a house about twenty feet, that had a light burning in the window; and in the same instant that house went overboard.
Nobody could stay on our forecastle; the water swept across it in a torrent every time we plunged athwart the current.
At the end of our fourth effort we brought up in the woods two miles below the cut-off; all the country there was overflowed, of course.
A day or two later the cut-off was three-quarters of a mile wide, and boats passed up through it without much difficulty, and so saved ten miles.
The old Raccourci cut-off reduced the river's length twenty-eight miles.
There used to be a tradition connected with it.
It was said that a boat came along there in the night and went around the enormous elbow the usual way, the pilots not knowing that the cut-off had been made.
It was a grisly, hideous night, and all shapes were vague and distorted.
The old bend had already begun to fill up, and the boat got to running away from mysterious reefs, and occasionally hitting one.
The perplexed pilots fell to swearing, and finally uttered the entirely unnecessary wish that they might never get out of that place.
As always happens in such cases, that particular prayer was answered, and the others neglected.
So to this day that phantom steamer is still butting around in that deserted river, trying to find her way out.
More than one grave watchman has sworn to me that on drizzly, dismal nights, he has glanced fearfully down that forgotten river as he passed the head of the island, and seen the faint glow of the specter steamer's lights drifting through the distant gloom,
In the absence of further statistics, I beg to close this chapter with one more reminiscence of 'Stephen.
' Most of the captains and pilots held Stephen's note for borrowed sums, ranging from two hundred and fifty dollars upward.
Stephen never paid one of these notes, but he was very prompt and very zealous about renewing them every twelve months.
Of course there came a time, at last, when Stephen could no longer borrow of his ancient creditors; so he was obliged to lie in wait for new men who did not know him.
Such a victim was good-hearted, simple natured young Yates (I use a fictitious name, but the real name began, as this one does, with a Y).
Young Yates graduated as a pilot, got a berth, and when the month was ended and he stepped up to the clerk's office and received his two hundred and fifty dollars in crisp new bills, Stephen was there!
His silvery tongue began to wag, and in a very little while Yates's two hundred and fifty dollars had changed hands.
The fact was soon known at pilot headquarters, and the amusement and satisfaction of the old creditors were large and generous.
But innocent Yates never suspected that Stephen's promise to pay promptly at the end of the week was a worthless one.
Yates called for his money at the stipulated time; Stephen sweetened him up and put him off a week.
He called then, according to agreement, and came away sugar-coated again, but suffering under another postponement.
So the thing went on.
Yates haunted Stephen week after week, to no purpose, and at last gave it up.
And then straightway Stephen began to haunt Yates!
Wherever Yates appeared, there was the inevitable Stephen.
And not only there, but beaming with affection and gushing with apologies for not being able to pay.
By and by, whenever poor Yates saw him coming, he would turn and fly, and drag his company with him, if he had company; but it was of no use; his debtor would run him down and corner him.
Panting and red-faced, Stephen would come, with outstretched hands and eager eyes, invade the conversation, shake both of Yates's arms loose in their sockets, and begin-- 'My, what a race I've had!
I saw you didn't see me, and so I clapped on all steam for fear I'd miss you entirely.
And here you are!
there, just stand so, and let me look at you!
just the same old noble countenance.
' [To Yates's friend:] 'Just look at him!
_Look _at him!
Ain't it just _good _to look at him!
_ain't_ it now?
Ain't he just a picture!
_Some _call him a picture; I call him a panorama!
That's what he is--an entire panorama.
And now I'm reminded!
How I do wish I could have seen you an hour earlier!
For twenty-four hours I've been saving up that two hundred and fifty dollars for you; been looking for you everywhere.
I waited at the Planter's from six yesterday evening till two o'clock this morning, without rest or food; my wife says, "Where have you been all night"?
I said, "This debt lies heavy on my mind".
She says, "In all my days I never saw a man take a debt to heart the way you do".
I said, "It's my nature; how can I change it"?
She says, "Well, do go to bed and get some rest".
I said, "Not till that poor, noble young man has got his money".
So I set up all night, and this morning out I shot, and the first man I struck told me you had shipped on the "Grand Turk" and gone to New Orleans.
Well, sir, I had to lean up against a building and cry.
So help me goodness, I couldn't help it.
The man that owned the place come out cleaning up with a rag, and said he didn't like to have people cry against his building, and then it seemed to me that the whole world had turned against me, and it wasn't any use to live any more; and coming along an
But as sure as I am standing here on this ground on this particular brick,--there, I've scratched a mark on the brick to remember it by,--I'll borrow that money and pay it over to you at twelve o'clock sharp, tomorrow!
Now, stand so; let me look at you just once more.
' And so on.
Yates's life became a burden to him.
He could not escape his debtor and his debtor's awful sufferings on account of not being able to pay.
He dreaded to show himself in the street, lest he should find Stephen lying in wait for him at the corner.
Bogart's billiard saloon was a great resort for pilots in those days.
They met there about as much to exchange river news as to play.
One morning Yates was there; Stephen was there, too, but kept out of sight.
But by and by, when about all the pilots had arrived who were in town, Stephen suddenly appeared in the midst, and rushed for Yates as for a long-lost brother.
'_Oh_, I am so glad to see you!
Oh my soul, the sight of you is such a comfort to my eyes!
Gentlemen, I owe all of you money; among you I owe probably forty thousand dollars.
I want to pay it; I intend to pay it every last cent of it.
You all know, without my telling you, what sorrow it has cost me to remain so long under such deep obligations to such patient and generous friends; but the sharpest pang I suffer--by far the sharpest--is from the debt I owe to this noble young man here;
And most especially I wanted _him _to be here when I announced it.
Yes, my faithful friend,--my benefactor, I've found the method!
I've found the method to pay off all my debts, and you'll get your money!
' Hope dawned in Yates's eye; then Stephen, beaming benignantly, and placing his hand upon Yates's head, added, 'I am going to pay them off in alphabetical order!
' Then he turned and disappeared.
The full significance of Stephen's 'method' did not dawn upon the perplexed and musing crowd for some two minutes; and then Yates murmured with a sigh-- 'Well, the Y's stand a gaudy chance.
He won't get any further than the C's in _this _world, and I reckon that after a good deal of eternity has wasted away in the next one, I'll still be referred to up there as "that poor, ragged pilot that came here from St. Louis in the early days"!
CHAPTER 18 I Take a Few Extra Lessons DURING the two or two and a half years of my apprenticeship, I served under many pilots, and had experience of many kinds of steamboatmen and many varieties of steamboats; for it was not always convenient for Mr. Bixby
I am to this day profiting somewhat by that experience; for in that brief, sharp schooling, I got personally and familiarly acquainted with about all the different types of human nature that are to be found in fiction, biography, or history.
The fact is daily borne in upon me, that the average shore-employment requires as much as forty years to equip a man with this sort of an education.
When I say I am still profiting by this thing, I do not mean that it has constituted me a judge of men--no, it has not done that; for judges of men are born, not made.
My profit is various in kind and degree; but the feature of it which I value most is the zest which that early experience has given to my later reading.
When I find a well-drawn character in fiction or biography, I generally take a warm personal interest in him, for the reason that I have known him before--met him on the river.
The figure that comes before me oftenest, out of the shadows of that vanished time, is that of Brown, of the steamer 'Pennsylvania'--the man referred to in a former chapter, whose memory was so good and tiresome.
He was a middle-aged, long, slim, bony, smooth-shaven, horse-faced, ignorant, stingy, malicious, snarling, fault hunting, mote-magnifying tyrant.
I early got the habit of coming on watch with dread at my heart.
No matter how good a time I might have been having with the off-watch below, and no matter how high my spirits might be when I started aloft, my soul became lead in my body the moment I approached the pilot-house.
I still remember the first time I ever entered the presence of that man.
The boat had backed out from St. Louis and was 'straightening down;' I ascended to the pilot-house in high feather, and very proud to be semi-officially a member of the executive family of so fast and famous a boat.
Brown was at the wheel.
I paused in the middle of the room, all fixed to make my bow, but Brown did not look around.
I thought he took a furtive glance at me out of the corner of his eye, but as not even this notice was repeated, I judged I had been mistaken.
By this time he was picking his way among some dangerous 'breaks' abreast the woodyards; therefore it would not be proper to interrupt him; so I stepped softly to the high bench and took a seat.
There was silence for ten minutes; then my new boss turned and inspected me deliberately and painstakingly from head to heel for about--as it seemed to me--a quarter of an hour.
After which he removed his countenance and I saw it no more for some seconds; then it came around once more, and this question greeted me-- 'Are you Horace Bigsby's cub?
' 'Yes, sir.
' After this there was a pause and another inspection.
Then-- 'What's your name?
' I told him.
He repeated it after me.
It was probably the only thing he ever forgot; for although I was with him many months he never addressed himself to me in any other way than 'Here!
' and then his command followed.
'Where was you born?
' 'In Florida, Missouri.
' A pause.
Then-- 'Dern sight better staid there!
' By means of a dozen or so of pretty direct questions, he pumped my family history out of me.
The leads were going now, in the first crossing.
This interrupted the inquest.
When the leads had been laid in, he resumed-- 'How long you been on the river?
' I told him.
After a pause-- 'Where'd you get them shoes?
' I gave him the information.
'Hold up your foot!
' I did so.
He stepped back, examined the shoe minutely and contemptuously, scratching his head thoughtfully, tilting his high sugar-loaf hat well forward to facilitate the operation, then ejaculated, 'Well, I'll be dod derned!
' and returned to his wheel.
What occasion there was to be dod derned about it is a thing which is still as much of a mystery to me now as it was then.
It must have been all of fifteen minutes--fifteen minutes of dull, homesick silence--before that long horse-face swung round upon me again--and then, what a change!
It was as red as fire, and every muscle in it was working.
Now came this shriek-- 'Here!
--You going to set there all day?
' I lit in the middle of the floor, shot there by the electric suddenness of the surprise.
As soon as I could get my voice I said, apologetically:--'I have had no orders, sir.
' 'You've had no _orders_!
My, what a fine bird we are!
We must have _orders_!
Our father was a _gentleman_--owned slaves--and we've been to _school_.
Yes, _we _are a gentleman, _too_, and got to have _orders!
orders_, is it?
_Orders _is what you want!
Dod dern my skin, _i'll_ learn you to swell yourself up and blow around here about your dod-derned _orders_!
G'way from the wheel!
' (I had approached it without knowing it.
) I moved back a step or two, and stood as in a dream, all my senses stupefied by this frantic assault.
'What you standing there for?
Take that ice-pitcher down to the texas-tender-come, move along, and don't you be all day about it!
' The moment I got back to the pilot-house, Brown said-- 'Here!
What was you doing down there all this time?
' 'I couldn't find the texas-tender; I had to go all the way to the pantry.
' 'Derned likely story!
Fill up the stove.
' I proceeded to do so.
He watched me like a cat.
Presently he shouted-- 'Put down that shovel!
Deadest numskull I ever saw--ain't even got sense enough to load up a stove.
' All through the watch this sort of thing went on.
Yes, and the subsequent watches were much like it, during a stretch of months.
As I have said, I soon got the habit of coming on duty with dread.
The moment I was in the presence, even in the darkest night, I could feel those yellow eyes upon me, and knew their owner was watching for a pretext to spit out some venom on me.
Preliminarily he would say-- 'Here!
Take the wheel.
' Two minutes later-- '_Where _in the nation you going to?
Pull her down!
pull her down!
' After another moment-- 'Say!
You going to hold her all day?
Let her go--meet her!
meet her!
' Then he would jump from the bench, snatch the wheel from me, and meet her himself, pouring out wrath upon me all the time.
George Ritchie was the other pilot's cub.
He was having good times now; for his boss, George Ealer, was as kindhearted as Brown wasn't.
Ritchie had steeled for Brown the season before; consequently he knew exactly how to entertain himself and plague me, all by the one operation.
Whenever I took the wheel for a moment on Ealer's watch, Ritchie would sit back on the bench and play Brown, with continual ejaculations of 'Snatch her!
snatch her!
Derndest mud-cat I ever saw!
' 'Here!
Where you going _now_?
Going to run over that snag?
' 'Pull her _down_!
Don't you hear me?
Pull her _down!
_' 'There she goes!
_Just _as I expected!
I _told_ you not to cramp that reef.
G'way from the wheel!
' So I always had a rough time of it, no matter whose watch it was; and sometimes it seemed to me that Ritchie's good-natured badgering was pretty nearly as aggravating as Brown's dead-earnest nagging.
I often wanted to kill Brown, but this would not answer.
A cub had to take everything his boss gave, in the way of vigorous comment and criticism; and we all believed that there was a United States law making it a penitentiary offense to strike or threaten a pilot who was on duty.
However, I could _imagine _myself killing Brown; there was no law against that; and that was the thing I used always to do the moment I was abed.
Instead of going over my river in my mind as was my duty, I threw business aside for pleasure, and killed Brown.
I killed Brown every night for months; not in old, stale, commonplace ways, but in new and picturesque ones;--ways that were sometimes surprising for freshness of design and ghastliness of situation and environment.
Brown was _always _watching for a pretext to find fault; and if he could find no plausible pretext, he would invent one.
He would scold you for shaving a shore, and for not shaving it; for hugging a bar, and for not hugging it; for 'pulling down' when not invited, and for not pulling down when not invited; for firing up without orders, and for waiting _for_ orders.
In a word, it was his invariable rule to find fault with _everything _you did; and another invariable rule of his was to throw all his remarks (to you) into the form of an insult.
One day we were approaching New Madrid, bound down and heavily laden.
Brown was at one side of the wheel, steering; I was at the other, standing by to 'pull down' or 'shove up.
' He cast a furtive glance at me every now and then.
I had long ago learned what that meant; viz.
, he was trying to invent a trap for me.
I wondered what shape it was going to take.
By and by he stepped back from the wheel and said in his usual snarly way-- 'Here!
--See if you've got gumption enough to round her to.
' This was simply _bound _to be a success; nothing could prevent it; for he had never allowed me to round the boat to before; consequently, no matter how I might do the thing, he could find free fault with it.
He stood back there with his greedy eye on me, and the result was what might have been foreseen: I lost my head in a quarter of a minute, and didn't know what I was about; I started too early to bring the boat around, but detected a green gleam of joy in
Brown's chance was come.
His face turned red with passion; he made one bound, hurled me across the house with a sweep of his arm, spun the wheel down, and began to pour out a stream of vituperation upon me which lasted till he was out of breath.
In the course of this speech he called me all the different kinds of hard names he could think of, and once or twice I thought he was even going to swear--but he didn't this time.
'Dod dern' was the nearest he ventured to the luxury of swearing, for he had been brought up with a wholesome respect for future fire and brimstone.
That was an uncomfortable hour; for there was a big audience on the hurricane deck.
When I went to bed that night, I killed Brown in seventeen different ways--all of them new.
CHAPTER 19 Brown and I Exchange Compliments Two trips later, I got into serious trouble.
Brown was steering; I was 'pulling down.
' My younger brother appeared on the hurricane deck, and shouted to Brown to stop at some landing or other a mile or so below.
Brown gave no intimation that he had heard anything.
But that was his way: he never condescended to take notice of an under clerk.
The wind was blowing; Brown was deaf (although he always pretended he wasn't), and I very much doubted if he had heard the order.
If I had two heads, I would have spoken; but as I had only one, it seemed judicious to take care of it; so I kept still.
Presently, sure enough, we went sailing by that plantation.
Captain Klinefelter appeared on the deck, and said-- 'Let her come around, sir, let her come around.
Didn't Henry tell you to land here?
' '_No_, sir!
' 'I sent him up to do, it.
' 'He did come up; and that's all the good it done, the dod-derned fool.
He never said anything.
' 'Didn't _you _hear him?
' asked the captain of me.
Of course I didn't want to be mixed up in this business, but there was no way to avoid it; so I said-- 'Yes, sir.
' I knew what Brown's next remark would be, before he uttered it; it was-- 'Shut your mouth!
you never heard anything of the kind.
' I closed my mouth according to instructions.
An hour later, Henry entered the pilot-house, unaware of what had been going on.
He was a thoroughly inoffensive boy, and I was sorry to see him come, for I knew Brown would have no pity on him.
Brown began, straightway-- 'Here!
why didn't you tell me we'd got to land at that plantation?
' 'I did tell you, Mr. Brown.
' 'It's a lie!
' I said-- 'You lie, yourself.
He did tell you.
' Brown glared at me in unaffected surprise; and for as much as a moment he was entirely speechless; then he shouted to me-- 'I'll attend to your case in half a minute!
' then to Henry, 'And you leave the pilot-house; out with you!
' It was pilot law, and must be obeyed.
The boy started out, and even had his foot on the upper step outside the door, when Brown, with a sudden access of fury, picked up a ten-pound lump of coal and sprang after him; but I was between, with a heavy stool, and I hit Brown a good honest blow
I had committed the crime of crimes--I had lifted my hand against a pilot on duty!
I supposed I was booked for the penitentiary sure, and couldn't be booked any surer if I went on and squared my long account with this person while I had the chance; consequently I stuck to him and pounded him with my fists a considerable time--I do not
However, Eagle Bend was two miles wide at this bank-full stage, and correspondingly long and deep; and the boat was steering herself straight down the middle and taking no chances.
Still, that was only luck--a body _might _have found her charging into the woods.
Perceiving, at a glance, that the 'Pennsylvania' was in no danger, Brown gathered up the big spy-glass, war-club fashion, and ordered me out of the pilot-house with more than Comanche bluster.
But I was not afraid of him now; so, instead of going, I tarried, and criticized his grammar; I reformed his ferocious speeches for him, and put them into good English, calling his attention to the advantage of pure English over the bastard dialect of the
He could have done his part to admiration in a cross-fire of mere vituperation, of course; but he was not equipped for this species of controversy; so he presently laid aside his glass and took the wheel, muttering and shaking his head; and I retired to
The racket had brought everybody to the hurricane deck, and I trembled when I saw the old captain looking up from the midst of the crowd.
I said to myself, 'Now I _am_ done for!
'--For although, as a rule, he was so fatherly and indulgent toward the boat's family, and so patient of minor shortcomings, he could be stern enough when the fault was worth it.
I tried to imagine what he _would _do to a cub pilot who had been guilty of such a crime as mine, committed on a boat guard-deep with costly freight and alive with passengers.
Our watch was nearly ended.
I thought I would go and hide somewhere till I got a chance to slide ashore.
So I slipped out of the pilot-house, and down the steps, and around to the texas door--and was in the act of gliding within, when the captain confronted me!
I dropped my head, and he stood over me in silence a moment or two, then said impressively-- 'Follow me.
' I dropped into his wake; he led the way to his parlor in the forward end of the texas.
We were alone, now.
He closed the after door; then moved slowly to the forward one and closed that.
He sat down; I stood before him.
He looked at me some little time, then said-- 'So you have been fighting Mr. Brown?
' I answered meekly-- 'Yes, sir.
' 'Do you know that that is a very serious matter?
' 'Yes, sir.
' 'Are you aware that this boat was plowing down the river fully five minutes with no one at the wheel?
' 'Yes, sir.
' 'Did you strike him first?
' 'Yes, sir.
' 'What with?
' 'A stool, sir.
' 'Hard?
' 'Middling, sir.
' 'Did it knock him down?
' 'He--he fell, sir.
' 'Did you follow it up?
Did you do anything further?
' 'Yes, sir.
' 'What did you do?
' 'Pounded him, sir.
' 'Pounded him?
' 'Yes, sir.
' 'Did you pound him much?
--that is, severely?
' 'One might call it that, sir, maybe.
' 'I'm deuced glad of it!
Hark ye, never mention that I said that.
You have been guilty of a great crime; and don't you ever be guilty of it again, on this boat.
_But_--lay for him ashore!
Give him a good sound thrashing, do you hear?
I'll pay the expenses.
Now go--and mind you, not a word of this to anybody.
Clear out with you!
--you've been guilty of a great crime, you whelp!
' I slid out, happy with the sense of a close shave and a mighty deliverance; and I heard him laughing to himself and slapping his fat thighs after I had closed his door.
When Brown came off watch he went straight to the captain, who was talking with some passengers on the boiler deck, and demanded that I be put ashore in New Orleans--and added-- 'I'll never turn a wheel on this boat again while that cub stays.
' The captain said-- 'But he needn't come round when you are on watch, Mr. Brown.
'I won't even stay on the same boat with him.
One of us has got to go ashore.
' 'Very well,' said the captain, 'let it be yourself;' and resumed his talk with the passengers.
During the brief remainder of the trip, I knew how an emancipated slave feels; for I was an emancipated slave myself.
While we lay at landings, I listened to George Ealer's flute; or to his readings from his two bibles, that is to say, Goldsmith and Shakespeare; or I played chess with him--and would have beaten him sometimes, only he always took back his last move and ran
CHAPTER 20 A Catastrophe WE lay three days in New Orleans, but the captain did not succeed in finding another pilot; so he proposed that I should stand a daylight watch, and leave the night watches to George Ealer.
But I was afraid; I had never stood a watch of any sort by myself, and I believed I should be sure to get into trouble in the head of some chute, or ground the boat in a near cut through some bar or other.
Brown remained in his place; but he would not travel with me.
So the captain gave me an order on the captain of the 'A.
T. Lacey,' for a passage to St. Louis, and said he would find a new pilot there and my steersman's berth could then be resumed.
The 'Lacey' was to leave a couple of days after the 'Pennsylvania.
' The night before the '_Pennsylvania_' left, Henry and I sat chatting on a freight pile on the levee till midnight.
The subject of the chat, mainly, was one which I think we had not exploited before--steamboat disasters.
One was then on its way to us, little as we suspected it; the water which was to make the steam which should cause it, was washing past some point fifteen hundred miles up the river while we talked;--but it would arrive at the right time and the right
We doubted if persons not clothed with authority were of much use in cases of disaster and attendant panic; still, they might be of _some _use; so we decided that if a disaster ever fell within our experience we would at least stick to the boat, and give
Henry remembered this, afterward, when the disaster came, and acted accordingly.
The 'Lacey' started up the river two days behind the 'Pennsylvania.
' We touched at Greenville, Mississippi, a couple of days out, and somebody shouted-- 'The "Pennsylvania" is blown up at Ship Island, and a hundred and fifty lives lost!
' At Napoleon, Arkansas, the same evening, we got an extra, issued by a Memphis paper, which gave some particulars.
It mentioned my brother, and said he was not hurt.
Further up the river we got a later extra.
My brother was again mentioned; but this time as being hurt beyond help.
We did not get full details of the catastrophe until we reached Memphis.
This is the sorrowful story-- It was six o'clock on a hot summer morning.
The 'Pennsylvania' was creeping along, north of Ship Island, about sixty miles below Memphis on a half-head of steam, towing a wood-flat which was fast being emptied.
George Ealer was in the pilot-house-alone, I think; the second engineer and a striker had the watch in the engine room; the second mate had the watch on deck; George Black, Mr. Wood, and my brother, clerks, were asleep, as were also Brown and the head
There were a good many cabin passengers aboard, and three or four hundred deck passengers--so it was said at the time--and not very many of them were astir.
The wood being nearly all out of the flat now, Ealer rang to 'come ahead' full steam, and the next moment four of the eight boilers exploded with a thunderous crash, and the whole forward third of the boat was hoisted toward the sky!
The main part of the mass, with the chimneys, dropped upon the boat again, a mountain of riddled and chaotic rubbish--and then, after a little, fire broke out.
Many people were flung to considerable distances, and fell in the river; among these were Mr. Wood and my brother, and the carpenter.
The carpenter was still stretched upon his mattress when he struck the water seventy-five feet from the boat.
Brown, the pilot, and George Black, chief clerk, were never seen or heard of after the explosion.
The barber's chair, with Captain Klinefelter in it and unhurt, was left with its back overhanging vacancy--everything forward of it, floor and all, had disappeared; and the stupefied barber, who was also unhurt, stood with one toe projecting over space,
When George Ealer saw the chimneys plunging aloft in front of him, he knew what the matter was; so he muffled his face in the lapels of his coat, and pressed both hands there tightly to keep this protection in its place so that no steam could get to his
He had ample time to attend to these details while he was going up and returning.
He presently landed on top of the unexploded boilers, forty feet below the former pilot-house, accompanied by his wheel and a rain of other stuff, and enveloped in a cloud of scalding steam.
All of the many who breathed that steam, died; none escaped.
But Ealer breathed none of it.
He made his way to the free air as quickly as he could; and when the steam cleared away he returned and climbed up on the boilers again, and patiently hunted out each and every one of his chessmen and the several joints of his flute.
By this time the fire was beginning to threaten.
Shrieks and groans filled the air.
A great many persons had been scalded, a great many crippled; the explosion had driven an iron crowbar through one man's body--I think they said he was a priest.
He did not die at once, and his sufferings were very dreadful.
A young French naval cadet, of fifteen, son of a French admiral, was fearfully scalded, but bore his tortures manfully.
Both mates were badly scalded, but they stood to their posts, nevertheless.
They drew the wood-boat aft, and they and the captain fought back the frantic herd of frightened immigrants till the wounded could be brought there and placed in safety first.
When Mr. Wood and Henry fell in the water, they struck out for shore, which was only a few hundred yards away; but Henry presently said he believed he was not hurt (what an unaccountable error!
), and therefore would swim back to the boat and help save the wounded.
So they parted, and Henry returned.
By this time the fire was making fierce headway, and several persons who were imprisoned under the ruins were begging piteously for help.
All efforts to conquer the fire proved fruitless; so the buckets were presently thrown aside and the officers fell-to with axes and tried to cut the prisoners out.
A striker was one of the captives; he said he was not injured, but could not free himself; and when he saw that the fire was likely to drive away the workers, he begged that some one would shoot him, and thus save him from the more dreadful death.
The fire did drive the axmen away, and they had to listen, helpless, to this poor fellow's supplications till the flames ended his miseries.
The fire drove all into the wood-flat that could be accommodated there; it was cut adrift, then, and it and the burning steamer floated down the river toward Ship Island.
They moored the flat at the head of the island, and there, unsheltered from the blazing sun, the half-naked occupants had to remain, without food or stimulants, or help for their hurts, during the rest of the day.
A steamer came along, finally, and carried the unfortunates to Memphis, and there the most lavish assistance was at once forthcoming.
By this time Henry was insensible.
The physicians examined his injuries and saw that they were fatal, and naturally turned their main attention to patients who could be saved.
Forty of the wounded were placed upon pallets on the floor of a great public hall, and among these was Henry.
There the ladies of Memphis came every day, with flowers, fruits, and dainties and delicacies of all kinds, and there they remained and nursed the wounded.
All the physicians stood watches there, and all the medical students; and the rest of the town furnished money, or whatever else was wanted.
And Memphis knew how to do all these things well; for many a disaster like the 'Pennsylvania's' had happened near her doors, and she was experienced, above all other cities on the river, in the gracious office of the Good Samaritan.
' The sight I saw when I entered that large hall was new and strange to me.
Two long rows of prostrate forms--more than forty, in all--and every face and head a shapeless wad of loose raw cotton.
It was a gruesome spectacle.
I watched there six days and nights, and a very melancholy experience it was.
There was one daily incident which was peculiarly depressing: this was the removal of the doomed to a chamber apart.
It was done in order that the _morale _of the other patients might not be injuriously affected by seeing one of their number in the death-agony.
The fated one was always carried out with as little stir as possible, and the stretcher was always hidden from sight by a wall of assistants; but no matter: everybody knew what that cluster of bent forms, with its muffled step and its slow movement meant;
I saw many poor fellows removed to the 'death-room,' and saw them no more afterward.
But I saw our chief mate carried thither more than once.
His hurts were frightful, especially his scalds.
He was clothed in linseed oil and raw cotton to his waist, and resembled nothing human.
He was often out of his mind; and then his pains would make him rave and shout and sometimes shriek.
Then, after a period of dumb exhaustion, his disordered imagination would suddenly transform the great apartment into a forecastle, and the hurrying throng of nurses into the crew; and he would come to a sitting posture and shout, 'Hump yourselves, _hump
going to be all _day_ getting that hatful of freight out?
' and supplement this explosion with a firmament-obliterating irruption or profanity which nothing could stay or stop till his crater was empty.
And now and then while these frenzies possessed him, he would tear off handfuls of the cotton and expose his cooked flesh to view.
It was horrible.
It was bad for the others, of course--this noise and these exhibitions; so the doctors tried to give him morphine to quiet him.
But, in his mind or out of it, he would not take it.
He said his wife had been killed by that treacherous drug, and he would die before he would take it.
He suspected that the doctors were concealing it in his ordinary medicines and in his water--so he ceased from putting either to his lips.
Once, when he had been without water during two sweltering days, he took the dipper in his hand, and the sight of the limpid fluid, and the misery of his thirst, tempted him almost beyond his strength; but he mastered himself and threw it away, and after
Three times I saw him carried to the death-room, insensible and supposed to be dying; but each time he revived, cursed his attendants, and demanded to be taken back.
He lived to be mate of a steamboat again.
But he was the only one who went to the death-room and returned alive.
Dr. Peyton, a principal physician, and rich in all the attributes that go to constitute high and flawless character, did all that educated judgment and trained skill could do for Henry; but, as the newspapers had said in the beginning, his hurts were past
On the evening of the sixth day his wandering mind busied itself with matters far away, and his nerveless fingers 'picked at his coverlet.
' His hour had struck; we bore him to the death-room, poor boy.
CHAPTER 21 A Section in My Biography IN due course I got my license.
I was a pilot now, full fledged.
I dropped into casual employments; no misfortunes resulting, intermittent work gave place to steady and protracted engagements.
Time drifted smoothly and prosperously on, and I supposed--and hoped--that I was going to follow the river the rest of my days, and die at the wheel when my mission was ended.
But by and by the war came, commerce was suspended, my occupation was gone.
I had to seek another livelihood.
So I became a silver miner in Nevada; next, a newspaper reporter; next, a gold miner, in California; next, a reporter in San Francisco; next, a special correspondent in the Sandwich Islands; next, a roving correspondent in Europe and the East; next, an
In so few words have I disposed of the twenty-one slow-drifting years that have come and gone since I last looked from the windows of a pilot-house.
Let us resume, now.
CHAPTER 22 I Return to My Muttons AFTER twenty-one years' absence, I felt a very strong desire to see the river again, and the steamboats, and such of the boys as might be left; so I resolved to go out there.
I enlisted a poet for company, and a stenographer to 'take him down,' and started westward about the middle of April.
As I proposed to make notes, with a view to printing, I took some thought as to methods of procedure.
I reflected that if I were recognized, on the river, I should not be as free to go and come, talk, inquire, and spy around, as I should be if unknown; I remembered that it was the custom of steamboatmen in the old times to load up the confiding stranger
The idea was certainly good, but it bred infinite bother; for although Smith, Jones, and Johnson are easy names to remember when there is no occasion to remember them, it is next to impossible to recollect them when they are wanted.
How do criminals manage to keep a brand-new _alias _in mind?
This is a great mystery.
I was innocent; and yet was seldom able to lay my hand on my new name when it was needed; and it seemed to me that if I had had a crime on my conscience to further confuse me, I could never have kept the name by me at all.
We left per Pennsylvania Railroad, at 8 A.M. April 18.
'EVENING.
Speaking of dress.
Grace and picturesqueness drop gradually out of it as one travels away from New York.
' I find that among my notes.
It makes no difference which direction you take, the fact remains the same.
Whether you move north, south, east, or west, no matter: you can get up in the morning and guess how far you have come, by noting what degree of grace and picturesqueness is by that time lacking in the costumes of the new passengers,--I do not mean of the
It may be that _carriage _is at the bottom of this thing; and I think it is; for there are plenty of ladies and gentlemen in the provincial cities whose garments are all made by the best tailors and dressmakers of New York; yet this has no perceptible
No, there is a godless grace, and snap, and style about a born and bred New-Yorker which mere clothing cannot effect.
'APRIL 19.
This morning, struck into the region of full goatees--sometimes accompanied by a mustache, but only occasionally.
' It was odd to come upon this thick crop of an obsolete and uncomely fashion; it was like running suddenly across a forgotten acquaintance whom you had supposed dead for a generation.
The goatee extends over a wide extent of country; and is accompanied by an iron-clad belief in Adam and the biblical history of creation, which has not suffered from the assaults of the scientists.
'AFTERNOON.
At the railway stations the loafers carry _both _hands in their breeches pockets; it was observable, heretofore, that one hand was sometimes out of doors,--here, never.
This is an important fact in geography.
' If the loafers determined the character of a country, it would be still more important, of course.
'Heretofore, all along, the station-loafer has been often observed to scratch one shin with the other foot; here, these remains of activity are wanting.
This has an ominous look.
' By and by, we entered the tobacco-chewing region.
Fifty years ago, the tobacco-chewing region covered the Union.
It is greatly restricted now.
Next, boots began to appear.
Not in strong force, however.
Later--away down the Mississippi--they became the rule.
They disappeared from other sections of the Union with the mud; no doubt they will disappear from the river villages, also, when proper pavements come in.
We reached St. Louis at ten o'clock at night.
At the counter of the hotel I tendered a hurriedly-invented fictitious name, with a miserable attempt at careless ease.
The clerk paused, and inspected me in the compassionate way in which one inspects a respectable person who is found in doubtful circumstances; then he said-- 'It's all right; I know what sort of a room you want.
Used to clerk at the St. James, in New York.
' An unpromising beginning for a fraudulent career.
We started to the supper room, and met two other men whom I had known elsewhere.
How odd and unfair it is: wicked impostors go around lecturing under my _Nom De Guerre_ and nobody suspects them; but when an honest man attempts an imposture, he is exposed at once.
One thing seemed plain: we must start down the river the next day, if people who could not be deceived were going to crop up at this rate: an unpalatable disappointment, for we had hoped to have a week in St. Louis.
The Southern was a good hotel, and we could have had a comfortable time there.
It is large, and well conducted, and its decorations do not make one cry, as do those of the vast Palmer House, in Chicago.
True, the billiard-tables were of the Old Silurian Period, and the cues and balls of the Post-Pliocene; but there was refreshment in this, not discomfort; for there is rest and healing in the contemplation of antiquities.
The most notable absence observable in the billiard-room, was the absence of the river man.
If he was there he had taken in his sign, he was in disguise.
I saw there none of the swell airs and graces, and ostentatious displays of money, and pompous squanderings of it, which used to distinguish the steamboat crowd from the dry-land crowd in the bygone days, in the thronged billiard-rooms of St. Louis.
In those times, the principal saloons were always populous with river men; given fifty players present, thirty or thirty-five were likely to be from the river.
But I suspected that the ranks were thin now, and the steamboatmen no longer an aristocracy.
Why, in my time they used to call the 'barkeep' Bill, or Joe, or Tom, and slap him on the shoulder; I watched for that.
But none of these people did it.
Manifestly a glory that once was had dissolved and vanished away in these twenty-one years.
When I went up to my room, I found there the young man called Rogers, crying.
Rogers was not his name; neither was Jones, Brown, Dexter, Ferguson, Bascom, nor Thompson; but he answered to either of these that a body found handy in an emergency; or to any other name, in fact, if he perceived that you meant him.
He said-- 'What is a person to do here when he wants a drink of water?
--drink this slush?
' 'Can't you drink it?
' 'I could if I had some other water to wash it with.
' Here was a thing which had not changed; a score of years had not affected this water's mulatto complexion in the least; a score of centuries would succeed no better, perhaps.
It comes out of the turbulent, bank-caving Missouri, and every tumblerful of it holds nearly an acre of land in solution.
I got this fact from the bishop of the diocese.
If you will let your glass stand half an hour, you can separate the land from the water as easy as Genesis; and then you will find them both good: the one good to eat, the other good to drink.
The land is very nourishing, the water is thoroughly wholesome.
The one appeases hunger; the other, thirst.
But the natives do not take them separately, but together, as nature mixed them.
When they find an inch of mud in the bottom of a glass, they stir it up, and then take the draught as they would gruel.
It is difficult for a stranger to get used to this batter, but once used to it he will prefer it to water.
This is really the case.
It is good for steamboating, and good to drink; but it is worthless for all other purposes, except baptizing.
Next morning, we drove around town in the rain.
The city seemed but little changed.
It _was _greatly changed, but it did not seem so; because in St. Louis, as in London and Pittsburgh, you can't persuade a new thing to look new; the coal smoke turns it into an antiquity the moment you take your hand off it.
The place had just about doubled its size, since I was a resident of it, and was now become a city of 400,000 inhabitants; still, in the solid business parts, it looked about as it had looked formerly.
Yet I am sure there is not as much smoke in St. Louis now as there used to be.
The smoke used to bank itself in a dense billowy black canopy over the town, and hide the sky from view.
This shelter is very much thinner now; still, there is a sufficiency of smoke there, I think.
I heard no complaint.
However, on the outskirts changes were apparent enough; notably in dwelling-house architecture.
The fine new homes are noble and beautiful and modern.
They stand by themselves, too, with green lawns around them; whereas the dwellings of a former day are packed together in blocks, and are all of one pattern, with windows all alike, set in an arched frame-work of twisted stone; a sort of house which was
There was another change--the Forest Park.
This was new to me.
It is beautiful and very extensive, and has the excellent merit of having been made mainly by nature.
There are other parks, and fine ones, notably Tower Grove and the Botanical Gardens; for St. Louis interested herself in such improvements at an earlier day than did the most of our cities.
The first time I ever saw St. Louis, I could have bought it for six million dollars, and it was the mistake of my life that I did not do it.
It was bitter now to look abroad over this domed and steepled metropolis, this solid expanse of bricks and mortar stretching away on every hand into dim, measure-defying distances, and remember that I had allowed that opportunity to go by.
Why I should have allowed it to go by seems, of course, foolish and inexplicable to-day, at a first glance; yet there were reasons at the time to justify this course.
A Scotchman, Hon.
Charles Augustus Murray, writing some forty-five or fifty years ago, said--'The streets are narrow, ill paved and ill lighted.
' Those streets are narrow still, of course; many of them are ill paved yet; but the reproach of ill lighting cannot be repeated, now.
The 'Catholic New Church' was the only notable building then, and Mr. Murray was confidently called upon to admire it, with its 'species of Grecian portico, surmounted by a kind of steeple, much too diminutive in its proportions, and surmounted by sundry
' St. Louis is well equipped with stately and noble public buildings now, and the little church, which the people used to be so proud of, lost its importance a long time ago.
Still, this would not surprise Mr. Murray, if he could come back; for he prophesied the coming greatness of St. Louis with strong confidence.
The further we drove in our inspection-tour, the more sensibly I realized how the city had grown since I had seen it last; changes in detail became steadily more apparent and frequent than at first, too: changes uniformly evidencing progress, energy,
But the change of changes was on the 'levee.
' This time, a departure from the rule.
Half a dozen sound-asleep steamboats where I used to see a solid mile of wide-awake ones!
This was melancholy, this was woeful.
The absence of the pervading and jocund steamboatman from the billiard-saloon was explained.
He was absent because he is no more.
His occupation is gone, his power has passed away, he is absorbed into the common herd, he grinds at the mill, a shorn Samson and inconspicuous.
Half a dozen lifeless steamboats, a mile of empty wharves, a negro fatigued with whiskey stretched asleep, in a wide and soundless vacancy, where the serried hosts of commerce used to contend!
{footnote [Capt.
Marryat, writing forty-five years ago says: 'St. Louis has 20,000 inhabitants.
_The river abreast of the town is crowded with steamboats, lying in two or three tiers_.
']} Here was desolation, indeed.
'The old, old sea, as one in tears, Comes murmuring, with foamy lips, And knocking at the vacant piers, Calls for his long-lost multitude of ships.
' The towboat and the railroad had done their work, and done it well and completely.
The mighty bridge, stretching along over our heads, had done its share in the slaughter and spoliation.
Remains of former steamboatmen told me, with wan satisfaction, that the bridge doesn't pay.
Still, it can be no sufficient compensation to a corpse, to know that the dynamite that laid him out was not of as good quality as it had been supposed to be.
The pavements along the river front were bad: the sidewalks were rather out of repair; there was a rich abundance of mud.
All this was familiar and satisfying; but the ancient armies of drays, and struggling throngs of men, and mountains of freight, were gone; and Sabbath reigned in their stead.
The immemorial mile of cheap foul doggeries remained, but business was dull with them; the multitudes of poison-swilling Irishmen had departed, and in their places were a few scattering handfuls of ragged negroes, some drinking, some drunk, some nodding,
St. Louis is a great and prosperous and advancing city; but the river-edge of it seems dead past resurrection.
Mississippi steamboating was born about 1812; at the end of thirty years, it had grown to mighty proportions; and in less than thirty more, it was dead!
A strangely short life for so majestic a creature.
Of course it is not absolutely dead, neither is a crippled octogenarian who could once jump twenty-two feet on level ground; but as contrasted with what it was in its prime vigor, Mississippi steamboating may be called dead.
It killed the old-fashioned keel-boating, by reducing the freight-trip to New Orleans to less than a week.
The railroads have killed the steamboat passenger traffic by doing in two or three days what the steamboats consumed a week in doing; and the towing-fleets have killed the through-freight traffic by dragging six or seven steamer-loads of stuff down the
Freight and passenger way-traffic remains to the steamers.
This is in the hands--along the two thousand miles of river between St. Paul and New Orleans---of two or three close corporations well fortified with capital; and by able and thoroughly business-like management and system, these make a sufficiency of money
I suppose that St. Louis and New Orleans have not suffered materially by the change, but alas for the wood-yard man!
He used to fringe the river all the way; his close-ranked merchandise stretched from the one city to the other, along the banks, and he sold uncountable cords of it every year for cash on the nail; but all the scattering boats that are left burn coal now,
Where now is the once wood-yard man?
CHAPTER 23 Traveling Incognito MY idea was, to tarry a while in every town between St. Louis and New Orleans.
To do this, it would be necessary to go from place to place by the short packet lines.
It was an easy plan to make, and would have been an easy one to follow, twenty years ago--but not now.
There are wide intervals between boats, these days.
I wanted to begin with the interesting old French settlements of St. Genevieve and Kaskaskia, sixty miles below St. Louis.
There was only one boat advertised for that section--a Grand Tower packet.
Still, one boat was enough; so we went down to look at her.
She was a venerable rack-heap, and a fraud to boot; for she was playing herself for personal property, whereas the good honest dirt was so thickly caked all over her that she was righteously taxable as real estate.
There are places in New England where her hurricane deck would be worth a hundred and fifty dollars an acre.
The soil on her forecastle was quite good--the new crop of wheat was already springing from the cracks in protected places.
The companionway was of a dry sandy character, and would have been well suited for grapes, with a southern exposure and a little subsoiling.
The soil of the boiler deck was thin and rocky, but good enough for grazing purposes.
A colored boy was on watch here--nobody else visible.
We gathered from him that this calm craft would go, as advertised, 'if she got her trip;' if she didn't get it, she would wait for it.
'Has she got any of her trip?
' 'Bless you, no, boss.
She ain't unloadened, yit.
She only come in dis mawnin'.
' He was uncertain as to when she might get her trip, but thought it might be to-morrow or maybe next day.
This would not answer at all; so we had to give up the novelty of sailing down the river on a farm.
We had one more arrow in our quiver: a Vicksburg packet, the 'Gold Dust,' was to leave at 5 P.M.
We took passage in her for Memphis, and gave up the idea of stopping off here and there, as being impracticable.
She was neat, clean, and comfortable.
We camped on the boiler deck, and bought some cheap literature to kill time with.
The vender was a venerable Irishman with a benevolent face and a tongue that worked easily in the socket, and from him we learned that he had lived in St. Louis thirty-four years and had never been across the river during that period.
Then he wandered into a very flowing lecture, filled with classic names and allusions, which was quite wonderful for fluency until the fact became rather apparent that this was not the first time, nor perhaps the fiftieth, that the speech had been
He was a good deal of a character, and much better company than the sappy literature he was selling.
A random remark, connecting Irishmen and beer, brought this nugget of information out of him-- They don't drink it, sir.
They can't drink it, sir.
Give an Irishman lager for a month, and he's a dead man.
An Irishman is lined with copper, and the beer corrodes it.
But whiskey polishes the copper and is the saving of him, sir.
' At eight o'clock, promptly, we backed out and crossed the river.
As we crept toward the shore, in the thick darkness, a blinding glory of white electric light burst suddenly from our forecastle, and lit up the water and the warehouses as with a noon-day glare.
Another big change, this--no more flickering, smoky, pitch-dripping, ineffectual torch-baskets, now: their day is past.
Next, instead of calling out a score of hands to man the stage, a couple of men and a hatful of steam lowered it from the derrick where it was suspended, launched it, deposited it in just the right spot, and the whole thing was over and done with before a
Why this new and simple method of handling the stages was not thought of when the first steamboat was built, is a mystery which helps one to realize what a dull-witted slug the average human being is.
We finally got away at two in the morning, and when I turned out at six, we were rounding to at a rocky point where there was an old stone warehouse--at any rate, the ruins of it; two or three decayed dwelling-houses were near by, in the shelter of the
I wondered if I had forgotten the river; for I had no recollection whatever of this place; the shape of the river, too, was unfamiliar; there was nothing in sight, anywhere, that I could remember ever having seen before.
I was surprised, disappointed, and annoyed.
We put ashore a well-dressed lady and gentleman, and two well-dressed, lady-like young girls, together with sundry Russia-leather bags.
A strange place for such folk!
No carriage was waiting.
The party moved off as if they had not expected any, and struck down a winding country road afoot.
But the mystery was explained when we got under way again; for these people were evidently bound for a large town which lay shut in behind a tow-head (i.
e.
, new island) a couple of miles below this landing.
I couldn't remember that town; I couldn't place it, couldn't call its name.
So I lost part of my temper.
I suspected that it might be St. Genevieve--and so it proved to be.
Observe what this eccentric river had been about: it had built up this huge useless tow-head directly in front of this town, cut off its river communications, fenced it away completely, and made a 'country' town of it.
It is a fine old place, too, and deserved a better fate.
It was settled by the French, and is a relic of a time when one could travel from the mouths of the Mississippi to Quebec and be on French territory and under French rule all the way.
Presently I ascended to the hurricane deck and cast a longing glance toward the pilot-house.
CHAPTER 24 My Incognito is Exploded AFTER a close study of the face of the pilot on watch, I was satisfied that I had never seen him before; so I went up there.
The pilot inspected me; I re-inspected the pilot.
These customary preliminaries over, I sat down on the high bench, and he faced about and went on with his work.
Every detail of the pilot-house was familiar to me, with one exception,--a large-mouthed tube under the breast-board.
I puzzled over that thing a considerable time; then gave up and asked what it was for.
'To hear the engine-bells through.
' It was another good contrivance which ought to have been invented half a century sooner.
So I was thinking, when the pilot asked-- 'Do you know what this rope is for?
' I managed to get around this question, without committing myself.
'Is this the first time you were ever in a pilot-house?
' I crept under that one.
'Where are you from?
' 'New England.
' 'First time you have ever been West?
' I climbed over this one.
'If you take an interest in such things, I can tell you what all these things are for.
' I said I should like it.
'This,' putting his hand on a backing-bell rope, 'is to sound the fire-alarm; this,' putting his hand on a go-ahead bell, 'is to call the texas-tender; this one,' indicating the whistle-lever, 'is to call the captain'--and so he went on, touching one
I had never felt so like a passenger before.
I thanked him, with emotion, for each new fact, and wrote it down in my note-book.
The pilot warmed to his opportunity, and proceeded to load me up in the good old-fashioned way.
At times I was afraid he was going to rupture his invention; but it always stood the strain, and he pulled through all right.
He drifted, by easy stages, into revealments of the river's marvelous eccentricities of one sort and another, and backed them up with some pretty gigantic illustrations.
For instance-- 'Do you see that little boulder sticking out of the water yonder?
well, when I first came on the river, that was a solid ridge of rock, over sixty feet high and two miles long.
All washed away but that.
' [This with a sigh.
] I had a mighty impulse to destroy him, but it seemed to me that killing, in any ordinary way, would be too good for him.
Once, when an odd-looking craft, with a vast coal-scuttle slanting aloft on the end of a beam, was steaming by in the distance, he indifferently drew attention to it, as one might to an object grown wearisome through familiarity, and observed that it was
' 'An alligator boat?
What's it for?
' 'To dredge out alligators with.
' 'Are they so thick as to be troublesome?
' 'Well, not now, because the Government keeps them down.
But they used to be.
Not everywhere; but in favorite places, here and there, where the river is wide and shoal-like Plum Point, and Stack Island, and so on--places they call alligator beds.
' 'Did they actually impede navigation?
' 'Years ago, yes, in very low water; there was hardly a trip, then, that we didn't get aground on alligators.
' It seemed to me that I should certainly have to get out my tomahawk.
However, I restrained myself and said-- 'It must have been dreadful.
' 'Yes, it was one of the main difficulties about piloting.
It was so hard to tell anything about the water; the damned things shift around so--never lie still five minutes at a time.
You can tell a wind-reef, straight off, by the look of it; you can tell a break; you can tell a sand-reef--that's all easy; but an alligator reef doesn't show up, worth anything.
Nine times in ten you can't tell where the water is; and when you do see where it is, like as not it ain't there when _you _get there, the devils have swapped around so, meantime.
Of course there were some few pilots that could judge of alligator water nearly as well as they could of any other kind, but they had to have natural talent for it; it wasn't a thing a body could learn, you had to be born with it.
Let me see: there was Ben Thornburg, and Beck Jolly, and Squire Bell, and Horace Bixby, and Major Downing, and John Stevenson, and Billy Gordon, and Jim Brady, and George Ealer, and Billy Youngblood--all A-1 alligator pilots.
_They _could tell alligator water as far as another Christian could tell whiskey.
Read it?
--Ah, _couldn't_ they, though!
I only wish I had as many dollars as they could read alligator water a mile and a half off.
Yes, and it paid them to do it, too.
A good alligator pilot could always get fifteen hundred dollars a month.
Nights, other people had to lay up for alligators, but those fellows never laid up for alligators; they never laid up for anything but fog.
They could _smell _the best alligator water it was said; I don't know whether it was so or not, and I think a body's got his hands full enough if he sticks to just what he knows himself, without going around backing up other people's say-so's, though
Which is not the style of Robert Styles, by as much as three fathom--maybe quarter-_less_.
' [My!
Was this Rob Styles?
--This mustached and stately figure?
-A slim enough cub, in my time.
How he has improved in comeliness in five-and-twenty year and in the noble art of inflating his facts.
] After these musings, I said aloud-- 'I should think that dredging out the alligators wouldn't have done much good, because they could come back again right away.
' 'If you had had as much experience of alligators as I have, you wouldn't talk like that.
You dredge an alligator once and he's _convinced_.
It's the last you hear of _him_.
He wouldn't come back for pie.
If there's one thing that an alligator is more down on than another, it's being dredged.
Besides, they were not simply shoved out of the way; the most of the scoopful were scooped aboard; they emptied them into the hold; and when they had got a trip, they took them to Orleans to the Government works.
' 'What for?
' 'Why, to make soldier-shoes out of their hides.
All the Government shoes are made of alligator hide.
It makes the best shoes in the world.
They last five years, and they won't absorb water.
The alligator fishery is a Government monopoly.
All the alligators are Government property--just like the live-oaks.
You cut down a live-oak, and Government fines you fifty dollars; you kill an alligator, and up you go for misprision of treason--lucky duck if they don't hang you, too.
And they will, if you're a Democrat.
The buzzard is the sacred bird of the South, and you can't touch him; the alligator is the sacred bird of the Government, and you've got to let him alone.
' 'Do you ever get aground on the alligators now?
' 'Oh, no!
it hasn't happened for years.
' 'Well, then, why do they still keep the alligator boats in service?
' 'Just for police duty--nothing more.
They merely go up and down now and then.
The present generation of alligators know them as easy as a burglar knows a roundsman; when they see one coming, they break camp and go for the woods.
' After rounding-out and finishing-up and polishing-off the alligator business, he dropped easily and comfortably into the historical vein, and told of some tremendous feats of half-a-dozen old-time steamboats of his acquaintance, dwelling at special
He couldn't ever seem to tell the truth, in any kind of weather.
Why, he would make you fairly shudder.
He _was _the most scandalous liar!
I left him, finally; I couldn't stand it.
The proverb says, "like master, like man;" and if you stay with that kind of a man, you'll come under suspicion by and by, just as sure as you live.
He paid first-class wages; but said I, What's wages when your reputation's in danger?
So I let the wages go, and froze to my reputation.
And I've never regretted it.
Reputation's worth everything, ain't it?
That's the way I look at it.
He had more selfish organs than any seven men in the world--all packed in the stern-sheets of his skull, of course, where they belonged.
They weighed down the back of his head so that it made his nose tilt up in the air.
People thought it was vanity, but it wasn't, it was malice.
If you only saw his foot, you'd take him to be nineteen feet high, but he wasn't; it was because his foot was out of drawing.
He was intended to be nineteen feet high, no doubt, if his foot was made first, but he didn't get there; he was only five feet ten.
That's what he was, and that's what he is.
You take the lies out of him, and he'll shrink to the size of your hat; you take the malice out of him, and he'll disappear.
That "Cyclone" was a rattler to go, and the sweetest thing to steer that ever walked the waters.
Set her amidships, in a big river, and just let her go; it was all you had to do.
She would hold herself on a star all night, if you let her alone.
You couldn't ever feel her rudder.
It wasn't any more labor to steer her than it is to count the Republican vote in a South Carolina election.
One morning, just at daybreak, the last trip she ever made, they took her rudder aboard to mend it; I didn't know anything about it; I backed her out from the wood-yard and went a-weaving down the river all serene.
When I had gone about twenty-three miles, and made four horribly crooked crossings--' 'Without any rudder?
' 'Yes--old Capt.
Tom appeared on the roof and began to find fault with me for running such a dark night--' 'Such a _dark night_?
--Why, you said--' 'Never mind what I said,--'twas as dark as Egypt now, though pretty soon the moon began to rise, and--' 'You mean the _sun_--because you started out just at break of--look here!
Was this _before _you quitted the captain on account of his lying, or--' 'It was before--oh, a long time before.
And as I was saying, he--' 'But was this the trip she sunk, or was--' 'Oh, no!
--months afterward.
And so the old man, he--' 'Then she made _two _last trips, because you said--' He stepped back from the wheel, swabbing away his perspiration, and said-- 'Here!
' (calling me by name), '_you _take her and lie a while--you're handier at it than I am.
Trying to play yourself for a stranger and an innocent!
--why, I knew you before you had spoken seven words; and I made up my mind to find out what was your little game.
It was to _draw me out_.
Well, I let you, didn't I?
Now take the wheel and finish the watch; and next time play fair, and you won't have to work your passage.
' Thus ended the fictitious-name business.
And not six hours out from St. Louis!
but I had gained a privilege, any way, for I had been itching to get my hands on the wheel, from the beginning.
I seemed to have forgotten the river, but I hadn't forgotten how to steer a steamboat, nor how to enjoy it, either.
CHAPTER 25 From Cairo to Hickman THE scenery, from St. Louis to Cairo--two hundred miles--is varied and beautiful.
The hills were clothed in the fresh foliage of spring now, and were a gracious and worthy setting for the broad river flowing between.
Our trip began auspiciously, with a perfect day, as to breeze and sunshine, and our boat threw the miles out behind her with satisfactory despatch.
We found a railway intruding at Chester, Illinois; Chester has also a penitentiary now, and is otherwise marching on.
At Grand Tower, too, there was a railway; and another at Cape Girardeau.
The former town gets its name from a huge, squat pillar of rock, which stands up out of the water on the Missouri side of the river--a piece of nature's fanciful handiwork--and is one of the most picturesque features of the scenery of that region.
For nearer or remoter neighbors, the Tower has the Devil's Bake Oven--so called, perhaps, because it does not powerfully resemble anybody else's bake oven; and the Devil's Tea Table--this latter a great smooth-surfaced mass of rock, with diminishing
Away down the river we have the Devil's Elbow and the Devil's Race-course, and lots of other property of his which I cannot now call to mind.
The Town of Grand Tower was evidently a busier place than it had been in old times, but it seemed to need some repairs here and there, and a new coat of whitewash all over.
Still, it was pleasant to me to see the old coat once more.
'Uncle' Mumford, our second officer, said the place had been suffering from high water, and consequently was not looking its best now.
But he said it was not strange that it didn't waste white-wash on itself, for more lime was made there, and of a better quality, than anywhere in the West; and added--'On a dairy farm you never can get any milk for your coffee, nor any sugar for it on a
' In my own experience I knew the first two items to be true; and also that people who sell candy don't care for candy; therefore there was plausibility in Uncle Mumford's final observation that 'people who make lime run more to religion than whitewash.
' Uncle Mumford said, further, that Grand Tower was a great coaling center and a prospering place.
Cape Girardeau is situated on a hillside, and makes a handsome appearance.
There is a great Jesuit school for boys at the foot of the town by the river.
Uncle Mumford said it had as high a reputation for thoroughness as any similar institution in Missouri!
There was another college higher up on an airy summit--a bright new edifice, picturesquely and peculiarly towered and pinnacled--a sort of gigantic casters, with the cruets all complete.
Uncle Mumford said that Cape Girardeau was the Athens of Missouri, and contained several colleges besides those already mentioned; and all of them on a religious basis of one kind or another.
He directed my attention to what he called the 'strong and pervasive religious look of the town,' but I could not see that it looked more religious than the other hill towns with the same slope and built of the same kind of bricks.
Partialities often make people see more than really exists.
Uncle Mumford has been thirty years a mate on the river.
He is a man of practical sense and a level head; has observed; has had much experience of one sort and another; has opinions; has, also, just a perceptible dash of poetry in his composition, an easy gift of speech, a thick growl in his voice, and an oath
He is a mate of the blessed old-time kind; and goes gravely damning around, when there is work to the fore, in a way to mellow the ex-steamboatman's heart with sweet soft longings for the vanished days that shall come no more.
'_Git _up there you!
Going to be all day?
Why d'n't you _say _you was petrified in your hind legs, before you shipped!
' He is a steady man with his crew; kind and just, but firm; so they like him, and stay with him.
He is still in the slouchy garb of the old generation of mates; but next trip the Anchor Line will have him in uniform--a natty blue naval uniform, with brass buttons, along with all the officers of the line--and then he will be a totally different style
Uniforms on the Mississippi!
It beats all the other changes put together, for surprise.
Still, there is another surprise--that it was not made fifty years ago.
It is so manifestly sensible, that it might have been thought of earlier, one would suppose.
During fifty years, out there, the innocent passenger in need of help and information, has been mistaking the mate for the cook, and the captain for the barber--and being roughly entertained for it, too.
But his troubles are ended now.
And the greatly improved aspect of the boat's staff is another advantage achieved by the dress-reform period.
Steered down the bend below Cape Girardeau.
They used to call it 'Steersman's Bend;' plain sailing and plenty of water in it, always; about the only place in the Upper River that a new cub was allowed to take a boat through, in low water.
Thebes, at the head of the Grand Chain, and Commerce at the foot of it, were towns easily rememberable, as they had not undergone conspicuous alteration.
Nor the Chain, either--in the nature of things; for it is a chain of sunken rocks admirably arranged to capture and kill steamboats on bad nights.
A good many steamboat corpses lie buried there, out of sight; among the rest my first friend the 'Paul Jones;' she knocked her bottom out, and went down like a pot, so the historian told me--Uncle Mumford.
He said she had a gray mare aboard, and a preacher.
To me, this sufficiently accounted for the disaster; as it did, of course, to Mumford, who added-- 'But there are many ignorant people who would scoff at such a matter, and call it superstition.
But you will always notice that they are people who have never traveled with a gray mare and a preacher.
I went down the river once in such company.
We grounded at Bloody Island; we grounded at Hanging Dog; we grounded just below this same Commerce; we jolted Beaver Dam Rock; we hit one of the worst breaks in the 'Graveyard' behind Goose Island; we had a roustabout killed in a fight; we burnt a boiler;
I remember it as if it were yesterday.
The men lost their heads with terror.
They painted the mare blue, in sight of town, and threw the preacher overboard, or we should not have arrived at all.
The preacher was fished out and saved.
He acknowledged, himself, that he had been to blame.
I remember it all, as if it were yesterday.
' That this combination--of preacher and gray mare--should breed calamity, seems strange, and at first glance unbelievable; but the fact is fortified by so much unassailable proof that to doubt is to dishonor reason.
I myself remember a case where a captain was warned by numerous friends against taking a gray mare and a preacher with him, but persisted in his purpose in spite of all that could be said; and the same day--it may have been the next, and some say it was,
This is literally true.
No vestige of Hat Island is left now; every shred of it is washed away.
I do not even remember what part of the river it used to be in, except that it was between St. Louis and Cairo somewhere.
It was a bad region--all around and about Hat Island, in early days.
A farmer who lived on the Illinois shore there, said that twenty-nine steamboats had left their bones strung along within sight from his house.
Between St. Louis and Cairo the steamboat wrecks average one to the mile;--two hundred wrecks, altogether.
I could recognize big changes from Commerce down.
Beaver Dam Rock was out in the middle of the river now, and throwing a prodigious 'break;' it used to be close to the shore, and boats went down outside of it.
A big island that used to be away out in mid-river, has retired to the Missouri shore, and boats do not go near it any more.
The island called Jacket Pattern is whittled down to a wedge now, and is booked for early destruction.
Goose Island is all gone but a little dab the size of a steamboat.
The perilous 'Graveyard,' among whose numberless wrecks we used to pick our way so slowly and gingerly, is far away from the channel now, and a terror to nobody.
One of the islands formerly called the Two Sisters is gone entirely; the other, which used to lie close to the Illinois shore, is now on the Missouri side, a mile away; it is joined solidly to the shore, and it takes a sharp eye to see where the seam
Near the mouth of the river several islands were missing--washed away.
Cairo was still there--easily visible across the long, flat point upon whose further verge it stands; but we had to steam a long way around to get to it.
Night fell as we were going out of the 'Upper River' and meeting the floods of the Ohio.
We dashed along without anxiety; for the hidden rock which used to lie right in the way has moved up stream a long distance out of the channel; or rather, about one county has gone into the river from the Missouri point, and the Cairo point has 'made down'
The Mississippi is a just and equitable river; it never tumbles one man's farm overboard without building a new farm just like it for that man's neighbor.
This keeps down hard feelings.
Going into Cairo, we came near killing a steamboat which paid no attention to our whistle and then tried to cross our bows.
By doing some strong backing, we saved him; which was a great loss, for he would have made good literature.
Cairo is a brisk town now; and is substantially built, and has a city look about it which is in noticeable contrast to its former estate, as per Mr. Dickens's portrait of it.
However, it was already building with bricks when I had seen it last--which was when Colonel (now General) Grant was drilling his first command there.
Uncle Mumford says the libraries and Sunday-schools have done a good work in Cairo, as well as the brick masons.
Cairo has a heavy railroad and river trade, and her situation at the junction of the two great rivers is so advantageous that she cannot well help prospering.
When I turned out, in the morning, we had passed Columbus, Kentucky, and were approaching Hickman, a pretty town, perched on a handsome hill.
Hickman is in a rich tobacco region, and formerly enjoyed a great and lucrative trade in that staple, collecting it there in her warehouses from a large area of country and shipping it by boat; but Uncle Mumford says she built a railway to facilitate this
' CHAPTER 26 Under Fire TALK began to run upon the war now, for we were getting down into the upper edge of the former battle-stretch by this time.
Columbus was just behind us, so there was a good deal said about the famous battle of Belmont.
Several of the boat's officers had seen active service in the Mississippi war-fleet.
I gathered that they found themselves sadly out of their element in that kind of business at first, but afterward got accustomed to it, reconciled to it, and more or less at home in it.
One of our pilots had his first war experience in the Belmont fight, as a pilot on a boat in the Confederate service.
I had often had a curiosity to know how a green hand might feel, in his maiden battle, perched all solitary and alone on high in a pilot house, a target for Tom, Dick and Harry, and nobody at his elbow to shame him from showing the white feather when
THE PILOT'S FIRST BATTLE He said-- It was the 7th of November.
The fight began at seven in the morning.
I was on the 'R.
H. W. Hill.
' Took over a load of troops from Columbus.
Came back, and took over a battery of artillery.
My partner said he was going to see the fight; wanted me to go along.
I said, no, I wasn't anxious, I would look at it from the pilot-house.
He said I was a coward, and left.
That fight was an awful sight.
General Cheatham made his men strip their coats off and throw them in a pile, and said, 'Now follow me to hell or victory!
' I heard him say that from the pilot-house; and then he galloped in, at the head of his troops.
Old General Pillow, with his white hair, mounted on a white horse, sailed in, too, leading his troops as lively as a boy.
By and by the Federals chased the rebels back, and here they came!
tearing along, everybody for himself and Devil take the hindmost!
and down under the bank they scrambled, and took shelter.
I was sitting with my legs hanging out of the pilot-house window.
All at once I noticed a whizzing sound passing my ear.
Judged it was a bullet.
I didn't stop to think about anything, I just tilted over backwards and landed on the floor, and staid there.
The balls came booming around.
Three cannon-balls went through the chimney; one ball took off the corner of the pilot-house; shells were screaming and bursting all around.
Mighty warm times--I wished I hadn't come.
I lay there on the pilot-house floor, while the shots came faster and faster.
I crept in behind the big stove, in the middle of the pilot-house.
Presently a minie-ball came through the stove, and just grazed my head, and cut my hat.
I judged it was time to go away from there.
The captain was on the roof with a red-headed major from Memphis--a fine-looking man.
I heard him say he wanted to leave here, but 'that pilot is killed.
' I crept over to the starboard side to pull the bell to set her back; raised up and took a look, and I saw about fifteen shot holes through the window panes; had come so lively I hadn't noticed them.
I glanced out on the water, and the spattering shot were like a hailstorm.
I thought best to get out of that place.
I went down the pilot-house guy, head first--not feet first but head first--slid down--before I struck the deck, the captain said we must leave there.
So I climbed up the guy and got on the floor again.
About that time, they collared my partner and were bringing him up to the pilot-house between two soldiers.
Somebody had said I was killed.
He put his head in and saw me on the floor reaching for the backing bells.
He said, 'Oh, hell, he ain't shot,' and jerked away from the men who had him by the collar, and ran below.
We were there until three o'clock in the afternoon, and then got away all right.
The next time I saw my partner, I said, 'Now, come out, be honest, and tell me the truth.
Where did you go when you went to see that battle?
' He says, 'I went down in the hold.
' All through that fight I was scared nearly to death.
I hardly knew anything, I was so frightened; but you see, nobody knew that but me.
Next day General Polk sent for me, and praised me for my bravery and gallant conduct.
I never said anything, I let it go at that.
I judged it wasn't so, but it was not for me to contradict a general officer.
Pretty soon after that I was sick, and used up, and had to go off to the Hot Springs.
When there, I got a good many letters from commanders saying they wanted me to come back.
I declined, because I wasn't well enough or strong enough; but I kept still, and kept the reputation I had made.
A plain story, straightforwardly told; but Mumford told me that that pilot had 'gilded that scare of his, in spots;' that his subsequent career in the war was proof of it.
We struck down through the chute of Island No.
8, and I went below and fell into conversation with a passenger, a handsome man, with easy carriage and an intelligent face.
We were approaching Island No.
10, a place so celebrated during the war.
This gentleman's home was on the main shore in its neighborhood.
I had some talk with him about the war times; but presently the discourse fell upon 'feuds,' for in no part of the South has the vendetta flourished more briskly, or held out longer between warring families, than in this particular region.
This gentleman said-- 'There's been more than one feud around here, in old times, but I reckon the worst one was between the Darnells and the Watsons.
Nobody don't know now what the first quarrel was about, it's so long ago; the Darnells and the Watsons don't know, if there's any of them living, which I don't think there is.
Some says it was about a horse or a cow--anyway, it was a little matter; the money in it wasn't of no consequence--none in the world--both families was rich.
The thing could have been fixed up, easy enough; but no, that wouldn't do.
Rough words had been passed; and so, nothing but blood could fix it up after that.
That horse or cow, whichever it was, cost sixty years of killing and crippling!
Every year or so somebody was shot, on one side or the other; and as fast as one generation was laid out, their sons took up the feud and kept it a-going.
And it's just as I say; they went on shooting each other, year in and year out--making a kind of a religion of it, you see--till they'd done forgot, long ago, what it was all about.
Wherever a Darnell caught a Watson, or a Watson caught a Darnell, one of 'em was going to get hurt--only question was, which of them got the drop on the other.
They'd shoot one another down, right in the presence of the family.
They didn't hunt for each other, but when they happened to meet, they puffed and begun.
Men would shoot boys, boys would shoot men.
A man shot a boy twelve years old--happened on him in the woods, and didn't give him no chance.
If he _had _'a' given him a chance, the boy'd 'a' shot him.
Both families belonged to the same church (everybody around here is religious); through all this fifty or sixty years' fuss, both tribes was there every Sunday, to worship.
They lived each side of the line, and the church was at a landing called Compromise.
Half the church and half the aisle was in Kentucky, the other half in Tennessee.
Sundays you'd see the families drive up, all in their Sunday clothes, men, women, and children, and file up the aisle, and set down, quiet and orderly, one lot on the Tennessee side of the church and the other on the Kentucky side; and the men and boys
I don't know; never was at that church in my life; but I remember that that's what used to be said.
'Twenty or twenty-five years ago, one of the feud families caught a young man of nineteen out and killed him.
Don't remember whether it was the Darnells and Watsons, or one of the other feuds; but anyway, this young man rode up--steamboat laying there at the time--and the first thing he saw was a whole gang of the enemy.
He jumped down behind a wood-pile, but they rode around and begun on him, he firing back, and they galloping and cavorting and yelling and banging away with all their might.
Think he wounded a couple of them; but they closed in on him and chased him into the river; and as he swum along down stream, they followed along the bank and kept on shooting at him; and when he struck shore he was dead.
Windy Marshall told me about it.
He saw it.
He was captain of the boat.
'Years ago, the Darnells was so thinned out that the old man and his two sons concluded they'd leave the country.
They started to take steamboat just above No.
10; but the Watsons got wind of it; and they arrived just as the two young Darnells was walking up the companion-way with their wives on their arms.
The fight begun then, and they never got no further--both of them killed.
After that, old Darnell got into trouble with the man that run the ferry, and the ferry-man got the worst of it--and died.
But his friends shot old Darnell through and through--filled him full of bullets, and ended him.
' The country gentleman who told me these things had been reared in ease and comfort, was a man of good parts, and was college bred.
His loose grammar was the fruit of careless habit, not ignorance.
This habit among educated men in the West is not universal, but it is prevalent--prevalent in the towns, certainly, if not in the cities; and to a degree which one cannot help noticing, and marveling at.
I heard a Westerner who would be accounted a highly educated man in any country, say 'never mind, it _don't make no difference_, anyway.
' A life-long resident who was present heard it, but it made no impression upon her.
She was able to recall the fact afterward, when reminded of it; but she confessed that the words had not grated upon her ear at the time--a confession which suggests that if educated people can hear such blasphemous grammar, from such a source, and be
No one in the world speaks blemishless grammar; no one has ever written it--_no_ one, either in the world or out of it (taking the Scriptures for evidence on the latter point); therefore it would not be fair to exact grammatical perfection from the peoples
I found the river greatly changed at Island No.
10.
The island which I remembered was some three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide, heavily timbered, and lay near the Kentucky shore--within two hundred yards of it, I should say.
Now, however, one had to hunt for it with a spy-glass.
Nothing was left of it but an insignificant little tuft, and this was no longer near the Kentucky shore; it was clear over against the opposite shore, a mile away.
In war times the island had been an important place, for it commanded the situation; and, being heavily fortified, there was no getting by it.
It lay between the upper and lower divisions of the Union forces, and kept them separate, until a junction was finally effected across the Missouri neck of land; but the island being itself joined to that neck now, the wide river is without obstruction.
In this region the river passes from Kentucky into Tennessee, back into Missouri, then back into Kentucky, and thence into Tennessee again.
So a mile or two of Missouri sticks over into Tennessee.
The town of New Madrid was looking very unwell; but otherwise unchanged from its former condition and aspect.
Its blocks of frame-houses were still grouped in the same old flat plain, and environed by the same old forests.
It was as tranquil as formerly, and apparently had neither grown nor diminished in size.
It was said that the recent high water had invaded it and damaged its looks.
This was surprising news; for in low water the river bank is very high there (fifty feet), and in my day an overflow had always been considered an impossibility.
This present flood of 1882 Will doubtless be celebrated in the river's history for several generations before a deluge of like magnitude shall be seen.
It put all the unprotected low lands under water, from Cairo to the mouth; it broke down the levees in a great many places, on both sides of the river; and in some regions south, when the flood was at its highest, the Mississippi was _seventy miles_ wide!
a number of lives were lost, and the destruction of property was fearful.
The crops were destroyed, houses washed away, and shelterless men and cattle forced to take refuge on scattering elevations here and there in field and forest, and wait in peril and suffering until the boats put in commission by the national and local
The properties of multitudes of people were under water for months, and the poorer ones must have starved by the hundred if succor had not been promptly afforded.
{footnote [For a detailed and interesting description of the great flood, written on board of the New Orleans _Times-Democrat's_ relief-boat, see Appendix A]} The water had been falling during a considerable time now, yet as a rule we found the banks still
CHAPTER 27 Some Imported Articles WE met two steamboats at New Madrid.
Two steamboats in sight at once!
an infrequent spectacle now in the lonesome Mississippi.
The loneliness of this solemn, stupendous flood is impressive--and depressing.
League after league, and still league after league, it pours its chocolate tide along, between its solid forest walls, its almost untenanted shores, with seldom a sail or a moving object of any kind to disturb the surface and break the monotony of the
Immediately after the war of 1812, tourists began to come to America, from England; scattering ones at first, then a sort of procession of them--a procession which kept up its plodding, patient march through the land during many, many years.
Each tourist took notes, and went home and published a book--a book which was usually calm, truthful, reasonable, kind; but which seemed just the reverse to our tender-footed progenitors.
A glance at these tourist-books shows us that in certain of its aspects the Mississippi has undergone no change since those strangers visited it, but remains to-day about as it was then.
The emotions produced in those foreign breasts by these aspects were not all formed on one pattern, of course; they _had _to be various, along at first, because the earlier tourists were obliged to originate their emotions, whereas in older countries one
And, mind you, emotions are among the toughest things in the world to manufacture out of whole cloth; it is easier to manufacture seven facts than one emotion.
Captain Basil Hall.
R.N., writing fifty-five years ago, says-- 'Here I caught the first glimpse of the object I had so long wished to behold, and felt myself amply repaid at that moment for all the trouble I had experienced in coming so far; and stood looking at the river
But it was not till I had visited the same spot a dozen times, that I came to a right comprehension of the grandeur of the scene.
' Following are Mrs. Trollope's emotions.
She is writing a few months later in the same year, 1827, and is coming in at the mouth of the Mississippi-- 'The first indication of our approach to land was the appearance of this mighty river pouring forth its muddy mass of waters, and mingling with the
I never beheld a scene so utterly desolate as this entrance of the Mississippi.
Had Dante seen it, he might have drawn images of another Borgia from its horrors.
One only object rears itself above the eddying waters; this is the mast of a vessel long since wrecked in attempting to cross the bar, and it still stands, a dismal witness of the destruction that has been, and a boding prophet of that which is to come.
' Emotions of Hon.
Charles Augustus Murray (near St. Louis), seven years later-- 'It is only when you ascend the mighty current for fifty or a hundred miles, and use the eye of imagination as well as that of nature, that you begin to understand all his might and majesty.
You see him fertilizing a boundless valley, bearing along in his course the trophies of his thousand victories over the shattered forest--here carrying away large masses of soil with all their growth, and there forming islands, destined at some future
' Receive, now, the emotions of Captain Marryat, R.N. author of the sea tales, writing in 1837, three years after Mr. Murray-- 'Never, perhaps, in the records of nations, was there an instance of a century of such unvarying and unmitigated crime as is to
The stream itself appears as if appropriate for the deeds which have been committed.
It is not like most rivers, beautiful to the sight, bestowing fertility in its course; not one that the eye loves to dwell upon as it sweeps along, nor can you wander upon its banks, or trust yourself without danger to its stream.
It is a furious, rapid, desolating torrent, loaded with alluvial soil; and few of those who are received into its waters ever rise again, {footnote [There was a foolish superstition of some little prevalence in that day, that the Mississippi would neither
]} or can support themselves long upon its surface without assistance from some friendly log.
It contains the coarsest and most uneatable of fish, such as the cat-fish and such genus, and as you descend, its banks are occupied with the fetid alligator, while the panther basks at its edge in the cane-brakes, almost impervious to man.
Pouring its impetuous waters through wild tracks covered with trees of little value except for firewood, it sweeps down whole forests in its course, which disappear in tumultuous confusion, whirled away by the stream now loaded with the masses of soil
There are no pleasing associations connected with the great common sewer of the Western America, which pours out its mud into the Mexican Gulf, polluting the clear blue sea for many miles beyond its mouth.
It is a river of desolation; and instead of reminding you, like other beautiful rivers, of an angel which has descended for the benefit of man, you imagine it a devil, whose energies have been only overcome by the wonderful power of steam.
' It is pretty crude literature for a man accustomed to handling a pen; still, as a panorama of the emotions sent weltering through this noted visitor's breast by the aspect and traditions of the 'great common sewer,' it has a value.
A value, though marred in the matter of statistics by inaccuracies; for the catfish is a plenty good enough fish for anybody, and there are no panthers that are 'impervious to man.
' Later still comes Alexander Mackay, of the Middle Temple, Barrister at Law, with a better digestion, and no catfish dinner aboard, and feels as follows-- 'The Mississippi!
It was with indescribable emotions that I first felt myself afloat upon its waters.
How often in my schoolboy dreams, and in my waking visions afterwards, had my imagination pictured to itself the lordly stream, rolling with tumultuous current through the boundless region to which it has given its name, and gathering into itself, in its
Here it was then in its reality, and I, at length, steaming against its tide.
I looked upon it with that reverence with which everyone must regard a great feature of external nature.
' So much for the emotions.
The tourists, one and all, remark upon the deep, brooding loneliness and desolation of the vast river.
Captain Basil Hall, who saw it at flood-stage, says-- 'Sometimes we passed along distances of twenty or thirty miles without seeing a single habitation.
An artist, in search of hints for a painting of the deluge, would here have found them in abundance.
' The first shall be last, etc.
just two hundred years ago, the old original first and gallantest of all the foreign tourists, pioneer, head of the procession, ended his weary and tedious discovery-voyage down the solemn stretches of the great river--La Salle, whose name will last as
We quote from Mr. Parkman-- 'And now they neared their journey's end.
On the sixth of April, the river divided itself into three broad channels.
La Salle followed that of the west, and D'Autray that of the east; while Tonty took the middle passage.
As he drifted down the turbid current, between the low and marshy shores, the brackish water changed to brine, and the breeze grew fresh with the salt breath of the sea.
Then the broad bosom of the great Gulf opened on his sight, tossing its restless billows, limitless, voiceless, lonely as when born of chaos, without a sail, without a sign of life.
' Then, on a spot of solid ground, La Salle reared a column 'bearing the arms of France; the Frenchmen were mustered under arms; and while the New England Indians and their squaws looked on in wondering silence, they chanted the _Te Deum, The Exaudiat_,
' Then, whilst the musketry volleyed and rejoicing shouts burst forth, the victorious discoverer planted the column, and made proclamation in a loud voice, taking formal possession of the river and the vast countries watered by it, in the name of the King.
The column bore this inscription-- LOUIS LE GRAND, ROY DE FRANCE ET DE NAVARRE, REGNE; LE NEUVIEME AVRIL, 1682.
New Orleans intended to fittingly celebrate, this present year, the bicentennial anniversary of this illustrious event; but when the time came, all her energies and surplus money were required in other directions, for the flood was upon the land then,
CHAPTER 28 Uncle Mumford Unloads ALL day we swung along down the river, and had the stream almost wholly to ourselves.
Formerly, at such a stage of the water, we should have passed acres of lumber rafts, and dozens of big coal barges; also occasional little trading-scows, peddling along from farm to farm, with the peddler's family on board; possibly, a random scow, bearing
But these were all absent.
Far along in the day, we saw one steamboat; just one, and no more.
She was lying at rest in the shade, within the wooded mouth of the Obion River.
The spy-glass revealed the fact that she was named for me--or _he_ was named for me, whichever you prefer.
As this was the first time I had ever encountered this species of honor, it seems excusable to mention it, and at the same time call the attention of the authorities to the tardiness of my recognition of it.
Noted a big change in the river, at Island 21.
It was a very large island, and used to be out toward mid-stream; but it is joined fast to the main shore now, and has retired from business as an island.
As we approached famous and formidable Plum Point, darkness fell, but that was nothing to shudder about--in these modern times.
For now the national government has turned the Mississippi into a sort of two-thousand-mile torchlight procession.
In the head of every crossing, and in the foot of every crossing, the government has set up a clear-burning lamp.
You are never entirely in the dark, now; there is always a beacon in sight, either before you, or behind you, or abreast.
One might almost say that lamps have been squandered there.
Dozens of crossings are lighted which were not shoal when they were created, and have never been shoal since; crossings so plain, too, and also so straight, that a steamboat can take herself through them without any help, after she has been through once.
Lamps in such places are of course not wasted; it is much more convenient and comfortable for a pilot to hold on them than on a spread of formless blackness that won't stay still; and money is saved to the boat, at the same time, for she can of course make
But this thing has knocked the romance out of piloting, to a large extent.
It, and some other things together, have knocked all the romance out of it.
For instance, the peril from snags is not now what it once was.
The government's snag-boats go patrolling up and down, in these matter-of-fact days, pulling the river's teeth; they have rooted out all the old clusters which made many localities so formidable; and they allow no new ones to collect.
Formerly, if your boat got away from you, on a black night, and broke for the woods, it was an anxious time with you; so was it also, when you were groping your way through solidified darkness in a narrow chute; but all that is changed now--you flash out
Horace Bixby and George Ritchie have charted the crossings and laid out the courses by compass; they have invented a lamp to go with the chart, and have patented the whole.
With these helps, one may run in the fog now, with considerable security, and with a confidence unknown in the old days.
With these abundant beacons, the banishment of snags, plenty of daylight in a box and ready to be turned on whenever needed, and a chart and compass to fight the fog with, piloting, at a good stage of water, is now nearly as safe and simple as driving
And now in these new days, these days of infinite change, the Anchor Line have raised the captain above the pilot by giving him the bigger wages of the two.
This was going far, but they have not stopped there.
They have decreed that the pilot shall remain at his post, and stand his watch clear through, whether the boat be under way or tied up to the shore.
We, that were once the aristocrats of the river, can't go to bed now, as we used to do, and sleep while a hundred tons of freight are lugged aboard; no, we must sit in the pilot-house; and keep awake, too.
Verily we are being treated like a parcel of mates and engineers.
The Government has taken away the romance of our calling; the Company has taken away its state and dignity.
Plum Point looked as it had always looked by night, with the exception that now there were beacons to mark the crossings, and also a lot of other lights on the Point and along its shore; these latter glinting from the fleet of the United States River
The military engineers of the Commission have taken upon their shoulders the job of making the Mississippi over again--a job transcended in size by only the original job of creating it.
They are building wing-dams here and there, to deflect the current; and dikes to confine it in narrower bounds; and other dikes to make it stay there; and for unnumbered miles along the Mississippi, they are felling the timber-front for fifty yards back,
One who knows the Mississippi will promptly aver--not aloud, but to himself--that ten thousand River Commissions, with the mines of the world at their back, cannot tame that lawless stream, cannot curb it or confine it, cannot say to it, Go here, or Go
But a discreet man will not put these things into spoken words; for the West Point engineers have not their superiors anywhere; they know all that can be known of their abstruse science; and so, since they conceive that they can fetter and handcuff that
Captain Eads, with his jetties, has done a work at the mouth of the Mississippi which seemed clearly impossible; so we do not feel full confidence now to prophesy against like impossibilities.
Otherwise one would pipe out and say the Commission might as well bully the comets in their courses and undertake to make them behave, as try to bully the Mississippi into right and reasonable conduct.
I consulted Uncle Mumford concerning this and cognate matters; and I give here the result, stenographically reported, and therefore to be relied on as being full and correct; except that I have here and there left out remarks which were addressed to the
' and which seemed to me to break the flow of the written statement, without compensating by adding to its information or its clearness.
Not that I have ventured to strike out all such interjections; I have removed only those which were obviously irrelevant; wherever one occurred which I felt any question about, I have judged it safest to let it remain.
UNCLE MUMFORD'S IMPRESSIONS Uncle Mumford said-- 'As long as I have been mate of a steamboat--thirty years--I have watched this river and studied it.
Maybe I could have learnt more about it at West Point, but if I believe it I wish I may be _what are you sucking your fingers there for ?
--collar that kag of nails!
_ Four years at West Point, and plenty of books and schooling, will learn a man a good deal, I reckon, but it won't learn him the river.
You turn one of those little European rivers over to this Commission, with its hard bottom and clear water, and it would just be a holiday job for them to wall it, and pile it, and dike it, and tame it down, and boss it around, and make it go wherever they
But this ain't that kind of a river.
They have started in here with big confidence, and the best intentions in the world; but they are going to get left.
What does Ecclesiastes vii.
13 say?
Says enough to knock _their _little game galley-west, don't it?
Now you look at their methods once.
There at Devil's Island, in the Upper River, they wanted the water to go one way, the water wanted to go another.
So they put up a stone wall.
But what does the river care for a stone wall?
When it got ready, it just bulged through it.
Maybe they can build another that will stay; that is, up there--but not down here they can't.
Down here in the Lower River, they drive some pegs to turn the water away from the shore and stop it from slicing off the bank; very well, don't it go straight over and cut somebody else's bank?
Certainly.
Are they going to peg all the banks?
Why, they could buy ground and build a new Mississippi cheaper.
They are pegging Bulletin Tow-head now.
It won't do any good.
If the river has got a mortgage on that island, it will foreclose, sure, pegs or no pegs.
Away down yonder, they have driven two rows of piles straight through the middle of a dry bar half a mile long, which is forty foot out of the water when the river is low.
What do you reckon that is for?
If I know, I wish I may land in--_hump yourself, you son of an undertaker!
--out with that coal-oil, now, lively, lively!
_ And just look at what they are trying to do down there at Milliken's Bend.
There's been a cut-off in that section, and Vicksburg is left out in the cold.
It's a country town now.
The river strikes in below it; and a boat can't go up to the town except in high water.
Well, they are going to build wing-dams in the bend opposite the foot of 103, and throw the water over and cut off the foot of the island and plow down into an old ditch where the river used to be in ancient times; and they think they can persuade the
That is, they are going to take this whole Mississippi, and twist it around and make it run several miles _up stream_.
Well you've got to admire men that deal in ideas of that size and can tote them around without crutches; but you haven't got to believe they can _do_ such miracles, have you!
And yet you ain't absolutely obliged to believe they can't.
I reckon the safe way, where a man can afford it, is to copper the operation, and at the same time buy enough property in Vicksburg to square you up in case they win.
Government is doing a deal for the Mississippi, now--spending loads of money on her.
When there used to be four thousand steamboats and ten thousand acres of coal-barges, and rafts and trading scows, there wasn't a lantern from St. Paul to New Orleans, and the snags were thicker than bristles on a hog's back; and now when there's three
And I reckon that by the time there ain't any boats left at all, the Commission will have the old thing all reorganized, and dredged out, and fenced in, and tidied up, to a degree that will make navigation just simply perfect, and absolutely safe and
going to be a year getting that hogshead ashore?
'_ During our trip to New Orleans and back, we had many conversations with river men, planters, journalists, and officers of the River Commission--with conflicting and confusing results.
To wit:-- 1.
Some believed in the Commission's scheme to arbitrarily and permanently confine (and thus deepen) the channel, preserve threatened shores, etc.
2.
Some believed that the Commission's money ought to be spent only on building and repairing the great system of levees.
3.
Some believed that the higher you build your levee, the higher the river's bottom will rise; and that consequently the levee system is a mistake.
4.
Some believed in the scheme to relieve the river, in flood-time, by turning its surplus waters off into Lake Borgne, etc.
5.
Some believed in the scheme of northern lake-reservoirs to replenish the Mississippi in low-water seasons.
Wherever you find a man down there who believes in one of these theories you may turn to the next man and frame your talk upon the hypothesis that he does not believe in that theory; and after you have had experience, you do not take this course
For you will have come to know, with a deep and restful certainty, that you are not going to meet two people sick of the same theory, one right after the other.
No, there will always be one or two with the other diseases along between.
And as you proceed, you will find out one or two other things.
You will find out that there is no distemper of the lot but is contagious; and you cannot go where it is without catching it.
You may vaccinate yourself with deterrent facts as much as you please--it will do no good; it will seem to 'take,' but it doesn't; the moment you rub against any one of those theorists, make up your mind that it is time to hang out your yellow flag.
Yes, you are his sure victim: yet his work is not all to your hurt--only part of it; for he is like your family physician, who comes and cures the mumps, and leaves the scarlet-fever behind.
If your man is a Lake-Borgne-relief theorist, for instance, he will exhale a cloud of deadly facts and statistics which will lay you out with that disease, sure; but at the same time he will cure you of any other of the five theories that may have
I have had all the five; and had them 'bad;' but ask me not, in mournful numbers, which one racked me hardest, or which one numbered the biggest sick list, for I do not know.
In truth, no one can answer the latter question.
Mississippi Improvement is a mighty topic, down yonder.
Every man on the river banks, south of Cairo, talks about it every day, during such moments as he is able to spare from talking about the war; and each of the several chief theories has its host of zealous partisans; but, as I have said, it is not possible
All were agreed upon one point, however: if Congress would make a sufficient appropriation, a colossal benefit would result.
Very well; since then the appropriation has been made--possibly a sufficient one, certainly not too large a one.
Let us hope that the prophecy will be amply fulfilled.
One thing will be easily granted by the reader; that an opinion from Mr. Edward Atkinson, upon any vast national commercial matter, comes as near ranking as authority, as can the opinion of any individual in the Union.
What he has to say about Mississippi River Improvement will be found in the Appendix.
{footnote [See Appendix B.]} Sometimes, half a dozen figures will reveal, as with a lightning-flash, the importance of a subject which ten thousand labored words, with the same purpose in view, had left at last but dim and uncertain.
Here is a case of the sort--paragraph from the 'Cincinnati Commercial'-- 'The towboat "Jos.
B. Williams" is on her way to New Orleans with a tow of thirty-two barges, containing six hundred thousand bushels (seventy-six pounds to the bushel) of coal exclusive of her own fuel, being the largest tow ever taken to New Orleans or anywhere else in the
Her freight bill, at 3 cents a bushel, amounts to $18,000.
It would take eighteen hundred cars, of three hundred and thirty-three bushels to the car, to transport this amount of coal.
At $10 per ton, or $100 per car, which would be a fair price for the distance by rail, the freight bill would amount to $180,000, or $162,000 more by rail than by river.
The tow will be taken from Pittsburg to New Orleans in fourteen or fifteen days.
It would take one hundred trains of eighteen cars to the train to transport this one tow of six hundred thousand bushels of coal, and even if it made the usual speed of fast freight lines, it would take one whole summer to put it through by rail.
' When a river in good condition can enable one to save $162,000 and a whole summer's time, on a single cargo, the wisdom of taking measures to keep the river in good condition is made plain to even the uncommercial mind.
CHAPTER 29 A Few Specimen Bricks WE passed through the Plum Point region, turned Craighead's Point, and glided unchallenged by what was once the formidable Fort Pillow, memorable because of the massacre perpetrated there during the war.
Massacres are sprinkled with some frequency through the histories of several Christian nations, but this is almost the only one that can be found in American history; perhaps it is the only one which rises to a size correspondent to that huge and somber
We have the 'Boston Massacre,' where two or three people were killed; but we must bunch Anglo-Saxon history together to find the fellow to the Fort Pillow tragedy; and doubtless even then we must travel back to the days and the performances of Coeur de
More of the river's freaks.
In times past, the channel used to strike above Island 37, by Brandywine Bar, and down towards Island 39.
Afterward, changed its course and went from Brandywine down through Vogelman's chute in the Devil's Elbow, to Island 39--part of this course reversing the old order; the river running _up_ four or five miles, instead of down, and cutting off, throughout,
This in 1876.
All that region is now called Centennial Island.
There is a tradition that Island 37 was one of the principal abiding places of the once celebrated 'Murel's Gang.
' This was a colossal combination of robbers, horse-thieves, negro-stealers, and counterfeiters, engaged in business along the river some fifty or sixty years ago.
While our journey across the country towards St. Louis was in progress we had had no end of Jesse James and his stirring history; for he had just been assassinated by an agent of the Governor of Missouri, and was in consequence occupying a good deal of
Cheap histories of him were for sale by train boys.
According to these, he was the most marvelous creature of his kind that had ever existed.
It was a mistake.
Murel was his equal in boldness; in pluck; in rapacity; in cruelty, brutality, heartlessness, treachery, and in general and comprehensive vileness and shamelessness; and very much his superior in some larger aspects.
James was a retail rascal; Murel, wholesale.
James's modest genius dreamed of no loftier flight than the planning of raids upon cars, coaches, and country banks; Murel projected negro insurrections and the capture of New Orleans; and furthermore, on occasion, this Murel could go into a pulpit and
What are James and his half-dozen vulgar rascals compared with this stately old-time criminal, with his sermons, his meditated insurrections and city-captures, and his majestic following of ten hundred men, sworn to do his evil will!
Here is a paragraph or two concerning this big operator, from a now forgotten book which was published half a century ago-- He appears to have been a most dexterous as well as consummate villain.
When he traveled, his usual disguise was that of an itinerant preacher; and it is said that his discourses were very 'soul-moving'--interesting the hearers so much that they forgot to look after their horses, which were carried away by his confederates
But the stealing of horses in one State, and selling them in another, was but a small portion of their business; the most lucrative was the enticing slaves to run away from their masters, that they might sell them in another quarter.
This was arranged as follows; they would tell a negro that if he would run away from his master, and allow them to sell him, he should receive a portion of the money paid for him, and that upon his return to them a second time they would send him to a free
The poor wretches complied with this request, hoping to obtain money and freedom; they would be sold to another master, and run away again, to their employers; sometimes they would be sold in this manner three or four times, until they had realized three
Even if it was established that they had stolen a negro, before he was murdered, they were always prepared to evade punishment; for they concealed the negro who had run away, until he was advertised, and a reward offered to any man who would catch him.
An advertisement of this kind warrants the person to take the property, if found.
And then the negro becomes a property in trust, when, therefore, they sold the negro, it only became a breach of trust, not stealing; and for a breach of trust, the owner of the property can only have redress by a civil action, which was useless, as the
It may be inquired, how it was that Murel escaped Lynch law under such circumstances This will be easily understood when it is stated that he had _more than a thousand sworn confederates_, all ready at a moment's notice to support any of the gang who might
The names of all the principal confederates of Murel were obtained from himself, in a manner which I shall presently explain.
The gang was composed of two classes: the Heads or Council, as they were called, who planned and concerted, but seldom acted; they amounted to about four hundred.
The other class were the active agents, and were termed strikers, and amounted to about six hundred and fifty.
These were the tools in the hands of the others; they ran all the risk, and received but a small portion of the money; they were in the power of the leaders of the gang, who would sacrifice them at any time by handing them over to justice, or sinking their
The general rendezvous of this gang of miscreants was on the Arkansas side of the river, where they concealed their negroes in the morasses and cane-brakes.
The depredations of this extensive combination were severely felt; but so well were their plans arranged, that although Murel, who was always active, was everywhere suspected, there was no proof to be obtained.
It so happened, however, that a young man of the name of Stewart, who was looking after two slaves which Murel had decoyed away, fell in with him and obtained his confidence, took the oath, and was admitted into the gang as one of the General Council.
By this means all was discovered; for Stewart turned traitor, although he had taken the oath, and having obtained every information, exposed the whole concern, the names of all the parties, and finally succeeded in bringing home sufficient evidence against
He was obliged to quit the Southern States in consequence.
It is, however, now well ascertained to have been all true; and although some blame Mr. Stewart for having violated his oath, they no longer attempt to deny that his revelations were correct.
I will quote one or two portions of Murel's confessions to Mr. Stewart, made to him when they were journeying together.
I ought to have observed, that the ultimate intentions of Murel and his associates were, by his own account, on a very extended scale; having no less an object in view than _raising the blacks against the whites, taking possession of, and plundering new
The following are a few extracts:-- 'I collected all my friends about New Orleans at one of our friends' houses in that place, and we sat in council three days before we got all our plans to our notion; we then determined to undertake the rebellion at
Every man's business being assigned him, I started to Natchez on foot, having sold my horse in New Orleans,--with the intention of stealing another after I started.
I walked four days, and no opportunity offered for me to get a horse.
The fifth day, about twelve, I had become tired, and stopped at a creek to get some water and rest a little.
While I was sitting on a log, looking down the road the way that I had come, a man came in sight riding on a good-looking horse.
The very moment I saw him, I was determined to have his horse, if he was in the garb of a traveler.
He rode up, and I saw from his equipage that he was a traveler.
I arose and drew an elegant rifle pistol on him and ordered him to dismount.
He did so, and I took his horse by the bridle and pointed down the creek, and ordered him to walk before me.
He went a few hundred yards and stopped.
I hitched his horse, and then made him undress himself, all to his shirt and drawers, and ordered him to turn his back to me.
He said, 'If you are determined to kill me, let me have time to pray before I die,' I told him I had no time to hear him pray.
He turned around and dropped on his knees, and I shot him through the back of the head.
I ripped open his belly and took out his entrails, and sunk him in the creek.
I then searched his pockets, and found four hundred dollars and thirty-seven cents, and a number of papers that I did not take time to examine.
I sunk the pocket-book and papers and his hat, in the creek.
His boots were brand-new, and fitted me genteelly; and I put them on and sunk my old shoes in the creek, to atone for them.
I rolled up his clothes and put them into his portmanteau, as they were brand-new cloth of the best quality.
I mounted as fine a horse as ever I straddled, and directed my course for Natchez in much better style than I had been for the last five days.
'Myself and a fellow by the name of Crenshaw gathered four good horses and started for Georgia.
We got in company with a young South Carolinian just before we got to Cumberland Mountain, and Crenshaw soon knew all about his business.
He had been to Tennessee to buy a drove of hogs, but when he got there pork was dearer than he calculated, and he declined purchasing.
We concluded he was a prize.
Crenshaw winked at me; I understood his idea.
Crenshaw had traveled the road before, but I never had; we had traveled several miles on the mountain, when he passed near a great precipice; just before we passed it Crenshaw asked me for my whip, which had a pound of lead in the butt; I handed it to him,
Crenshaw said he knew a place to hide him, and he gathered him under his arms, and I by his feet, and conveyed him to a deep crevice in the brow of the precipice, and tumbled him into it, and he went out of sight; we then tumbled in his saddle, and took
'We were detained a few days, and during that time our friend went to a little village in the neighborhood and saw the negro advertised (a negro in our possession), and a description of the two men of whom he had been purchased, and giving his suspicions
It was rather squally times, but any port in a storm: we took the negro that night on the bank of a creek which runs by the farm of our friend, and Crenshaw shot him through the head.
We took out his entrails and sunk him in the creek.
'He had sold the other negro the third time on Arkansaw River for upwards of five hundred dollars; and then stole him and delivered him into the hand of his friend, who conducted him to a swamp, and veiled the tragic scene, and got the last gleanings and
He sold the negro, first and last, for nearly two thousand dollars, and then put him for ever out of the reach of all pursuers; and they can never graze him unless they can find the negro; and that they cannot do, for his carcass has fed many a tortoise
' We were approaching Memphis, in front of which city, and witnessed by its people, was fought the most famous of the river battles of the Civil War.
Two men whom I had served under, in my river days, took part in that fight: Mr. Bixby, head pilot of the Union fleet, and Montgomery, Commodore of the Confederate fleet.
Both saw a great deal of active service during the war, and achieved high reputations for pluck and capacity.
As we neared Memphis, we began to cast about for an excuse to stay with the 'Gold Dust' to the end of her course--Vicksburg.
We were so pleasantly situated, that we did not wish to make a change.
I had an errand of considerable importance to do at Napoleon, Arkansas, but perhaps I could manage it without quitting the 'Gold Dust.
' I said as much; so we decided to stick to present quarters.
The boat was to tarry at Memphis till ten the next morning.
It is a beautiful city, nobly situated on a commanding bluff overlooking the river.
The streets are straight and spacious, though not paved in a way to incite distempered admiration.
No, the admiration must be reserved for the town's sewerage system, which is called perfect; a recent reform, however, for it was just the other way, up to a few years ago--a reform resulting from the lesson taught by a desolating visitation of the
In those awful days the people were swept off by hundreds, by thousands; and so great was the reduction caused by flight and by death together, that the population was diminished three-fourths, and so remained for a time.
Business stood nearly still, and the streets bore an empty Sunday aspect.
Here is a picture of Memphis, at that disastrous time, drawn by a German tourist who seems to have been an eye-witness of the scenes which he describes.
It is from Chapter VII, of his book, just published, in Leipzig, 'Mississippi-Fahrten, von Ernst von Hesse-Wartegg.
'-- 'In August the yellow-fever had reached its extremest height.
Daily, hundreds fell a sacrifice to the terrible epidemic.
The city was become a mighty graveyard, two-thirds of the population had deserted the place, and only the poor, the aged and the sick, remained behind, a sure prey for the insidious enemy.
The houses were closed: little lamps burned in front of many--a sign that here death had entered.
Often, several lay dead in a single house; from the windows hung black crape.
The stores were shut up, for their owners were gone away or dead.
'Fearful evil!
In the briefest space it struck down and swept away even the most vigorous victim.
A slight indisposition, then an hour of fever, then the hideous delirium, then--the Yellow Death!
On the street corners, and in the squares, lay sick men, suddenly overtaken by the disease; and even corpses, distorted and rigid.
Food failed.
Meat spoiled in a few hours in the fetid and pestiferous air, and turned black.
'Fearful clamors issue from many houses; then after a season they cease, and all is still: noble, self-sacrificing men come with the coffin, nail it up, and carry it away, to the graveyard.
In the night stillness reigns.
Only the physicians and the hearses hurry through the streets; and out of the distance, at intervals, comes the muffled thunder of the railway train, which with the speed of the wind, and as if hunted by furies, flies by the pest-ridden city without
' But there is life enough there now.
The population exceeds forty thousand and is augmenting, and trade is in a flourishing condition.
We drove about the city; visited the park and the sociable horde of squirrels there; saw the fine residences, rose-clad and in other ways enticing to the eye; and got a good breakfast at the hotel.
A thriving place is the Good Samaritan City of the Mississippi: has a great wholesale jobbing trade; foundries, machine shops; and manufactories of wagons, carriages, and cotton-seed oil; and is shortly to have cotton mills and elevators.
Her cotton receipts reached five hundred thousand bales last year--an increase of sixty thousand over the year before.
Out from her healthy commercial heart issue five trunk lines of railway; and a sixth is being added.
This is a very different Memphis from the one which the vanished and unremembered procession of foreign tourists used to put into their books long time ago.
In the days of the now forgotten but once renowned and vigorously hated Mrs. Trollope, Memphis seems to have consisted mainly of one long street of log-houses, with some outlying cabins sprinkled around rearward toward the woods; and now and then a pig,
That was fifty-five years ago.
She stopped at the hotel.
Plainly it was not the one which gave us our breakfast.
She says-- 'The table was laid for fifty persons, and was nearly full.
They ate in perfect silence, and with such astonishing rapidity that their dinner was over literally before ours was begun; the only sounds heard were those produced by the knives and forks, with the unceasing chorus of coughing, _etc_.
' 'Coughing, etc.
' The 'etc.
' stands for an unpleasant word there, a word which she does not always charitably cover up, but sometimes prints.
You will find it in the following description of a steamboat dinner which she ate in company with a lot of aristocratic planters; wealthy, well-born, ignorant swells they were, tinselled with the usual harmless military and judicial titles of that old day
' CHAPTER 30 Sketches by the Way IT was a big river, below Memphis; banks brimming full, everywhere, and very frequently more than full, the waters pouring out over the land, flooding the woods and fields for miles into the interior; and in places, to a
A melancholy picture, and a continuous one;--hundreds of miles of it.
Sometimes the beacon lights stood in water three feet deep, in the edge of dense forests which extended for miles without farm, wood-yard, clearing, or break of any kind; which meant that the keeper of the light must come in a skiff a great distance to
Yet I was told that the work is faithfully performed, in all weathers; and not always by men, sometimes by women, if the man is sick or absent.
The Government furnishes oil, and pays ten or fifteen dollars a month for the lighting and tending.
A Government boat distributes oil and pays wages once a month.
The Ship Island region was as woodsy and tenantless as ever.
The island has ceased to be an island; has joined itself compactly to the main shore, and wagons travel, now, where the steamboats used to navigate.
No signs left of the wreck of the 'Pennsylvania.
' Some farmer will turn up her bones with his plow one day, no doubt, and be surprised.
We were getting down now into the migrating negro region.
These poor people could never travel when they were slaves; so they make up for the privation now.
They stay on a plantation till the desire to travel seizes them; then they pack up, hail a steamboat, and clear out.
Not for any particular place; no, nearly any place will answer; they only want to be moving.
The amount of money on hand will answer the rest of the conundrum for them.
If it will take them fifty miles, very well; let it be fifty.
If not, a shorter flight will do.
During a couple of days, we frequently answered these hails.
Sometimes there was a group of high-water-stained, tumble-down cabins, populous with colored folk, and no whites visible; with grassless patches of dry ground here and there; a few felled trees, with skeleton cattle, mules, and horses, eating the leaves
Sometimes there was a single lonely landing-cabin; near it the colored family that had hailed us; little and big, old and young, roosting on the scant pile of household goods; these consisting of a rusty gun, some bed-ticks, chests, tinware, stools, a
They must have their dogs; can't go without their dogs.
Yet the dogs are never willing; they always object; so, one after another, in ridiculous procession, they are dragged aboard; all four feet braced and sliding along the stage, head likely to be pulled off; but the tugger marching determinedly forward,
Sometimes a child is forgotten and left on the bank; but never a dog.
The usual river-gossip going on in the pilot-house.
Island No.
63--an island with a lovely 'chute,' or passage, behind it in the former times.
They said Jesse Jamieson, in the 'Skylark,' had a visiting pilot with him one trip--a poor old broken-down, superannuated fellow--left him at the wheel, at the foot of 63, to run off the watch.
The ancient mariner went up through the chute, and down the river outside; and up the chute and down the river again; and yet again and again; and handed the boat over to the relieving pilot, at the end of three hours of honest endeavor, at the same old
A darkey on shore who had observed the boat go by, about thirteen times, said, 'clar to gracious, I wouldn't be s'prised if dey's a whole line o' dem Sk'ylarks!
' Anecdote illustrative of influence of reputation in the changing of opinion.
The 'Eclipse' was renowned for her swiftness.
One day she passed along; an old darkey on shore, absorbed in his own matters, did not notice what steamer it was.
Presently someone asked-- 'Any boat gone up?
' 'Yes, sah.
' 'Was she going fast?
' 'Oh, so-so--loafin' along.
' 'Now, do you know what boat that was?
' 'No, sah.
' 'Why, uncle, that was the "Eclipse".
' 'No!
Is dat so?
Well, I bet it was--cause she jes' went by here a-_sparklin_'!
' Piece of history illustrative of the violent style of some of the people down along here, During the early weeks of high water, A's fence rails washed down on B's ground, and B's rails washed up in the eddy and landed on A's ground.
A said, 'Let the thing remain so; I will use your rails, and you use mine.
' But B objected--wouldn't have it so.
One day, A came down on B's ground to get his rails.
B said, 'I'll kill you!
' and proceeded for him with his revolver.
A said, 'I'm not armed.
' So B, who wished to do only what was right, threw down his revolver; then pulled a knife, and cut A's throat all around, but gave his principal attention to the front, and so failed to sever the jugular.
Struggling around, A managed to get his hands on the discarded revolver, and shot B dead with it--and recovered from his own injuries.
Further gossip;--after which, everybody went below to get afternoon coffee, and left me at the wheel, alone, Something presently reminded me of our last hour in St. Louis, part of which I spent on this boat's hurricane deck, aft.
I was joined there by a stranger, who dropped into conversation with me--a brisk young fellow, who said he was born in a town in the interior of Wisconsin, and had never seen a steamboat until a week before.
Also said that on the way down from La Crosse he had inspected and examined his boat so diligently and with such passionate interest that he had mastered the whole thing from stem to rudder-blade.
Asked me where I was from.
I answered, New England.
'Oh, a Yank!
' said he; and went chatting straight along, without waiting for assent or denial.
He immediately proposed to take me all over the boat and tell me the names of her different parts, and teach me their uses.
Before I could enter protest or excuse, he was already rattling glibly away at his benevolent work; and when I perceived that he was misnaming the things, and inhospitably amusing himself at the expense of an innocent stranger from a far country, I held my
He gave me a world of misinformation; and the further he went, the wider his imagination expanded, and the more he enjoyed his cruel work of deceit.
Sometimes, after palming off a particularly fantastic and outrageous lie upon me, he was so 'full of laugh' that he had to step aside for a minute, upon one pretext or another, to keep me from suspecting.
I staid faithfully by him until his comedy was finished.
Then he remarked that he had undertaken to 'learn' me all about a steamboat, and had done it; but that if he had overlooked anything, just ask him and he would supply the lack.
'Anything about this boat that you don't know the name of or the purpose of, you come to me and I'll tell you.
' I said I would, and took my departure; disappeared, and approached him from another quarter, whence he could not see me.
There he sat, all alone, doubling himself up and writhing this way and that, in the throes of unappeasable laughter.
He must have made himself sick; for he was not publicly visible afterward for several days.
Meantime, the episode dropped out of my mind.
The thing that reminded me of it now, when I was alone at the wheel, was the spectacle of this young fellow standing in the pilot-house door, with the knob in his hand, silently and severely inspecting me.
I don't know when I have seen anybody look so injured as he did.
He did not say anything--simply stood there and looked; reproachfully looked and pondered.
Finally he shut the door, and started away; halted on the texas a minute; came slowly back and stood in the door again, with that grieved look in his face; gazed upon me awhile in meek rebuke, then said-- 'You let me learn you all about a steamboat, didn't
' 'Yes,' I confessed.
'Yes, you did--_didn't_ you?
' 'Yes.
' 'You are the feller that--that--' Language failed.
Pause--impotent struggle for further words--then he gave it up, choked out a deep, strong oath, and departed for good.
Afterward I saw him several times below during the trip; but he was cold--would not look at me.
Idiot, if he had not been in such a sweat to play his witless practical joke upon me, in the beginning, I would have persuaded his thoughts into some other direction, and saved him from committing that wanton and silly impoliteness.
I had myself called with the four o'clock watch, mornings, for one cannot see too many summer sunrises on the Mississippi.
They are enchanting.
First, there is the eloquence of silence; for a deep hush broods everywhere.
Next, there is the haunting sense of loneliness, isolation, remoteness from the worry and bustle of the world.
The dawn creeps in stealthily; the solid walls of black forest soften to gray, and vast stretches of the river open up and reveal themselves; the water is glass-smooth, gives off spectral little wreaths of white mist, there is not the faintest breath of
Then a bird pipes up, another follows, and soon the pipings develop into a jubilant riot of music.
You see none of the birds; you simply move through an atmosphere of song which seems to sing itself.
When the light has become a little stronger, you have one of the fairest and softest pictures imaginable.
You have the intense green of the massed and crowded foliage near by; you see it paling shade by shade in front of you; upon the next projecting cape, a mile off or more, the tint has lightened to the tender young green of spring; the cape beyond that one
And all this stretch of river is a mirror, and you have the shadowy reflections of the leafage and the curving shores and the receding capes pictured in it.
Well, that is all beautiful; soft and rich and beautiful; and when the sun gets well up, and distributes a pink flush here and a powder of gold yonder and a purple haze where it will yield the best effect, you grant that you have seen something that is
We had the Kentucky Bend country in the early morning--scene of a strange and tragic accident in the old times, Captain Poe had a small stern-wheel boat, for years the home of himself and his wife.
One night the boat struck a snag in the head of Kentucky Bend, and sank with astonishing suddenness; water already well above the cabin floor when the captain got aft.
So he cut into his wife's state-room from above with an ax; she was asleep in the upper berth, the roof a flimsier one than was supposed; the first blow crashed down through the rotten boards and clove her skull.
This bend is all filled up now--result of a cut-off; and the same agent has taken the great and once much-frequented Walnut Bend, and set it away back in a solitude far from the accustomed track of passing steamers.
Helena we visited, and also a town I had not heard of before, it being of recent birth--Arkansas City.
It was born of a railway; the Little Rock, Mississippi River and Texas Railroad touches the river there.
We asked a passenger who belonged there what sort of a place it was.
'Well,' said he, after considering, and with the air of one who wishes to take time and be accurate, 'It's a hell of a place.
' A description which was photographic for exactness.
There were several rows and clusters of shabby frame-houses, and a supply of mud sufficient to insure the town against a famine in that article for a hundred years; for the overflow had but lately subsided.
There were stagnant ponds in the streets, here and there, and a dozen rude scows were scattered about, lying aground wherever they happened to have been when the waters drained off and people could do their visiting and shopping on foot once more.
Still, it is a thriving place, with a rich country behind it, an elevator in front of it, and also a fine big mill for the manufacture of cotton-seed oil.
I had never seen this kind of a mill before.
Cotton-seed was comparatively valueless in my time; but it is worth $12 or $13 a ton now, and none of it is thrown away.
The oil made from it is colorless, tasteless, and almost if not entirely odorless.
It is claimed that it can, by proper manipulation, be made to resemble and perform the office of any and all oils, and be produced at a cheaper rate than the cheapest of the originals.
Sagacious people shipped it to Italy, doctored it, labeled it, and brought it back as olive oil.
This trade grew to be so formidable that Italy was obliged to put a prohibitory impost upon it to keep it from working serious injury to her oil industry.
Helena occupies one of the prettiest situations on the Mississippi.
Her perch is the last, the southernmost group of hills which one sees on that side of the river.
In its normal condition it is a pretty town; but the flood (or possibly the seepage) had lately been ravaging it; whole streets of houses had been invaded by the muddy water, and the outsides of the buildings were still belted with a broad stain extending
Stranded and discarded scows lay all about; plank sidewalks on stilts four feet high were still standing; the board sidewalks on the ground level were loose and ruinous,--a couple of men trotting along them could make a blind man think a cavalry charge was
A Mississippi inundation is the next most wasting and desolating infliction to a fire.
We had an enjoyable time here, on this sunny Sunday: two full hours' liberty ashore while the boat discharged freight.
In the back streets but few white people were visible, but there were plenty of colored folk--mainly women and girls; and almost without exception upholstered in bright new clothes of swell and elaborate style and cut--a glaring and hilarious contrast to
Helena is the second town in Arkansas, in point of population--which is placed at five thousand.
The country about it is exceptionally productive.
Helena has a good cotton trade; handles from forty to sixty thousand bales annually; she has a large lumber and grain commerce; has a foundry, oil mills, machine shops and wagon factories--in brief has $1,000,000 invested in manufacturing industries.
She has two railways, and is the commercial center of a broad and prosperous region.
Her gross receipts of money, annually, from all sources, are placed by the New Orleans 'Times-Democrat' at $4,000,000.
CHAPTER 31 A Thumb-print and What Came of It WE were approaching Napoleon, Arkansas.
So I began to think about my errand there.
Time, noonday; and bright and sunny.
This was bad--not best, anyway; for mine was not (preferably) a noonday kind of errand.
The more I thought, the more that fact pushed itself upon me--now in one form, now in another.
Finally, it took the form of a distinct question: is it good common sense to do the errand in daytime, when, by a little sacrifice of comfort and inclination, you can have night for it, and no inquisitive eyes around.
This settled it.
Plain question and plain answer make the shortest road out of most perplexities.
I got my friends into my stateroom, and said I was sorry to create annoyance and disappointment, but that upon reflection it really seemed best that we put our luggage ashore and stop over at Napoleon.
Their disapproval was prompt and loud; their language mutinous.
Their main argument was one which has always been the first to come to the surface, in such cases, since the beginning of time: 'But you decided and _agreed _to stick to this boat, etc.
; as if, having determined to do an unwise thing, one is thereby bound to go ahead and make _two _unwise things of it, by carrying out that determination.
I tried various mollifying tactics upon them, with reasonably good success: under which encouragement, I increased my efforts; and, to show them that I had not created this annoying errand, and was in no way to blame for it, I presently drifted into its
In November I was living in Fraulein Dahlweiner's _pension_, 1a, Karlstrasse; but my working quarters were a mile from there, in the house of a widow who supported herself by taking lodgers.
She and her two young children used to drop in every morning and talk German to me--by request.
One day, during a ramble about the city, I visited one of the two establishments where the Government keeps and watches corpses until the doctors decide that they are permanently dead, and not in a trance state.
It was a grisly place, that spacious room.
There were thirty-six corpses of adults in sight, stretched on their backs on slightly slanted boards, in three long rows--all of them with wax-white, rigid faces, and all of them wrapped in white shrouds.
Along the sides of the room were deep alcoves, like bay windows; and in each of these lay several marble-visaged babes, utterly hidden and buried under banks of fresh flowers, all but their faces and crossed hands.
Around a finger of each of these fifty still forms, both great and small, was a ring; and from the ring a wire led to the ceiling, and thence to a bell in a watch-room yonder, where, day and night, a watchman sits always alert and ready to spring to the
I imagined myself a death-sentinel drowsing there alone, far in the dragging watches of some wailing, gusty night, and having in a twinkling all my body stricken to quivering jelly by the sudden clamor of that awful summons!
So I inquired about this thing; asked what resulted usually?
if the watchman died, and the restored corpse came and did what it could to make his last moments easy.
But I was rebuked for trying to feed an idle and frivolous curiosity in so solemn and so mournful a place; and went my way with a humbled crest.
Next morning I was telling the widow my adventure, when she exclaimed-- 'Come with me!
I have a lodger who shall tell you all you want to know.
He has been a night-watchman there.
' He was a living man, but he did not look it.
He was abed, and had his head propped high on pillows; his face was wasted and colorless, his deep-sunken eyes were shut; his hand, lying on his breast, was talon-like, it was so bony and long-fingered.
The widow began her introduction of me.
The man's eyes opened slowly, and glittered wickedly out from the twilight of their caverns; he frowned a black frown; he lifted his lean hand and waved us peremptorily away.
But the widow kept straight on, till she had got out the fact that I was a stranger and an American.
The man's face changed at once; brightened, became even eager--and the next moment he and I were alone together.
I opened up in cast-iron German; he responded in quite flexible English; thereafter we gave the German language a permanent rest.
This consumptive and I became good friends.
I visited him every day, and we talked about everything.
At least, about everything but wives and children.
Let anybody's wife or anybody's child be mentioned, and three things always followed: the most gracious and loving and tender light glimmered in the man's eyes for a moment; faded out the next, and in its place came that deadly look which had flamed there
When I had been this Karl Ritter's daily and sole intimate during two months, he one day said, abruptly-- 'I will tell you my story.
' A DYING MAN S CONFESSION Then he went on as follows:-- I have never given up, until now.
But now I have given up.
I am going to die.
I made up my mind last night that it must be, and very soon, too.
You say you are going to revisit your river, by-and-bye, when you find opportunity.
Very well; that, together with a certain strange experience which fell to my lot last night, determines me to tell you my history--for you will see Napoleon, Arkansas; and for my sake you will stop there, and do a certain thing for me--a thing which you
Let us shorten the story wherever we can, for it will need it, being long.
You already know how I came to go to America, and how I came to settle in that lonely region in the South.
But you do not know that I had a wife.
My wife was young, beautiful, loving, and oh, so divinely good and blameless and gentle!
And our little girl was her mother in miniature.
It was the happiest of happy households.
One night--it was toward the close of the war--I woke up out of a sodden lethargy, and found myself bound and gagged, and the air tainted with chloroform!
I saw two men in the room, and one was saying to the other, in a hoarse whisper, 'I told her I would, if she made a noise, and as for the child--' The other man interrupted in a low, half-crying voice-- 'You said we'd only gag them and rob them, not hurt
' 'Shut up your whining; had to change the plan when they waked up; you done all you could to protect them, now let that satisfy you; come, help rummage.
' Both men were masked, and wore coarse, ragged 'nigger' clothes; they had a bull's-eye lantern, and by its light I noticed that the gentler robber had no thumb on his right hand.
They rummaged around my poor cabin for a moment; the head bandit then said, in his stage whisper-- 'It's a waste of time--he shall tell where it's hid.
Undo his gag, and revive him up.
' The other said-- 'All right--provided no clubbing.
' 'No clubbing it is, then--provided he keeps still.
' They approached me; just then there was a sound outside; a sound of voices and trampling hoofs; the robbers held their breath and listened; the sounds came slowly nearer and nearer; then came a shout-- '_Hello_, the house!
Show a light, we want water.
' 'The captain's voice, by G--!
' said the stage-whispering ruffian, and both robbers fled by the way of the back door, shutting off their bull's-eye as they ran.
The strangers shouted several times more, then rode by--there seemed to be a dozen of the horses--and I heard nothing more.
I struggled, but could not free myself from my bonds.
I tried to speak, but the gag was effective; I could not make a sound.
I listened for my wife's voice and my child's--listened long and intently, but no sound came from the other end of the room where their bed was.
This silence became more and more awful, more and more ominous, every moment.
Could you have endured an hour of it, do you think?
Pity me, then, who had to endure three.
Three hours--?
it was three ages!
Whenever the clock struck, it seemed as if years had gone by since I had heard it last.
All this time I was struggling in my bonds; and at last, about dawn, I got myself free, and rose up and stretched my stiff limbs.
I was able to distinguish details pretty well.
The floor was littered with things thrown there by the robbers during their search for my savings.
The first object that caught my particular attention was a document of mine which I had seen the rougher of the two ruffians glance at and then cast away.
It had blood on it!
I staggered to the other end of the room.
Oh, poor unoffending, helpless ones, there they lay, their troubles ended, mine begun!
Did I appeal to the law--I?
Does it quench the pauper's thirst if the King drink for him?
Oh, no, no, no--I wanted no impertinent interference of the law.
Laws and the gallows could not pay the debt that was owing to me!
Let the laws leave the matter in my hands, and have no fears: I would find the debtor and collect the debt.
How accomplish this, do you say?
How accomplish it, and feel so sure about it, when I had neither seen the robbers' faces, nor heard their natural voices, nor had any idea who they might be?
Nevertheless, I _was _sure--quite sure, quite confident.
I had a clue--a clue which you would not have valued--a clue which would not have greatly helped even a detective, since he would lack the secret of how to apply it.
I shall come to that, presently--you shall see.
Let us go on, now, taking things in their due order.
There was one circumstance which gave me a slant in a definite direction to begin with: Those two robbers were manifestly soldiers in tramp disguise; and not new to military service, but old in it--regulars, perhaps; they did not acquire their soldierly
So I thought, but said nothing.
And one of them had said, 'the captain's voice, by G--!
'--the one whose life I would have.
Two miles away, several regiments were in camp, and two companies of U.S. cavalry.
When I learned that Captain Blakely, of Company C had passed our way, that night, with an escort, I said nothing, but in that company I resolved to seek my man.
In conversation I studiously and persistently described the robbers as tramps, camp followers; and among this class the people made useless search, none suspecting the soldiers but me.
Working patiently, by night, in my desolated home, I made a disguise for myself out of various odds and ends of clothing; in the nearest village I bought a pair of blue goggles.
By-and-bye, when the military camp broke up, and Company C was ordered a hundred miles north, to Napoleon, I secreted my small hoard of money in my belt, and took my departure in the night.
When Company C arrived in Napoleon, I was already there.
Yes, I was there, with a new trade--fortune-teller.
Not to seem partial, I made friends and told fortunes among all the companies garrisoned there; but I gave Company C the great bulk of my attentions.
I made myself limitlessly obliging to these particular men; they could ask me no favor, put upon me no risk, which I would decline.
I became the willing butt of their jokes; this perfected my popularity; I became a favorite.
I early found a private who lacked a thumb--what joy it was to me!
And when I found that he alone, of all the company, had lost a thumb, my last misgiving vanished; I was _sure _I was on the right track.
This man's name was Kruger, a German.
There were nine Germans in the company.
I watched, to see who might be his intimates; but he seemed to have no especial intimates.
But I was his intimate; and I took care to make the intimacy grow.
Sometimes I so hungered for my revenge that I could hardly restrain myself from going on my knees and begging him to point out the man who had murdered my wife and child; but I managed to bridle my tongue.
I bided my time, and went on telling fortunes, as opportunity offered.
My apparatus was simple: a little red paint and a bit of white paper.
I painted the ball of the client's thumb, took a print of it on the paper, studied it that night, and revealed his fortune to him next day.
What was my idea in this nonsense?
It was this: When I was a youth, I knew an old Frenchman who had been a prison-keeper for thirty years, and he told me that there was one thing about a person which never changed, from the cradle to the grave--the lines in the ball of the thumb; and he
In these days, we photograph the new criminal, and hang his picture in the Rogues' Gallery for future reference; but that Frenchman, in his day, used to take a print of the ball of a new prisoner's thumb and put that away for future reference.
He always said that pictures were no good--future disguises could make them useless; 'The thumb's the only sure thing,' said he; 'you can't disguise that.
' And he used to prove his theory, too, on my friends and acquaintances; it always succeeded.
I went on telling fortunes.
Every night I shut myself in, all alone, and studied the day's thumb-prints with a magnifying-glass.
Imagine the devouring eagerness with which I pored over those mazy red spirals, with that document by my side which bore the right-hand thumb-and-finger-marks of that unknown murderer, printed with the dearest blood--to me--that was ever shed on this
And many and many a time I had to repeat the same old disappointed remark, 'will they _never _correspond!
' But my reward came at last.
It was the print of the thumb of the forty-third man of Company C whom I had experimented on--Private Franz Adler.
An hour before, I did not know the murderer's name, or voice, or figure, or face, or nationality; but now I knew all these things!
I believed I might feel sure; the Frenchman's repeated demonstrations being so good a warranty.
Still, there was a way to _make _sure.
I had an impression of Kruger's left thumb.
In the morning I took him aside when he was off duty; and when we were out of sight and hearing of witnesses, I said, impressively-- 'A part of your fortune is so grave, that I thought it would be better for you if I did not tell it in public.
You and another man, whose fortune I was studying last night,--Private Adler,--have been murdering a woman and a child!
You are being dogged: within five days both of you will be assassinated.
' He dropped on his knees, frightened out of his wits; and for five minutes he kept pouring out the same set of words, like a demented person, and in the same half-crying way which was one of my memories of that murderous night in my cabin-- 'I didn't do
He did it alone.
' This was all I wanted.
And I tried to get rid of the fool; but no, he clung to me, imploring me to save him from the assassin.
He said-- 'I have money--ten thousand dollars--hid away, the fruit of loot and thievery; save me--tell me what to do, and you shall have it, every penny.
Two-thirds of it is my cousin Adler's; but you can take it all.
We hid it when we first came here.
But I hid it in a new place yesterday, and have not told him--shall not tell him.
I was going to desert, and get away with it all.
It is gold, and too heavy to carry when one is running and dodging; but a woman who has been gone over the river two days to prepare my way for me is going to follow me with it; and if I got no chance to describe the hiding-place to her I was going to slip
There's a piece of paper in the back of the case, which tells it all.
Here, take the watch--tell me what to do!
' He was trying to press his watch upon me, and was exposing the paper and explaining it to me, when Adler appeared on the scene, about a dozen yards away.
I said to poor Kruger-- 'Put up your watch, I don't want it.
You shan't come to any harm.
Go, now; I must tell Adler his fortune.
Presently I will tell you how to escape the assassin; meantime I shall have to examine your thumbmark again.
Say nothing to Adler about this thing--say nothing to anybody.
' He went away filled with fright and gratitude, poor devil.
I told Adler a long fortune--purposely so long that I could not finish it; promised to come to him on guard, that night, and tell him the really important part of it--the tragical part of it, I said--so must be out of reach of eavesdroppers.
They always kept a picket-watch outside the town--mere discipline and ceremony--no occasion for it, no enemy around.
Toward midnight I set out, equipped with the countersign, and picked my way toward the lonely region where Adler was to keep his watch.
It was so dark that I stumbled right on a dim figure almost before I could get out a protecting word.
The sentinel hailed and I answered, both at the same moment.
I added, 'It's only me--the fortune-teller.
' Then I slipped to the poor devil's side, and without a word I drove my dirk into his heart!
_Ya wohl_, laughed I, it _was _the tragedy part of his fortune, indeed!
As he fell from his horse, he clutched at me, and my blue goggles remained in his hand; and away plunged the beast dragging him, with his foot in the stirrup.
I fled through the woods, and made good my escape, leaving the accusing goggles behind me in that dead man's hand.
This was fifteen or sixteen years ago.
Since then I have wandered aimlessly about the earth, sometimes at work, sometimes idle; sometimes with money, sometimes with none; but always tired of life, and wishing it was done, for my mission here was finished, with the act of that night; and the
' Four years ago, my health began to fail.
I had wandered into Munich, in my purposeless way.
Being out of money, I sought work, and got it; did my duty faithfully about a year, and was then given the berth of night watchman yonder in that dead-house which you visited lately.
The place suited my mood.
I liked it.
I liked being with the dead--liked being alone with them.
I used to wander among those rigid corpses, and peer into their austere faces, by the hour.
The later the time, the more impressive it was; I preferred the late time.
Sometimes I turned the lights low: this gave perspective, you see; and the imagination could play; always, the dim receding ranks of the dead inspired one with weird and fascinating fancies.
Two years ago--I had been there a year then--I was sitting all alone in the watch-room, one gusty winter's night, chilled, numb, comfortless; drowsing gradually into unconsciousness; the sobbing of the wind and the slamming of distant shutters falling
The shock of it nearly paralyzed me; for it was the first time I had ever heard it.
I gathered myself together and flew to the corpse-room.
About midway down the outside rank, a shrouded figure was sitting upright, wagging its head slowly from one side to the other--a grisly spectacle!
Its side was toward me.
I hurried to it and peered into its face.
Heavens, it was Adler!
Can you divine what my first thought was?
Put into words, it was this: 'It seems, then, you escaped me once: there will be a different result this time!
' Evidently this creature was suffering unimaginable terrors.
Think what it must have been to wake up in the midst of that voiceless hush, and, look out over that grim congregation of the dead!
What gratitude shone in his skinny white face when he saw a living form before him!
And how the fervency of this mute gratitude was augmented when his eyes fell upon the life-giving cordials which I carried in my hands!
Then imagine the horror which came into this pinched face when I put the cordials behind me, and said mockingly-- 'Speak up, Franz Adler--call upon these dead.
Doubtless they will listen and have pity; but here there is none else that will.
' He tried to speak, but that part of the shroud which bound his jaws, held firm and would not let him.
He tried to lift imploring hands, but they were crossed upon his breast and tied.
I said-- 'Shout, Franz Adler; make the sleepers in the distant streets hear you and bring help.
Shout--and lose no time, for there is little to lose.
What, you cannot?
That is a pity; but it is no matter--it does not always bring help.
When you and your cousin murdered a helpless woman and child in a cabin in Arkansas--my wife, it was, and my child!
--they shrieked for help, you remember; but it did no good; you remember that it did no good, is it not so?
Your teeth chatter--then why cannot you shout?
Loosen the bandages with your hands--then you can.
Ah, I see--your hands are tied, they cannot aid you.
How strangely things repeat themselves, after long years; for _my_ hands were tied, that night, you remember?
Yes, tied much as yours are now--how odd that is.
I could not pull free.
It did not occur to you to untie me; it does not occur to me to untie you.
Sh--!
there's a late footstep.
It is coming this way.
Hark, how near it is!
One can count the footfalls--one--two--three.
There--it is just outside.
Now is the time!
Shout, man, shout!
--it is the one sole chance between you and eternity!
Ah, you see you have delayed too long--it is gone by.
There--it is dying out.
It is gone!
Think of it--reflect upon it--you have heard a human footstep for the last time.
How curious it must be, to listen to so common a sound as that, and know that one will never hear the fellow to it again.
' Oh, my friend, the agony in that shrouded face was ecstasy to see!
I thought of a new torture, and applied it--assisting myself with a trifle of lying invention-- 'That poor Kruger tried to save my wife and child, and I did him a grateful good turn for it when the time came.
I persuaded him to rob you; and I and a woman helped him to desert, and got him away in safety.
' A look as of surprise and triumph shone out dimly through the anguish in my victim's face.
I was disturbed, disquieted.
I said-- 'What, then--didn't he escape?
' A negative shake of the head.
'No?
What happened, then?
' The satisfaction in the shrouded face was still plainer.
The man tried to mumble out some words--could not succeed; tried to express something with his obstructed hands--failed; paused a moment, then feebly tilted his head, in a meaning way, toward the corpse that lay nearest him.
'Dead?
' I asked.
'Failed to escape?
--caught in the act and shot?
' Negative shake of the head.
'How, then?
' Again the man tried to do something with his hands.
I watched closely, but could not guess the intent.
I bent over and watched still more intently.
He had twisted a thumb around and was weakly punching at his breast with it.
'Ah--stabbed, do you mean?
' Affirmative nod, accompanied by a spectral smile of such peculiar devilishness, that it struck an awakening light through my dull brain, and I cried-- 'Did I stab him, mistaking him for you?
--for that stroke was meant for none but you.
' The affirmative nod of the re-dying rascal was as joyous as his failing strength was able to put into its expression.
'O, miserable, miserable me, to slaughter the pitying soul that, stood a friend to my darlings when they were helpless, and would have saved them if he could!
miserable, oh, miserable, miserable me!
' I fancied I heard the muffled gurgle of a mocking laugh.
I took my face out of my hands, and saw my enemy sinking back upon his inclined board.
He was a satisfactory long time dying.
He had a wonderful vitality, an astonishing constitution.
Yes, he was a pleasant long time at it.
I got a chair and a newspaper, and sat down by him and read.
Occasionally I took a sip of brandy.
This was necessary, on account of the cold.
But I did it partly because I saw, that along at first, whenever I reached for the bottle, he thought I was going to give him some.
I read aloud: mainly imaginary accounts of people snatched from the grave's threshold and restored to life and vigor by a few spoonsful of liquor and a warm bath.
Yes, he had a long, hard death of it--three hours and six minutes, from the time he rang his bell.
It is believed that in all these eighteen years that have elapsed since the institution of the corpse-watch, no shrouded occupant of the Bavarian dead-houses has ever rung its bell.
Well, it is a harmless belief.
Let it stand at that.
The chill of that death-room had penetrated my bones.
It revived and fastened upon me the disease which had been afflicting me, but which, up to that night, had been steadily disappearing.
That man murdered my wife and my child; and in three days hence he will have added me to his list.
No matter--God!
how delicious the memory of it!
--I caught him escaping from his grave, and thrust him back into it.
After that night, I was confined to my bed for a week; but as soon as I could get about, I went to the dead-house books and got the number of the house which Adler had died in.
A wretched lodging-house, it was.
It was my idea that he would naturally have gotten hold of Kruger's effects, being his cousin; and I wanted to get Kruger's watch, if I could.
But while I was sick, Adler's things had been sold and scattered, all except a few old letters, and some odds and ends of no value.
However, through those letters, I traced out a son of Kruger's, the only relative left.
He is a man of thirty now, a shoemaker by trade, and living at No.
14 Konigstrasse, Mannheim--widower, with several small children.
Without explaining to him why, I have furnished two-thirds of his support, ever since.
Now, as to that watch--see how strangely things happen!
I traced it around and about Germany for more than a year, at considerable cost in money and vexation; and at last I got it.
Got it, and was unspeakably glad; opened it, and found nothing in it!
Why, I might have known that that bit of paper was not going to stay there all this time.
Of course I gave up that ten thousand dollars then; gave it up, and dropped it out of my mind: and most sorrowfully, for I had wanted it for Kruger's son.
Last night, when I consented at last that I must die, I began to make ready.
I proceeded to burn all useless papers; and sure enough, from a batch of Adler's, not previously examined with thoroughness, out dropped that long-desired scrap!
I recognized it in a moment.
Here it is--I will translate it: 'Brick livery stable, stone foundation, middle of town, corner of Orleans and Market.
Corner toward Court-house.
Third stone, fourth row.
Stick notice there, saying how many are to come.
' There--take it, and preserve it.
Kruger explained that that stone was removable; and that it was in the north wall of the foundation, fourth row from the top, and third stone from the west.
The money is secreted behind it.
He said the closing sentence was a blind, to mislead in case the paper should fall into wrong hands.
It probably performed that office for Adler.
Now I want to beg that when you make your intended journey down the river, you will hunt out that hidden money, and send it to Adam Kruger, care of the Mannheim address which I have mentioned.
It will make a rich man of him, and I shall sleep the sounder in my grave for knowing that I have done what I could for the son of the man who tried to save my wife and child--albeit my hand ignorantly struck him down, whereas the impulse of my heart would
CHAPTER 32 The Disposal of a Bonanza 'SUCH was Ritter's narrative,' said I to my two friends.
There was a profound and impressive silence, which lasted a considerable time; then both men broke into a fusillade of exciting and admiring ejaculations over the strange incidents of the tale; and this, along with a rattling fire of questions, was kept up
Then my friends began to cool down, and draw off, under shelter of occasional volleys, into silence and abysmal reverie.
For ten minutes now, there was stillness.
Then Rogers said dreamily-- 'Ten thousand dollars.
' Adding, after a considerable pause-- 'Ten thousand.
It is a heap of money.
' Presently the poet inquired-- 'Are you going to send it to him right away?
' 'Yes,' I said.
'It is a queer question.
' No reply.
After a little, Rogers asked, hesitatingly: '_All _of it?
--That is--I mean--' 'Certainly, all of it.
' I was going to say more, but stopped--was stopped by a train of thought which started up in me.
Thompson spoke, but my mind was absent, and I did not catch what he said.
But I heard Rogers answer-- 'Yes, it seems so to me.
It ought to be quite sufficient; for I don't see that he has done anything.
' Presently the poet said-- 'When you come to look at it, it is more than sufficient.
Just look at it--five thousand dollars!
Why, he couldn't spend it in a lifetime!
And it would injure him, too; perhaps ruin him--you want to look at that.
In a little while he would throw his last away, shut up his shop, maybe take to drinking, maltreat his motherless children, drift into other evil courses, go steadily from bad to worse--' 'Yes, that's it,' interrupted Rogers, fervently, 'I've seen it a
You put money into the hands of a man like that, if you want to destroy him, that's all; just put money into his hands, it's all you've got to do; and if it don't pull him down, and take all the usefulness out of him, and all the self-respect and
And even if we were to give him a _third _of it; why, in less than six months--' 'Less than six _weeks_, you'd better say!
' said I, warming up and breaking in.
'Unless he had that three thousand dollars in safe hands where he couldn't touch it, he would no more last you six weeks than--' 'Of _course _he wouldn't,' said Thompson; 'I've edited books for that kind of people; and the moment they get their hands on
' broke in Rogers, earnestly.
'A man perhaps perfectly contented now, there in Mannheim, surrounded by his own class, eating his bread with the appetite which laborious industry alone can give, enjoying his humble life, honest, upright, pure in heart; and _blest_!
--yes, I say blest!
blest above all the myriads that go in silk attire and walk the empty artificial round of social folly--but just you put that temptation before him once!
just you lay fifteen hundred dollars before a man like that, and say--' 'Fifteen hundred devils!
' cried I, '_five _hundred would rot his principles, paralyze his industry, drag him to the rumshop, thence to the gutter, thence to the almshouse, thence to----' '_Why _put upon ourselves this crime, gentlemen?
' interrupted the poet earnestly and appealingly.
'He is happy where he is, and _as _he is.
Every sentiment of honor, every sentiment of charity, every sentiment of high and sacred benevolence warns us, beseeches us, commands us to leave him undisturbed.
That is real friendship, that is true friendship.
We could follow other courses that would be more showy; but none that would be so truly kind and wise, depend upon it.
' After some further talk, it became evident that each of us, down in his heart, felt some misgivings over this settlement of the matter.
It was manifest that we all felt that we ought to send the poor shoemaker _something_.
There was long and thoughtful discussion of this point; and we finally decided to send him a chromo.
Well, now that everything seemed to be arranged satisfactorily to everybody concerned, a new trouble broke out: it transpired that these two men were expecting to share equally in the money with me.
That was not my idea.
I said that if they got half of it between them they might consider themselves lucky.
Rogers said-- 'Who would have had _any _if it hadn't been for me?
I flung out the first hint--but for that it would all have gone to the shoemaker.
' Thompson said that he was thinking of the thing himself at the very moment that Rogers had originally spoken.
I retorted that the idea would have occurred to me plenty soon enough, and without anybody's help.
I was slow about thinking, maybe, but I was sure.
This matter warmed up into a quarrel; then into a fight; and each man got pretty badly battered.
As soon as I had got myself mended up after a fashion, I ascended to the hurricane deck in a pretty sour humor.
I found Captain McCord there, and said, as pleasantly as my humor would permit-- 'I have come to say good-bye, captain.
I wish to go ashore at Napoleon.
' 'Go ashore where?
' 'Napoleon.
' The captain laughed; but seeing that I was not in a jovial mood, stopped that and said-- 'But are you serious?
' 'Serious?
I certainly am.
' The captain glanced up at the pilot-house and said-- 'He wants to get off at Napoleon!
' 'Napoleon?
' 'That's what he says.
' 'Great Caesar's ghost!
' Uncle Mumford approached along the deck.
The captain said-- 'Uncle, here's a friend of yours wants to get off at Napoleon!
' 'Well, by--?
' I said-- 'Come, what is all this about?
Can't a man go ashore at Napoleon if he wants to?
' 'Why, hang it, don't you know?
There _isn't_ any Napoleon any more.
Hasn't been for years and years.
The Arkansas River burst through it, tore it all to rags, and emptied it into the Mississippi!
' 'Carried the _whole _town away?
-banks, churches, jails, newspaper-offices, court-house, theater, fire department, livery stable _everything _?
' 'Everything.
just a fifteen-minute job.
' or such a matter.
Didn't leave hide nor hair, shred nor shingle of it, except the fag-end of a shanty and one brick chimney.
This boat is paddling along right now, where the dead-center of that town used to be; yonder is the brick chimney-all that's left of Napoleon.
These dense woods on the right used to be a mile back of the town.
Take a look behind you--up-stream--now you begin to recognize this country, don't you?
' 'Yes, I do recognize it now.
It is the most wonderful thing I ever heard of; by a long shot the most wonderful--and unexpected.
' Mr. Thompson and Mr. Rogers had arrived, meantime, with satchels and umbrellas, and had silently listened to the captain's news.
Thompson put a half-dollar in my hand and said softly-- 'For my share of the chromo.
' Rogers followed suit.
Yes, it was an astonishing thing to see the Mississippi rolling between unpeopled shores and straight over the spot where I used to see a good big self-complacent town twenty years ago.
Town that was county-seat of a great and important county; town with a big United States marine hospital; town of innumerable fights--an inquest every day; town where I had used to know the prettiest girl, and the most accomplished in the whole Mississippi
CHAPTER 33 Refreshments and Ethics IN regard to Island 74, which is situated not far from the former Napoleon, a freak of the river here has sorely perplexed the laws of men and made them a vanity and a jest.
When the State of Arkansas was chartered, she controlled 'to the center of the river'--a most unstable line.
The State of Mississippi claimed 'to the channel'--another shifty and unstable line.
No.
74 belonged to Arkansas.
By and by a cut-off threw this big island out of Arkansas, and yet not within Mississippi.
'Middle of the river' on one side of it, 'channel' on the other.
That is as I understand the problem.
Whether I have got the details right or wrong, this _fact _remains: that here is this big and exceedingly valuable island of four thousand acres, thrust out in the cold, and belonging to neither the one State nor the other; paying taxes to neither, owing
One man owns the whole island, and of right is 'the man without a country.
' Island 92 belongs to Arkansas.
The river moved it over and joined it to Mississippi.
A chap established a whiskey shop there, without a Mississippi license, and enriched himself upon Mississippi custom under Arkansas protection (where no license was in those days required).
We glided steadily down the river in the usual privacy--steamboat or other moving thing seldom seen.
Scenery as always: stretch upon stretch of almost unbroken forest, on both sides of the river; soundless solitude.
Here and there a cabin or two, standing in small openings on the gray and grassless banks--cabins which had formerly stood a quarter or half-mile farther to the front, and gradually been pulled farther and farther back as the shores caved in.
As at Pilcher's Point, for instance, where the cabins had been moved back three hundred yards in three months, so we were told; but the caving banks had already caught up with them, and they were being conveyed rearward once more.
Napoleon had but small opinion of Greenville, Mississippi, in the old times; but behold, Napoleon is gone to the cat-fishes, and here is Greenville full of life and activity, and making a considerable flourish in the Valley; having three thousand
A growing town.
There was much talk on the boat about the Calhoun Land Company, an enterprise which is expected to work wholesome results.
Colonel Calhoun, a grandson of the statesman, went to Boston and formed a syndicate which purchased a large tract of land on the river, in Chicot County, Arkansas--some ten thousand acres--for cotton-growing.
The purpose is to work on a cash basis: buy at first hands, and handle their own product; supply their negro laborers with provisions and necessaries at a trifling profit, say 8 or 10 per cent.
; furnish them comfortable quarters, etc.
, and encourage them to save money and remain on the place.
If this proves a financial success, as seems quite certain, they propose to establish a banking-house in Greenville, and lend money at an unburdensome rate of interest--6 per cent.
is spoken of.
The trouble heretofore has been--I am quoting remarks of planters and steamboatmen--that the planters, although owning the land, were without cash capital; had to hypothecate both land and crop to carry on the business.
Consequently, the commission dealer who furnishes the money takes some risk and demands big interest--usually 10 per cent.
, and 2{half} per cent.
for negotiating the loan.
The planter has also to buy his supplies through the same dealer, paying commissions and profits.
Then when he ships his crop, the dealer adds his commissions, insurance, etc.
So, taking it by and large, and first and last, the dealer's share of that crop is about 25 per cent.
'{footnote ['But what can the State do where the people are under subjection to rates of interest ranging from 18 to 30 per cent.
, and are also under the necessity of purchasing their crops in advance even of planting, at these rates, for the privilege of purchasing all their supplies at 100 per cent.
profit?
'--_Edward Atkinson_.
]} A cotton-planter's estimate of the average margin of profit on planting, in his section: One man and mule will raise ten acres of cotton, giving ten bales cotton, worth, say, $500; cost of producing, say $350; net profit, $150, or $15 per acre.
There is also a profit now from the cotton-seed, which formerly had little value--none where much transportation was necessary.
In sixteen hundred pounds crude cotton four hundred are lint, worth, say, ten cents a pound; and twelve hundred pounds of seed, worth $12 or $13 per ton.
Maybe in future even the stems will not be thrown away.
Mr. Edward Atkinson says that for each bale of cotton there are fifteen hundred pounds of stems, and that these are very rich in phosphate of lime and potash; that when ground and mixed with ensilage or cotton-seed meal (which is too rich for use as fodder
Heretofore the stems have been considered a nuisance.
Complaint is made that the planter remains grouty toward the former slave, since the war; will have nothing but a chill business relation with him, no sentiment permitted to intrude, will not keep a 'store' himself, and supply the negro's wants and thus
It is hoped that the Calhoun Company will show, by its humane and protective treatment of its laborers, that its method is the most profitable for both planter and negro; and it is believed that a general adoption of that method will then follow.
And where so many are saying their say, shall not the barkeeper testify?
He is thoughtful, observant, never drinks; endeavors to earn his salary, and _would _earn it if there were custom enough.
He says the people along here in Mississippi and Louisiana will send up the river to buy vegetables rather than raise them, and they will come aboard at the landings and buy fruits of the barkeeper.
Thinks they 'don't know anything but cotton;' believes they don't know how to raise vegetables and fruit--'at least the most of them.
' Says 'a nigger will go to H for a watermelon' ('H' is all I find in the stenographer's report--means Halifax probably, though that seems a good way to go for a watermelon).
Barkeeper buys watermelons for five cents up the river, brings them down and sells them for fifty.
'Why does he mix such elaborate and picturesque drinks for the nigger hands on the boat?
' Because they won't have any other.
'They want a big drink; don't make any difference what you make it of, they want the worth of their money.
You give a nigger a plain gill of half-a-dollar brandy for five cents--will he touch it?
No.
Ain't size enough to it.
But you put up a pint of all kinds of worthless rubbish, and heave in some red stuff to make it beautiful--red's the main thing--and he wouldn't put down that glass to go to a circus.
' All the bars on this Anchor Line are rented and owned by one firm.
They furnish the liquors from their own establishment, and hire the barkeepers 'on salary.
' Good liquors?
Yes, on some of the boats, where there are the kind of passengers that want it and can pay for it.
On the other boats?
No.
Nobody but the deck hands and firemen to drink it.
'Brandy?
Yes, I've got brandy, plenty of it; but you don't want any of it unless you've made your will.
' It isn't as it used to be in the old times.
Then everybody traveled by steamboat, everybody drank, and everybody treated everybody else.
'Now most everybody goes by railroad, and the rest don't drink.
' In the old times the barkeeper owned the bar himself, 'and was gay and smarty and talky and all jeweled up, and was the toniest aristocrat on the boat; used to make $2,000 on a trip.
A father who left his son a steamboat bar, left him a fortune.
Now he leaves him board and lodging; yes, and washing, if a shirt a trip will do.
Yes, indeedy, times are changed.
Why, do you know, on the principal line of boats on the Upper Mississippi, they don't have any bar at all!
Sounds like poetry, but it's the petrified truth.
' CHAPTER 34 Tough Yarns STACK island.
I remembered Stack Island; also Lake Providence, Louisiana--which is the first distinctly Southern-looking town you come to, downward-bound; lies level and low, shade-trees hung with venerable gray beards of Spanish moss; 'restful, pensive, Sunday aspect
A Mr. H. furnished some minor details of fact concerning this region which I would have hesitated to believe if I had not known him to be a steamboat mate.
He was a passenger of ours, a resident of Arkansas City, and bound to Vicksburg to join his boat, a little Sunflower packet.
He was an austere man, and had the reputation of being singularly unworldly, for a river man.
Among other things, he said that Arkansas had been injured and kept back by generations of exaggerations concerning the mosquitoes here.
One may smile, said he, and turn the matter off as being a small thing; but when you come to look at the effects produced, in the way of discouragement of immigration, and diminished values of property, it was quite the opposite of a small thing, or thing
These mosquitoes had been persistently represented as being formidable and lawless; whereas 'the truth is, they are feeble, insignificant in size, diffident to a fault, sensitive'--and so on, and so on; you would have supposed he was talking about his
But if he was soft on the Arkansas mosquitoes, he was hard enough on the mosquitoes of Lake Providence to make up for it--'those Lake Providence colossi,' as he finely called them.
He said that two of them could whip a dog, and that four of them could hold a man down; and except help come, they would kill him--'butcher him,' as he expressed it.
Referred in a sort of casual way--and yet significant way--to 'the fact that the life policy in its simplest form is unknown in Lake Providence--they take out a mosquito policy besides.
' He told many remarkable things about those lawless insects.
Among others, said he had seen them try to vote.
Noticing that this statement seemed to be a good deal of a strain on us, he modified it a little: said he might have been mistaken, as to that particular, but knew he had seen them around the polls 'canvassing.
' There was another passenger--friend of H.'s--who backed up the harsh evidence against those mosquitoes, and detailed some stirring adventures which he had had with them.
The stories were pretty sizable, merely pretty sizable; yet Mr. H. was continually interrupting with a cold, inexorable 'Wait--knock off twenty-five per cent.
of that; now go on;' or, 'Wait--you are getting that too strong; cut it down, cut it down--you get a leetle too much costumery on to your statements: always dress a fact in tights, never in an ulster;' or, 'Pardon, once more: if you are going to load
' He explained privately that it was necessary to watch this man all the time, and keep him within bounds; it would not do to neglect this precaution, as he, Mr. H., 'knew to his sorrow.
' Said he, 'I will not deceive you; he told me such a monstrous lie once, that it swelled my left ear up, and spread it so that I was actually not able to see out around it; it remained so for months, and people came miles to see me fan myself with it.
' CHAPTER 35 Vicksburg During the Trouble WE used to plow past the lofty hill-city, Vicksburg, down-stream; but we cannot do that now.
A cut-off has made a country town of it, like Osceola, St. Genevieve, and several others.
There is currentless water--also a big island--in front of Vicksburg now.
You come down the river the other side of the island, then turn and come up to the town; that is, in high water: in low water you can't come up, but must land some distance below it.
Signs and scars still remain, as reminders of Vicksburg's tremendous war experiences; earthworks, trees crippled by the cannon balls, cave-refuges in the clay precipices, etc.
The caves did good service during the six weeks' bombardment of the city--May 8 to July 4, 1863.
They were used by the non-combatants--mainly by the women and children; not to live in constantly, but to fly to for safety on occasion.
They were mere holes, tunnels, driven into the perpendicular clay bank, then branched Y shape, within the hill.
Life in Vicksburg, during the six weeks was perhaps--but wait; here are some materials out of which to reproduce it:-- Population, twenty-seven thousand soldiers and three thousand non-combatants; the city utterly cut off from the world--walled solidly in,
' and laugh.
The cannon-thunder rages, shells scream and crash overhead, the iron rain pours down, one hour, two hours, three, possibly six, then stops; silence follows, but the streets are still empty; the silence continues; by-and-bye a head projects from a cave here
There being but three thousand of these cave-dwellers--merely the population of a village--would they not come to know each other, after a week or two, and familiarly; insomuch that the fortunate or unfortunate experiences of one would be of interest to
Those are the materials furnished by history.
From them might not almost anybody reproduce for himself the life of that time in Vicksburg?
Could you, who did not experience it, come nearer to reproducing it to the imagination of another non-participant than could a Vicksburger who did experience it?
It seems impossible; and yet there are reasons why it might not really be.
When one makes his first voyage in a ship, it is an experience which multitudinously bristles with striking novelties; novelties which are in such sharp contrast with all this person's former experiences that they take a seemingly deathless grip upon his
By tongue or pen he can make a landsman live that strange and stirring voyage over with him; make him see it all and feel it all.
But if he wait?
If he make ten voyages in succession--what then?
Why, the thing has lost color, snap, surprise; and has become commonplace.
The man would have nothing to tell that would quicken a landsman's pulse.
Years ago, I talked with a couple of the Vicksburg non-combatants--a man and his wife.
Left to tell their story in their own way, those people told it without fire, almost without interest.
A week of their wonderful life there would have made their tongues eloquent for ever perhaps; but they had six weeks of it, and that wore the novelty all out; they got used to being bomb-shelled out of home and into the ground; the matter became
After that, the possibility of their ever being startlingly interesting in their talks about it was gone.
What the man said was to this effect:-- 'It got to be Sunday all the time.
Seven Sundays in the week--to us, anyway.
We hadn't anything to do, and time hung heavy.
Seven Sundays, and all of them broken up at one time or another, in the day or in the night, by a few hours of the awful storm of fire and thunder and iron.
At first we used to shin for the holes a good deal faster than we did afterwards.
The first time, I forgot the children, and Maria fetched them both along.
When she was all safe in the cave she fainted.
Two or three weeks afterwards, when she was running for the holes, one morning, through a shell-shower, a big shell burst near her, and covered her all over with dirt, and a piece of the iron carried away her game-bag of false hair from the back of her
Well, she stopped to get that game-bag before she shoved along again!
Was getting used to things already, you see.
We all got so that we could tell a good deal about shells; and after that we didn't always go under shelter if it was a light shower.
Us men would loaf around and talk; and a man would say, 'There she goes!
' and name the kind of shell it was from the sound of it, and go on talking--if there wasn't any danger from it.
If a shell was bursting close over us, we stopped talking and stood still;--uncomfortable, yes, but it wasn't safe to move.
When it let go, we went on talking again, if nobody hurt--maybe saying, 'That was a ripper!
' or some such commonplace comment before we resumed; or, maybe, we would see a shell poising itself away high in the air overhead.
In that case, every fellow just whipped out a sudden, 'See you again, gents!
' and shoved.
Often and often I saw gangs of ladies promenading the streets, looking as cheerful as you please, and keeping an eye canted up watching the shells; and I've seen them stop still when they were uncertain about what a shell was going to do, and wait and make
Streets in some towns have a litter of pieces of paper, and odds and ends of one sort or another lying around.
Ours hadn't; they had _iron _litter.
Sometimes a man would gather up all the iron fragments and unbursted shells in his neighborhood, and pile them into a kind of monument in his front yard--a ton of it, sometimes.
No glass left; glass couldn't stand such a bombardment; it was all shivered out.
Windows of the houses vacant--looked like eye-holes in a skull.
_Whole _panes were as scarce as news.
'We had church Sundays.
Not many there, along at first; but by-and-bye pretty good turnouts.
I've seen service stop a minute, and everybody sit quiet--no voice heard, pretty funeral-like then--and all the more so on account of the awful boom and crash going on outside and overhead; and pretty soon, when a body could be heard, service would go on
Organs and church-music mixed up with a bombardment is a powerful queer combination--along at first.
Coming out of church, one morning, we had an accident--the only one that happened around me on a Sunday.
I was just having a hearty handshake with a friend I hadn't seen for a while, and saying, 'Drop into our cave to-night, after bombardment; we've got hold of a pint of prime wh--.
' Whiskey, I was going to say, you know, but a shell interrupted.
A chunk of it cut the man's arm off, and left it dangling in my hand.
And do you know the thing that is going to stick the longest in my memory, and outlast everything else, little and big, I reckon, is the mean thought I had then?
It was 'the whiskey _is saved_.
' And yet, don't you know, it was kind of excusable; because it was as scarce as diamonds, and we had only just that little; never had another taste during the siege.
'Sometimes the caves were desperately crowded, and always hot and close.
Sometimes a cave had twenty or twenty-five people packed into it; no turning-room for anybody; air so foul, sometimes, you couldn't have made a candle burn in it.
A child was born in one of those caves one night, Think of that; why, it was like having it born in a trunk.
'Twice we had sixteen people in our cave; and a number of times we had a dozen.
Pretty suffocating in there.
We always had eight; eight belonged there.
Hunger and misery and sickness and fright and sorrow, and I don't know what all, got so loaded into them that none of them were ever rightly their old selves after the siege.
They all died but three of us within a couple of years.
One night a shell burst in front of the hole and caved it in and stopped it up.
It was lively times, for a while, digging out.
Some of us came near smothering.
After that we made two openings--ought to have thought of it at first.
'Mule meat.
No, we only got down to that the last day or two.
Of course it was good; anything is good when you are starving.
This man had kept a diary during--six weeks?
No, only the first six days.
The first day, eight close pages; the second, five; the third, one--loosely written; the fourth, three or four lines; a line or two the fifth and sixth days; seventh day, diary abandoned; life in terrific Vicksburg having now become commonplace and matter
The war history of Vicksburg has more about it to interest the general reader than that of any other of the river-towns.
It is full of variety, full of incident, full of the picturesque.
Vicksburg held out longer than any other important river-town, and saw warfare in all its phases, both land and water--the siege, the mine, the assault, the repulse, the bombardment, sickness, captivity, famine.
The most beautiful of all the national cemeteries is here.
Over the great gateway is this inscription:-- "HERE REST IN PEACE 16,600 WHO DIED FOR THEIR COUNTRY IN THE YEARS 1861 TO 1865".
The grounds are nobly situated; being very high and commanding a wide prospect of land and river.
They are tastefully laid out in broad terraces, with winding roads and paths; and there is profuse adornment in the way of semi-tropical shrubs and flowers,' and in one part is a piece of native wild-wood, left just as it grew, and, therefore, perfect in
Everything about this cemetery suggests the hand of the national Government.
The Government's work is always conspicuous for excellence, solidity, thoroughness, neatness.
The Government does its work well in the first place, and then takes care of it.
By winding-roads--which were often cut to so great a depth between perpendicular walls that they were mere roofless tunnels--we drove out a mile or two and visited the monument which stands upon the scene of the surrender of Vicksburg to General Grant by
Its metal will preserve it from the hackings and chippings which so defaced its predecessor, which was of marble; but the brick foundations are crumbling, and it will tumble down by-and-bye.
It overlooks a picturesque region of wooded hills and ravines; and is not unpicturesque itself, being well smothered in flowering weeds.
The battered remnant of the marble monument has been removed to the National Cemetery.
On the road, a quarter of a mile townward, an aged colored man showed us, with pride, an unexploded bomb-shell which has lain in his yard since the day it fell there during the siege.
'I was a-stannin' heah, an' de dog was a-stannin' heah; de dog he went for de shell, gwine to pick a fuss wid it; but I didn't; I says, "Jes' make you'seff at home heah; lay still whah you is, or bust up de place, jes' as you's a mind to, but I's got
' Vicksburg is a town of substantial business streets and pleasant residences; it commands the commerce of the Yazoo and Sunflower Rivers; is pushing railways in several directions, through rich agricultural regions, and has a promising future of
Apparently, nearly all the river towns, big and little, have made up their minds that they must look mainly to railroads for wealth and upbuilding, henceforth.
They are acting upon this idea.
The signs are, that the next twenty years will bring about some noteworthy changes in the Valley, in the direction of increased population and wealth, and in the intellectual advancement and the liberalizing of opinion which go naturally with these.
And yet, if one may judge by the past, the river towns will manage to find and use a chance, here and there, to cripple and retard their progress.
They kept themselves back in the days of steamboating supremacy, by a system of wharfage-dues so stupidly graded as to prohibit what may be called small _retail _traffic in freights and passengers.
Boats were charged such heavy wharfage that they could not afford to land for one or two passengers or a light lot of freight.
Instead of encouraging the bringing of trade to their doors, the towns diligently and effectively discouraged it.
They could have had many boats and low rates; but their policy rendered few boats and high rates compulsory.
It was a policy which extended--and extends--from New Orleans to St. Paul.
We had a strong desire to make a trip up the Yazoo and the Sunflower--an interesting region at any time, but additionally interesting at this time, because up there the great inundation was still to be seen in force--but we were nearly sure to have to wait
Here is a story which I picked up on board the boat that night.
I insert it in this place merely because it is a good story, not because it belongs here--for it doesn't.
It was told by a passenger--a college professor--and was called to the surface in the course of a general conversation which began with talk about horses, drifted into talk about astronomy, then into talk about the lynching of the gamblers in Vicksburg
CHAPTER 36 The Professor's Yarn IT was in the early days.
I was not a college professor then.
I was a humble-minded young land-surveyor, with the world before me--to survey, in case anybody wanted it done.
I had a contract to survey a route for a great mining-ditch in California, and I was on my way thither, by sea--a three or four weeks' voyage.
There were a good many passengers, but I had very little to say to them; reading and dreaming were my passions, and I avoided conversation in order to indulge these appetites.
There were three professional gamblers on board--rough, repulsive fellows.
I never had any talk with them, yet I could not help seeing them with some frequency, for they gambled in an upper-deck stateroom every day and night, and in my promenades I often had glimpses of them through their door, which stood a little ajar to let
They were an evil and hateful presence, but I had to put up with it, of course, There was one other passenger who fell under my eye a good deal, for he seemed determined to be friendly with me, and I could not have gotten rid of him without running some
Besides, there was something engaging in his countrified simplicity and his beaming good-nature.
The first time I saw this Mr. John Backus, I guessed, from his clothes and his looks, that he was a grazier or farmer from the backwoods of some western State--doubtless Ohio--and afterward when he dropped into his personal history and I discovered that he
He got to dropping alongside me every day, after breakfast, to help me make my promenade; and so, in the course of time, his easy-working jaw had told me everything about his business, his prospects, his family, his relatives, his politics--in fact
And meantime I think he had managed to get out of me everything I knew about my trade, my tribe, my purposes, my prospects, and myself.
He was a gentle and persuasive genius, and this thing showed it; for I was not given to talking about my matters.
I said something about triangulation, once; the stately word pleased his ear; he inquired what it meant; I explained; after that he quietly and inoffensively ignored my name, and always called me Triangle.
What an enthusiast he was in cattle!
At the bare name of a bull or a cow, his eye would light and his eloquent tongue would turn itself loose.
As long as I would walk and listen, he would walk and talk; he knew all breeds, he loved all breeds, he caressed them all with his affectionate tongue.
I tramped along in voiceless misery whilst the cattle question was up; when I could endure it no longer, I used to deftly insert a scientific topic into the conversation; then my eye fired and his faded; my tongue fluttered, his stopped; life was a joy to
One day he said, a little hesitatingly, and with somewhat of diffidence-- 'Triangle, would you mind coming down to my stateroom a minute, and have a little talk on a certain matter?
' I went with him at once.
Arrived there, he put his head out, glanced up and down the saloon warily, then closed the door and locked it.
He sat down on the sofa, and he said-- 'I'm a-going to make a little proposition to you, and if it strikes you favorable, it'll be a middling good thing for both of us.
You ain't a-going out to Californy for fun, nuther am I--it's business, ain't that so?
Well, you can do me a good turn, and so can I you, if we see fit.
I've raked and scraped and saved, a considerable many years, and I've got it all here.
' He unlocked an old hair trunk, tumbled a chaos of shabby clothes aside, and drew a short stout bag into view for a moment, then buried it again and relocked the trunk.
Dropping his voice to a cautious low tone, he continued, 'She's all there--a round ten thousand dollars in yellow-boys; now this is my little idea: What I don't know about raising cattle, ain't worth knowing.
There's mints of money in it, in Californy.
Well, I know, and you know, that all along a line that 's being surveyed, there 's little dabs of land that they call "gores," that fall to the surveyor free gratis for nothing.
All you've got to do, on your side, is to survey in such a way that the "gores" will fall on good fat land, then you turn 'em over to me, I stock 'em with cattle, in rolls the cash, I plank out your share of the dollars regular, right along, and--' I was
I interrupted, and said severely-- 'I am not that kind of a surveyor.
Let us change the subject, Mr. Backus.
' It was pitiful to see his confusion and hear his awkward and shamefaced apologies.
I was as much distressed as he was--especially as he seemed so far from having suspected that there was anything improper in his proposition.
So I hastened to console him and lead him on to forget his mishap in a conversational orgy about cattle and butchery.
We were lying at Acapulco; and, as we went on deck, it happened luckily that the crew were just beginning to hoist some beeves aboard in slings.
Backus's melancholy vanished instantly, and with it the memory of his late mistake.
'Now only look at that!
' cried he; 'My goodness, Triangle, what _would _they say to it in _Ohio_.
Wouldn't their eyes bug out, to see 'em handled like that?
--wouldn't they, though?
' All the passengers were on deck to look--even the gamblers--and Backus knew them all, and had afflicted them all with his pet topic.
As I moved away, I saw one of the gamblers approach and accost him; then another of them; then the third.
I halted; waited; watched; the conversation continued between the four men; it grew earnest; Backus drew gradually away; the gamblers followed, and kept at his elbow.
I was uncomfortable.
However, as they passed me presently, I heard Backus say, with a tone of persecuted annoyance-- 'But it ain't any use, gentlemen; I tell you again, as I've told you a half a dozen times before, I warn't raised to it, and I ain't a-going to resk it.
' I felt relieved.
'His level head will be his sufficient protection,' I said to myself.
During the fortnight's run from Acapulco to San Francisco I several times saw the gamblers talking earnestly with Backus, and once I threw out a gentle warning to him.
He chuckled comfortably and said-- 'Oh, yes!
they tag around after me considerable--want me to play a little, just for amusement, they say--but laws-a-me, if my folks have told me once to look out for that sort of live-stock, they've told me a thousand times, I reckon.
' By-and-bye, in due course, we were approaching San Francisco.
It was an ugly black night, with a strong wind blowing, but there was not much sea.
I was on deck, alone.
Toward ten I started below.
A figure issued from the gamblers' den, and disappeared in the darkness.
I experienced a shock, for I was sure it was Backus.
I flew down the companion-way, looked about for him, could not find him, then returned to the deck just in time to catch a glimpse of him as he re-entered that confounded nest of rascality.
Had he yielded at last?
I feared it.
What had he gone below for?
--His bag of coin?
Possibly.
I drew near the door, full of bodings.
It was a-crack, and I glanced in and saw a sight that made me bitterly wish I had given my attention to saving my poor cattle-friend, instead of reading and dreaming my foolish time away.
He was gambling.
Worse still, he was being plied with champagne, and was already showing some effect from it.
He praised the 'cider,' as he called it, and said now that he had got a taste of it he almost believed he would drink it if it was spirits, it was so good and so ahead of anything he had ever run across before.
Surreptitious smiles, at this, passed from one rascal to another, and they filled all the glasses, and whilst Backus honestly drained his to the bottom they pretended to do the same, but threw the wine over their shoulders.
I could not bear the scene, so I wandered forward and tried to interest myself in the sea and the voices of the wind.
But no, my uneasy spirit kept dragging me back at quarter-hour intervals; and always I saw Backus drinking his wine--fairly and squarely, and the others throwing theirs away.
It was the painfullest night I ever spent.
The only hope I had was that we might reach our anchorage with speed--that would break up the game.
I helped the ship along all I could with my prayers.
At last we went booming through the Golden Gate, and my pulses leaped for joy.
I hurried back to that door and glanced in.
Alas, there was small room for hope--Backus's eyes were heavy and bloodshot, his sweaty face was crimson, his speech maudlin and thick, his body sawed drunkenly about with the weaving motion of the ship.
He drained another glass to the dregs, whilst the cards were being dealt.
He took his hand, glanced at it, and his dull eyes lit up for a moment.
The gamblers observed it, and showed their gratification by hardly perceptible signs.
'How many cards?
' 'None!
' said Backus.
One villain--named Hank Wiley--discarded one card, the others three each.
The betting began.
Heretofore the bets had been trifling--a dollar or two; but Backus started off with an eagle now, Wiley hesitated a moment, then 'saw it' and 'went ten dollars better.
' The other two threw up their hands.
Backus went twenty better.
Wiley said-- 'I see that, and go you a hundred better!
' then smiled and reached for the money.
'Let it alone,' said Backus, with drunken gravity.
'What!
you mean to say you're going to cover it?
' 'Cover it?
Well, I reckon I am--and lay another hundred on top of it, too.
' He reached down inside his overcoat and produced the required sum.
'Oh, that's your little game, is it?
I see your raise, and raise it five hundred!
' said Wiley.
'Five hundred better.
' said the foolish bull-driver, and pulled out the amount and showered it on the pile.
The three conspirators hardly tried to conceal their exultation.
All diplomacy and pretense were dropped now, and the sharp exclamations came thick and fast, and the yellow pyramid grew higher and higher.
At last ten thousand dollars lay in view.
Wiley cast a bag of coin on the table, and said with mocking gentleness-- 'Five thousand dollars better, my friend from the rural districts--what do you say _now_?
' 'I _call _you!
' said Backus, heaving his golden shot-bag on the pile.
'What have you got?
' 'Four kings, you d--d fool!
' and Wiley threw down his cards and surrounded the stakes with his arms.
'Four _aces_, you ass!
' thundered Backus, covering his man with a cocked revolver.
'_I'm a professional gambler myself, and i've been laying for you duffers all this voyage!
'_ Down went the anchor, rumbledy-dum-dum!
and the long trip was ended.
Well--well, it is a sad world.
One of the three gamblers was Backus's 'pal.
' It was he that dealt the fateful hands.
According to an understanding with the two victims, he was to have given Backus four queens, but alas, he didn't.
A week later, I stumbled upon Backus--arrayed in the height of fashion--in Montgomery Street.
He said, cheerily, as we were parting-- 'Ah, by-the-way, you needn't mind about those gores.
I don't really know anything about cattle, except what I was able to pick up in a week's apprenticeship over in Jersey just before we sailed.
My cattle-culture and cattle-enthusiasm have served their turn--I shan't need them any more.
' Next day we reluctantly parted from the 'Gold Dust' and her officers, hoping to see that boat and all those officers again, some day.
A thing which the fates were to render tragically impossible!
CHAPTER 37 The End of the 'Gold Dust' FOR, three months later, August 8, while I was writing one of these foregoing chapters, the New York papers brought this telegram-- A TERRIBLE DISASTER.
SEVENTEEN PERSONS KILLED BY AN EXPLOSION ON THE STEAMER 'GOLD DUST.
' 'NASHVILLE, Aug.
7.
--A despatch from Hickman, Ky.
, says-- 'The steamer "Gold Dust" exploded her boilers at three o'clock to-day, just after leaving Hickman.
Forty-seven persons were scalded and seventeen are missing.
The boat was landed in the eddy just above the town, and through the exertions of the citizens the cabin passengers, officers, and part of the crew and deck passengers were taken ashore and removed to the hotels and residences.
Twenty-four of the injured were lying in Holcomb's dry-goods store at one time, where they received every attention before being removed to more comfortable places.
' A list of the names followed, whereby it appeared that of the seventeen dead, one was the barkeeper; and among the forty-seven wounded, were the captain, chief mate, second mate, and second and third clerks; also Mr. Lem S. Gray, pilot, and several
In answer to a private telegram, we learned that none of these was severely hurt, except Mr. Gray.
Letters received afterward confirmed this news, and said that Mr. Gray was improving and would get well.
Later letters spoke less hopefully of his case; and finally came one announcing his death.
A good man, a most companionable and manly man, and worthy of a kindlier fate.
CHAPTER 38 The House Beautiful WE took passage in a Cincinnati boat for New Orleans; or on a Cincinnati boat--either is correct; the former is the eastern form of putting it, the latter the western.
Mr. Dickens declined to agree that the Mississippi steamboats were 'magnificent,' or that they were 'floating palaces,'--terms which had always been applied to them; terms which did not over-express the admiration with which the people viewed them.
Mr. Dickens's position was unassailable, possibly; the people's position was certainly unassailable.
If Mr. Dickens was comparing these boats with the crown jewels; or with the Taj, or with the Matterhorn; or with some other priceless or wonderful thing which he had seen, they were not magnificent--he was right.
The people compared them with what they had seen; and, thus measured, thus judged, the boats were magnificent--the term was the correct one, it was not at all too strong.
The people were as right as was Mr. Dickens.
The steamboats were finer than anything on shore.
Compared with superior dwelling-houses and first-class hotels in the Valley, they were indubitably magnificent, they were 'palaces.
' To a few people living in New Orleans and St. Louis, they were not magnificent, perhaps; not palaces; but to the great majority of those populations, and to the entire populations spread over both banks between Baton Rouge and St. Louis, they were
Every town and village along that vast stretch of double river-frontage had a best dwelling, finest dwelling, mansion,--the home of its wealthiest and most conspicuous citizen.
It is easy to describe it: large grassy yard, with paling fence painted white--in fair repair; brick walk from gate to door; big, square, two-story 'frame' house, painted white and porticoed like a Grecian temple--with this difference, that the imposing
Within, an uncarpeted hall, of planed boards; opening out of it, a parlor, fifteen feet by fifteen--in some instances five or ten feet larger; ingrain carpet; mahogany center-table; lamp on it, with green-paper shade--standing on a gridiron, so to speak,
; current number of the chaste and innocuous Godey's 'Lady's Book,' with painted fashion-plate of wax-figure women with mouths all alike--lips and eyelids the same size--each five-foot woman with a two-inch wedge sticking from under her dress and
Polished air-tight stove (new and deadly invention), with pipe passing through a board which closes up the discarded good old fireplace.
On each end of the wooden mantel, over the fireplace, a large basket of peaches and other fruits, natural size, all done in plaster, rudely, or in wax, and painted to resemble the originals--which they don't.
Over middle of mantel, engraving--Washington Crossing the Delaware; on the wall by the door, copy of it done in thunder-and-lightning crewels by one of the young ladies--work of art which would have made Washington hesitate about crossing, if he could have
Piano--kettle in disguise--with music, bound and unbound, piled on it, and on a stand near by: Battle of Prague; Bird Waltz; Arkansas Traveler; Rosin the Bow; Marseilles Hymn; On a Lone Barren Isle (St. Helena); The Last Link is Broken; She wore a Wreath
Tilted pensively against the piano, a guitar--guitar capable of playing the Spanish Fandango by itself, if you give it a start.
Frantic work of art on the wall--pious motto, done on the premises, sometimes in colored yarns, sometimes in faded grasses: progenitor of the 'God Bless Our Home' of modern commerce.
Framed in black moldings on the wall, other works of arts, conceived and committed on the premises, by the young ladies; being grim black-and-white crayons; landscapes, mostly: lake, solitary sail-boat, petrified clouds, pre-geological trees on shore,
Lithograph, Napoleon Crossing the Alps.
Lithograph, The Grave at St. Helena.
Steel-plates, Trumbull's Battle of Bunker Hill, and the Sally from Gibraltar.
Copper-plates, Moses Smiting the Rock, and Return of the Prodigal Son.
In big gilt frame, slander of the family in oil: papa holding a book ('Constitution of the United States'); guitar leaning against mamma, blue ribbons fluttering from its neck; the young ladies, as children, in slippers and scalloped pantelettes, one
These persons all fresh, raw, and red--apparently skinned.
Opposite, in gilt frame, grandpa and grandma, at thirty and twenty-two, stiff, old-fashioned, high-collared, puff-sleeved, glaring pallidly out from a background of solid Egyptian night.
Under a glass French clock dome, large bouquet of stiff flowers done in corpsy-white wax.
Pyramidal what-not in the corner, the shelves occupied chiefly with bric-a-brac of the period, disposed with an eye to best effect: shell, with the Lord's Prayer carved on it; another shell--of the long-oval sort, narrow, straight orifice, three inches
These two are memorials of the long-ago bridal trip to New Orleans and the French Market.
Other bric-a-brac: Californian 'specimens'--quartz, with gold wart adhering; old Guinea-gold locket, with circlet of ancestral hair in it; Indian arrow-heads, of flint; pair of bead moccasins, from uncle who crossed the Plains; three 'alum' baskets of
' Bracketed over what-not--place of special sacredness--an outrage in water-color, done by the young niece that came on a visit long ago, and died.
Pity, too; for she might have repented of this in time.
Horse-hair chairs, horse-hair sofa which keeps sliding from under you.
Window shades, of oil stuff, with milk-maids and ruined castles stenciled on them in fierce colors.
Lambrequins dependent from gaudy boxings of beaten tin, gilded.
Bedrooms with rag carpets; bedsteads of the 'corded' sort, with a sag in the middle, the cords needing tightening; snuffy feather-bed--not aired often enough; cane-seat chairs, splint-bottomed rocker; looking-glass on wall, school-slate size, veneered
Nothing else in the room.
Not a bathroom in the house; and no visitor likely to come along who has ever seen one.
That was the residence of the principal citizen, all the way from the suburbs of New Orleans to the edge of St. Louis.
When he stepped aboard a big fine steamboat, he entered a new and marvelous world: chimney-tops cut to counterfeit a spraying crown of plumes--and maybe painted red; pilot-house, hurricane deck, boiler-deck guards, all garnished with white wooden filigree
In the ladies' cabin a pink and white Wilton carpet, as soft as mush, and glorified with a ravishing pattern of gigantic flowers.
Then the Bridal Chamber--the animal that invented that idea was still alive and unhanged, at that day--Bridal Chamber whose pretentious flummery was necessarily overawing to the now tottering intellect of that hosannahing citizen.
Every state-room had its couple of cozy clean bunks, and perhaps a looking-glass and a snug closet; and sometimes there was even a washbowl and pitcher, and part of a towel which could be told from mosquito netting by an expert--though generally these
Take the steamboat which I have just described, and you have her in her highest and finest, and most pleasing, and comfortable, and satisfactory estate.
Now cake her over with a layer of ancient and obdurate dirt, and you have the Cincinnati steamer awhile ago referred to.
Not all over--only inside; for she was ably officered in all departments except the steward's.
But wash that boat and repaint her, and she would be about the counterpart of the most complimented boat of the old flush times: for the steamboat architecture of the West has undergone no change; neither has steamboat furniture and ornamentation undergone
CHAPTER 39 Manufactures and Miscreants WHERE the river, in the Vicksburg region, used to be corkscrewed, it is now comparatively straight--made so by cut-off; a former distance of seventy miles is reduced to thirty-five.
It is a change which threw Vicksburg's neighbor, Delta, Louisiana, out into the country and ended its career as a river town.
Its whole river-frontage is now occupied by a vast sand-bar, thickly covered with young trees--a growth which will magnify itself into a dense forest by-and-bye, and completely hide the exiled town.
In due time we passed Grand Gulf and Rodney, of war fame, and reached Natchez, the last of the beautiful hill-cities--for Baton Rouge, yet to come, is not on a hill, but only on high ground.
Famous Natchez-under-the-hill has not changed notably in twenty years; in outward aspect--judging by the descriptions of the ancient procession of foreign tourists--it has not changed in sixty; for it is still small, straggling, and shabby.
It had a desperate reputation, morally, in the old keel-boating and early steamboating times--plenty of drinking, carousing, fisticuffing, and killing there, among the riff-raff of the river, in those days.
But Natchez-on-top-of-the-hill is attractive; has always been attractive.
Even Mrs. Trollope (1827) had to confess its charms: 'At one or two points the wearisome level line is relieved by bluffs, as they call the short intervals of high ground.
The town of Natchez is beautifully situated on one of those high spots.
The contrast that its bright green hill forms with the dismal line of black forest that stretches on every side, the abundant growth of the pawpaw, palmetto and orange, the copious variety of sweet-scented flowers that flourish there, all make it appear
Natchez is the furthest point to the north at which oranges ripen in the open air, or endure the winter without shelter.
With the exception of this sweet spot, I thought all the little towns and villages we passed wretched-looking in the extreme.
' Natchez, like her near and far river neighbors, has railways now, and is adding to them--pushing them hither and thither into all rich outlying regions that are naturally tributary to her.
And like Vicksburg and New Orleans, she has her ice-factory: she makes thirty tons of ice a day.
In Vicksburg and Natchez, in my time, ice was jewelry; none but the rich could wear it.
But anybody and everybody can have it now.
I visited one of the ice-factories in New Orleans, to see what the polar regions might look like when lugged into the edge of the tropics.
But there was nothing striking in the aspect of the place.
It was merely a spacious house, with some innocent steam machinery in one end of it and some big porcelain pipes running here and there.
No, not porcelain--they merely seemed to be; they were iron, but the ammonia which was being breathed through them had coated them to the thickness of your hand with solid milk-white ice.
It ought to have melted; for one did not require winter clothing in that atmosphere: but it did not melt; the inside of the pipe was too cold.
Sunk into the floor were numberless tin boxes, a foot square and two feet long, and open at the top end.
These were full of clear water; and around each box, salt and other proper stuff was packed; also, the ammonia gases were applied to the water in some way which will always remain a secret to me, because I was not able to understand the process.
While the water in the boxes gradually froze, men gave it a stir or two with a stick occasionally--to liberate the air-bubbles, I think.
Other men were continually lifting out boxes whose contents had become hard frozen.
They gave the box a single dip into a vat of boiling water, to melt the block of ice free from its tin coffin, then they shot the block out upon a platform car, and it was ready for market.
These big blocks were hard, solid, and crystal-clear.
In certain of them, big bouquets of fresh and brilliant tropical flowers had been frozen-in; in others, beautiful silken-clad French dolls, and other pretty objects.
These blocks were to be set on end in a platter, in the center of dinner-tables, to cool the tropical air; and also to be ornamental, for the flowers and things imprisoned in them could be seen as through plate glass.
I was told that this factory could retail its ice, by wagon, throughout New Orleans, in the humblest dwelling-house quantities, at six or seven dollars a ton, and make a sufficient profit.
This being the case, there is business for ice-factories in the North; for we get ice on no such terms there, if one take less than three hundred and fifty pounds at a delivery.
The Rosalie Yarn Mill, of Natchez, has a capacity of 6,000 spindles and 160 looms, and employs 100 hands.
The Natchez Cotton Mills Company began operations four years ago in a two-story building of 50 x 190 feet, with 4,000 spindles and 128 looms; capital $105,000, all subscribed in the town.
Two years later, the same stockholders increased their capital to $225,000; added a third story to the mill, increased its length to 317 feet; added machinery to increase the capacity to 10,300 spindles and 304 looms.
The company now employ 250 operatives, many of whom are citizens of Natchez.
'The mill works 5,000 bales of cotton annually and manufactures the best standard quality of brown shirtings and sheetings and drills, turning out 5,000,000 yards of these goods per year.
'{footnote [New Orleans Times-Democrat, 26 Aug, 1882.
]} A close corporation--stock held at $5,000 per share, but none in the market.
The changes in the Mississippi River are great and strange, yet were to be expected; but I was not expecting to live to see Natchez and these other river towns become manufacturing strongholds and railway centers.
Speaking of manufactures reminds me of a talk upon that topic which I heard--which I overheard--on board the Cincinnati boat.
I awoke out of a fretted sleep, with a dull confusion of voices in my ears.
I listened--two men were talking; subject, apparently, the great inundation.
I looked out through the open transom.
The two men were eating a late breakfast; sitting opposite each other; nobody else around.
They closed up the inundation with a few words--having used it, evidently, as a mere ice-breaker and acquaintanceship-breeder--then they dropped into business.
It soon transpired that they were drummers--one belonging in Cincinnati, the other in New Orleans.
Brisk men, energetic of movement and speech; the dollar their god, how to get it their religion.
'Now as to this article,' said Cincinnati, slashing into the ostensible butter and holding forward a slab of it on his knife-blade, 'it's from our house; look at it--smell of it--taste it.
Put any test on it you want to.
Take your own time--no hurry--make it thorough.
There now--what do you say?
butter, ain't it.
Not by a thundering sight--it's oleomargarine!
Yes, sir, that's what it is--oleomargarine.
You can't tell it from butter; by George, an _expert _can't.
It's from our house.
We supply most of the boats in the West; there's hardly a pound of butter on one of them.
We are crawling right along--_jumping _right along is the word.
We are going to have that entire trade.
Yes, and the hotel trade, too.
You are going to see the day, pretty soon, when you can't find an ounce of butter to bless yourself with, in any hotel in the Mississippi and Ohio Valleys, outside of the biggest cities.
Why, we are turning out oleomargarine _now _by the thousands of tons.
And we can sell it so dirt-cheap that the whole country has _got _to take it--can't get around it you see.
Butter don't stand any show--there ain't any chance for competition.
Butter's had its _day_--and from this out, butter goes to the wall.
There's more money in oleomargarine than--why, you can't imagine the business we do.
I've stopped in every town from Cincinnati to Natchez; and I've sent home big orders from every one of them.
' And so-forth and so-on, for ten minutes longer, in the same fervid strain.
Then New Orleans piped up and said-- Yes, it's a first-rate imitation, that's a certainty; but it ain't the only one around that's first-rate.
For instance, they make olive-oil out of cotton-seed oil, nowadays, so that you can't tell them apart.
' 'Yes, that's so,' responded Cincinnati, 'and it was a tip-top business for a while.
They sent it over and brought it back from France and Italy, with the United States custom-house mark on it to indorse it for genuine, and there was no end of cash in it; but France and Italy broke up the game--of course they naturally would.
Cracked on such a rattling impost that cotton-seed olive-oil couldn't stand the raise; had to hang up and quit.
' 'Oh, it _did_, did it?
You wait here a minute.
' Goes to his state-room, brings back a couple of long bottles, and takes out the corks--says: 'There now, smell them, taste them, examine the bottles, inspect the labels.
One of 'm's from Europe, the other's never been out of this country.
One's European olive-oil, the other's American cotton-seed olive-oil.
Tell 'm apart?
'Course you can't.
Nobody can.
People that want to, can go to the expense and trouble of shipping their oils to Europe and back--it's their privilege; but our firm knows a trick worth six of that.
We turn out the whole thing--clean from the word go--in our factory in New Orleans: labels, bottles, oil, everything.
Well, no, not labels: been buying them abroad--get them dirt-cheap there.
You see, there's just one little wee speck, essence, or whatever it is, in a gallon of cotton-seed oil, that give it a smell, or a flavor, or something--get that out, and you're all right--perfectly easy then to turn the oil into any kind of oil you want
Well, we know how to get that one little particle out--and we're the only firm that does.
And we turn out an olive-oil that is just simply perfect--undetectable!
We are doing a ripping trade, too--as I could easily show you by my order-book for this trip.
Maybe you'll butter everybody's bread pretty soon, but we'll cotton-seed his salad for him from the Gulf to Canada, and that's a dead-certain thing.
' Cincinnati glowed and flashed with admiration.
The two scoundrels exchanged business-cards, and rose.
As they left the table, Cincinnati said-- 'But you have to have custom-house marks, don't you?
How do you manage that?
' I did not catch the answer.
We passed Port Hudson, scene of two of the most terrific episodes of the war--the night-battle there between Farragut's fleet and the Confederate land batteries, April 14th, 1863; and the memorable land battle, two months later, which lasted eight
CHAPTER 40 Castles and Culture BATON ROUGE was clothed in flowers, like a bride--no, much more so; like a greenhouse.
For we were in the absolute South now--no modifications, no compromises, no half-way measures.
The magnolia-trees in the Capitol grounds were lovely and fragrant, with their dense rich foliage and huge snow-ball blossoms.
The scent of the flower is very sweet, but you want distance on it, because it is so powerful.
They are not good bedroom blossoms--they might suffocate one in his sleep.
We were certainly in the South at last; for here the sugar region begins, and the plantations--vast green levels, with sugar-mill and negro quarters clustered together in the middle distance--were in view.
And there was a tropical sun overhead and a tropical swelter in the air.
And at this point, also, begins the pilot's paradise: a wide river hence to New Orleans, abundance of water from shore to shore, and no bars, snags, sawyers, or wrecks in his road.
Sir Walter Scott is probably responsible for the Capitol building; for it is not conceivable that this little sham castle would ever have been built if he had not run the people mad, a couple of generations ago, with his medieval romances.
The South has not yet recovered from the debilitating influence of his books.
Admiration of his fantastic heroes and their grotesque 'chivalry' doings and romantic juvenilities still survives here, in an atmosphere in which is already perceptible the wholesome and practical nineteenth-century smell of cotton-factories and
It is pathetic enough, that a whitewashed castle, with turrets and things--materials all ungenuine within and without, pretending to be what they are not--should ever have been built in this otherwise honorable place; but it is much more pathetic to see
Baton Rouge has no patent on imitation castles, however, and no monopoly of them.
Here is a picture from the advertisement of the 'Female Institute' of Columbia; Tennessee.
The following remark is from the same advertisement-- 'The Institute building has long been famed as a model of striking and beautiful architecture.
Visitors are charmed with its resemblance to the old castles of song and story, with its towers, turreted walls, and ivy-mantled porches.
' Keeping school in a castle is a romantic thing; as romantic as keeping hotel in a castle.
By itself the imitation castle is doubtless harmless, and well enough; but as a symbol and breeder and sustainer of maudlin Middle-Age romanticism here in the midst of the plainest and sturdiest and infinitely greatest and worthiest of all the centuries
Here is an extract from the prospectus of a Kentucky 'Female College.
' Female college sounds well enough; but since the phrasing it in that unjustifiable way was done purely in the interest of brevity, it seems to me that she-college would have been still better--because shorter, and means the same thing: that is, if either
Believing the southern to be the highest type of civilization this continent has seen, the young ladies are trained according to the southern ideas of delicacy, refinement, womanhood, religion, and propriety; hence we offer a first-class female college for
' {footnote [Illustrations of it thoughtlessly omitted by the advertiser: KNOXVILLE, Tenn.
, October 19.
--This morning a few minutes after ten o'clock, General Joseph A. Mabry, Thomas O'Connor, and Joseph A. Mabry, Jr., were killed in a shooting affray.
The difficulty began yesterday afternoon by General Mabry attacking Major O'Connor and threatening to kill him.
This was at the fair grounds, and O'Connor told Mabry that it was not the place to settle their difficulties.
Mabry then told O'Connor he should not live.
It seems that Mabry was armed and O'Connor was not.
The cause of the difficulty was an old feud about the transfer of some property from Mabry to O'Connor.
Later in the afternoon Mabry sent word to O'Connor that he would kill him on sight.
This morning Major O'Connor was standing in the door of the Mechanics' National Bank, of which he was president.
General Mabry and another gentleman walked down Gay Street on the opposite side from the bank.
O'Connor stepped into the bank, got a shot gun, took deliberate aim at General Mabry and fired.
Mabry fell dead, being shot in the left side.
As he fell O'Connor fired again, the shot taking effect in Mabry's thigh.
O'Connor then reached into the bank and got another shot gun.
About this time Joseph A. Mabry, Jr., son of General Mabry, came rushing down the street, unseen by O'Connor until within forty feet, when the young man fired a pistol, the shot taking effect in O'Connor's right breast, passing through the body near the
The instant Mabry shot, O'Connor turned and fired, the load taking effect in young Mabry's right breast and side.
Mabry fell pierced with twenty buckshot, and almost instantly O'Connor fell dead without a struggle.
Mabry tried to rise, but fell back dead.
The whole tragedy occurred within two minutes, and neither of the three spoke after he was shot.
General Mabry had about thirty buckshot in his body.
A bystander was painfully wounded in the thigh with a buckshot, and another was wounded in the arm.
Four other men had their clothing pierced by buckshot.
The affair caused great excitement, and Gay Street was thronged with thousands of people.
General Mabry and his son Joe were acquitted only a few days ago of the murder of Moses Lusby and Don Lusby, father and son, whom they killed a few weeks ago.
Will Mabry was killed by Don Lusby last Christmas.
Major Thomas O'Connor was President of the Mechanics' National Bank here, and was the wealthiest man in the State.
--_Associated Press Telegram_.
One day last month, Professor Sharpe, of the Somerville, Tenn.
, Female College, 'a quiet and gentlemanly man,' was told that his brother-in-law, a Captain Burton, had threatened to kill him.
Burton, it seems, had already killed one man and driven his knife into another.
The Professor armed himself with a double-barreled shot gun, started out in search of his brother-in-law, found him playing billiards in a saloon, and blew his brains out.
The 'Memphis Avalanche' reports that the Professor's course met with pretty general approval in the community; knowing that the law was powerless, in the actual condition of public sentiment, to protect him, he protected himself.
About the same time, two young men in North Carolina quarreled about a girl, and 'hostile messages' were exchanged.
Friends tried to reconcile them, but had their labor for their pains.
On the 24th the young men met in the public highway.
One of them had a heavy club in his hand, the other an ax.
The man with the club fought desperately for his life, but it was a hopeless fight from the first.
A well-directed blow sent his club whirling out of his grasp, and the next moment he was a dead man.
About the same time, two 'highly connected' young Virginians, clerks in a hardware store at Charlottesville, while 'skylarking,' came to blows.
Peter Dick threw pepper in Charles Roads's eyes; Roads demanded an apology; Dick refused to give it, and it was agreed that a duel was inevitable, but a difficulty arose; the parties had no pistols, and it was too late at night to procure them.
One of them suggested that butcher-knives would answer the purpose, and the other accepted the suggestion; the result was that Roads fell to the floor with a gash in his abdomen that may or may not prove fatal.
If Dick has been arrested, the news has not reached us.
He 'expressed deep regret,' and we are told by a Staunton correspondent of the _Philadelphia Press_ that 'every effort has been made to hush the matter up.
'--_Extracts From The Public Journals_.
]} What, warder, ho!
the man that can blow so complacent a blast as that, probably blows it from a castle.
From Baton Rouge to New Orleans, the great sugar plantations border both sides of the river all the way, and stretch their league-wide levels back to the dim forest-walls of bearded cypress in the rear.
Shores lonely no longer.
Plenty of dwellings all the way, on both banks--standing so close together, for long distances, that the broad river lying between the two rows, becomes a sort of spacious street.
A most home-like and happy-looking region.
And now and then you see a pillared and porticoed great manor-house, embowered in trees.
Here is testimony of one or two of the procession of foreign tourists that filed along here half a century ago.
Mrs. Trollope says-- 'The unbroken flatness of the banks of the Mississippi continued unvaried for many miles above New Orleans; but the graceful and luxuriant palmetto, the dark and noble ilex, and the bright orange, were everywhere to be seen, and it was
' Captain Basil Hall-- 'The district of country which lies adjacent to the Mississippi, in the lower parts of Louisiana, is everywhere thickly peopled by sugar planters, whose showy houses, gay piazzas, trig gardens, and numerous slave-villages, all clean
All the procession paint the attractive picture in the same way.
The descriptions of fifty years ago do not need to have a word changed in order to exactly describe the same region as it appears to-day--except as to the 'trigness' of the houses.
The whitewash is gone from the negro cabins now; and many, possibly most, of the big mansions, once so shining white, have worn out their paint and have a decayed, neglected look.
It is the blight of the war.
Twenty-one years ago everything was trim and trig and bright along the 'coast,' just as it had been in 1827, as described by those tourists.
Unfortunate tourists!
People humbugged them with stupid and silly lies, and then laughed at them for believing and printing the same.
They told Mrs. Trollope that the alligators--or crocodiles, as she calls them--were terrible creatures; and backed up the statement with a blood-curdling account of how one of these slandered reptiles crept into a squatter cabin one night, and ate up a
The woman, by herself, would have satisfied any ordinarily-impossible alligator; but no, these liars must make him gorge the five children besides.
One would not imagine that jokers of this robust breed would be sensitive--but they were.
It is difficult, at this day, to understand, and impossible to justify, the reception which the book of the grave, honest, intelligent, gentle, manly, charitable, well-meaning Capt.
Basil Hall got.
CHAPTER 41 The Metropolis of the South THE approaches to New Orleans were familiar; general aspects were unchanged.
When one goes flying through London along a railway propped in the air on tall arches, he may inspect miles of upper bedrooms through the open windows, but the lower half of the houses is under his level and out of sight.
Similarly, in high-river stage, in the New Orleans region, the water is up to the top of the enclosing levee-rim, the flat country behind it lies low--representing the bottom of a dish--and as the boat swims along, high on the flood, one looks down upon
There is nothing but that frail breastwork of earth between the people and destruction.
The old brick salt-warehouses clustered at the upper end of the city looked as they had always looked; warehouses which had had a kind of Aladdin's lamp experience, however, since I had seen them; for when the war broke out the proprietor went to bed one
The vast reach of plank wharves remained unchanged, and there were as many ships as ever: but the long array of steamboats had vanished; not altogether, of course, but not much of it was left.
The city itself had not changed--to the eye.
It had greatly increased in spread and population, but the look of the town was not altered.
The dust, waste-paper-littered, was still deep in the streets; the deep, trough-like gutters alongside the curbstones were still half full of reposeful water with a dusty surface; the sidewalks were still--in the sugar and bacon region--encumbered by casks
Canal Street was finer, and more attractive and stirring than formerly, with its drifting crowds of people, its several processions of hurrying street-cars, and--toward evening--its broad second-story verandas crowded with gentlemen and ladies clothed
Not that there is any 'architecture' in Canal Street: to speak in broad, general terms, there is no architecture in New Orleans, except in the cemeteries.
It seems a strange thing to say of a wealthy, far-seeing, and energetic city of a quarter of a million inhabitants, but it is true.
There is a huge granite U.S. Custom-house--costly enough, genuine enough, but as a decoration it is inferior to a gasometer.
It looks like a state prison.
But it was built before the war.
Architecture in America may be said to have been born since the war.
New Orleans, I believe, has had the good luck--and in a sense the bad luck--to have had no great fire in late years.
It must be so.
If the opposite had been the case, I think one would be able to tell the 'burnt district' by the radical improvement in its architecture over the old forms.
One can do this in Boston and Chicago.
The 'burnt district' of Boston was commonplace before the fire; but now there is no commercial district in any city in the world that can surpass it--or perhaps even rival it--in beauty, elegance, and tastefulness.
However, New Orleans has begun--just this moment, as one may say.
When completed, the new Cotton Exchange will be a stately and beautiful building; massive, substantial, full of architectural graces; no shams or false pretenses or uglinesses about it anywhere.
To the city, it will be worth many times its cost, for it will breed its species.
What has been lacking hitherto, was a model to build toward; something to educate eye and taste; a _suggester_, so to speak.
The city is well outfitted with progressive men--thinking, sagacious, long-headed men.
The contrast between the spirit of the city and the city's architecture is like the contrast between waking and sleep.
Apparently there is a 'boom' in everything but that one dead feature.
The water in the gutters used to be stagnant and slimy, and a potent disease-breeder; but the gutters are flushed now, two or three times a day, by powerful machinery; in many of the gutters the water never stands still, but has a steady current.
Other sanitary improvements have been made; and with such effect that New Orleans claims to be (during the long intervals between the occasional yellow-fever assaults) one of the healthiest cities in the Union.
There's plenty of ice now for everybody, manufactured in the town.
It is a driving place commercially, and has a great river, ocean, and railway business.
At the date of our visit, it was the best lighted city in the Union, electrically speaking.
The New Orleans electric lights were more numerous than those of New York, and very much better.
One had this modified noonday not only in Canal and some neighboring chief streets, but all along a stretch of five miles of river frontage.
There are good clubs in the city now--several of them but recently organized--and inviting modern-style pleasure resorts at West End and Spanish Fort.
The telephone is everywhere.
One of the most notable advances is in journalism.
The newspapers, as I remember them, were not a striking feature.
Now they are.
Money is spent upon them with a free hand.
They get the news, let it cost what it may.
The editorial work is not hack-grinding, but literature.
As an example of New Orleans journalistic achievement, it may be mentioned that the 'Times-Democrat' of August 26, 1882, contained a report of the year's business of the towns of the Mississippi Valley, from New Orleans all the way to St. Paul--two
That issue of the paper consisted of forty pages; seven columns to the page; two hundred and eighty columns in all; fifteen hundred words to the column; an aggregate of four hundred and twenty thousand words.
That is to say, not much short of three times as many words as there are in this book.
One may with sorrow contrast this with the architecture of New Orleans.
I have been speaking of public architecture only.
The domestic article in New Orleans is reproachless, notwithstanding it remains as it always was.
All the dwellings are of wood--in the American part of the town, I mean--and all have a comfortable look.
Those in the wealthy quarter are spacious; painted snow-white usually, and generally have wide verandas, or double-verandas, supported by ornamental columns.
These mansions stand in the center of large grounds, and rise, garlanded with roses, out of the midst of swelling masses of shining green foliage and many-colored blossoms.
No houses could well be in better harmony with their surroundings, or more pleasing to the eye, or more home-like and comfortable-looking.
One even becomes reconciled to the cistern presently; this is a mighty cask, painted green, and sometimes a couple of stories high, which is propped against the house-corner on stilts.
There is a mansion-and-brewery suggestion about the combination which seems very incongruous at first.
But the people cannot have wells, and so they take rain-water.
Neither can they conveniently have cellars, or graves,{footnote [The Israelites are buried in graves--by permission, I take it, not requirement; but none else, except the destitute, who are buried at public expense.
The graves are but three or four feet deep.
]} the town being built upon 'made' ground; so they do without both, and few of the living complain, and none of the others.
CHAPTER 42 Hygiene and Sentiment THEY bury their dead in vaults, above the ground.
These vaults have a resemblance to houses--sometimes to temples; are built of marble, generally; are architecturally graceful and shapely; they face the walks and driveways of the cemetery; and when one moves through the midst of a thousand or so of them
Many of the cemeteries are beautiful, and are kept in perfect order.
When one goes from the levee or the business streets near it, to a cemetery, he observes to himself that if those people down there would live as neatly while they are alive as they do after they are dead, they would find many advantages in it; and
Fresh flowers, in vases of water, are to be seen at the portals of many of the vaults: placed there by the pious hands of bereaved parents and children, husbands and wives, and renewed daily.
A milder form of sorrow finds its inexpensive and lasting remembrancer in the coarse and ugly but indestructible 'immortelle'--which is a wreath or cross or some such emblem, made of rosettes of black linen, with sometimes a yellow rosette at the
The immortelle requires no attention: you just hang it up, and there you are; just leave it alone, it will take care of your grief for you, and keep it in mind better than you can; stands weather first-rate, and lasts like boiler-iron.
On sunny days, pretty little chameleons--gracefullest of legged reptiles--creep along the marble fronts of the vaults, and catch flies.
Their changes of color--as to variety--are not up to the creature's reputation.
They change color when a person comes along and hangs up an immortelle; but that is nothing: any right-feeling reptile would do that.
I will gradually drop this subject of graveyards.
I have been trying all I could to get down to the sentimental part of it, but I cannot accomplish it.
I think there is no genuinely sentimental part to it.
It is all grotesque, ghastly, horrible.
Graveyards may have been justifiable in the bygone ages, when nobody knew that for every dead body put into the ground, to glut the earth and the plant-roots, and the air with disease-germs, five or fifty, or maybe a hundred persons must die before their
It is a grim sort of a thought.
The relics of St. Anne, up in Canada, have now, after nineteen hundred years, gone to curing the sick by the dozen.
But it is merest matter-of-course that these same relics, within a generation after St. Anne's death and burial, _made _several thousand people sick.
Therefore these miracle-performances are simply compensation, nothing more.
St. Anne is somewhat slow pay, for a Saint, it is true; but better a debt paid after nineteen hundred years, and outlawed by the statute of limitations, than not paid at all; and most of the knights of the halo do not pay at all.
Where you find one that pays--like St. Anne--you find a hundred and fifty that take the benefit of the statute.
And none of them pay any more than the principal of what they owe--they pay none of the interest either simple or compound.
A Saint can never _quite _return the principal, however; for his dead body _kills _people, whereas his relics _heal _only--they never restore the dead to life.
That part of the account is always left unsettled.
'Dr. F. Julius Le Moyne, after fifty years of medical practice, wrote: "The inhumation of human bodies, dead from infectious diseases, results in constantly loading the atmosphere, and polluting the waters, with not only the germs that rise from simply
'The gases (from buried corpses) will rise to the surface through eight or ten feet of gravel, just as coal-gas will do, and there is practically no limit to their power of escape.
'During the epidemic in New Orleans in 1853, Dr. E. H. Barton reported that in the Fourth District the mortality was four hundred and fifty-two per thousand--more than double that of any other.
In this district were three large cemeteries, in which during the previous year more than three thousand bodies had been buried.
In other districts the proximity of cemeteries seemed to aggravate the disease.
'In 1828 Professor Bianchi demonstrated how the fearful reappearance of the plague at Modena was caused by excavations in ground where, _three hundred years previously_, the victims of the pestilence had been buried.
Mr. Cooper, in explaining the causes of some epidemics, remarks that the opening of the plague burial-grounds at Eyam resulted in an immediate outbreak of disease.
'--_North American Review, No.
3, Vol.
135.
_ In an address before the Chicago Medical Society, in advocacy of cremation, Dr. Charles W. Purdy made some striking comparisons to show what a burden is laid upon society by the burial of the dead:-- 'One and one-fourth times more money is expended
Funerals cost this country in 1880 enough money to pay the liabilities of all the commercial failures in the United States during the same year, and give each bankrupt a capital of $8,630 with which to resume business.
Funerals cost annually more money than the value of the combined gold and silver yield of the United States in the year 1880!
These figures do not include the sums invested in burial-grounds and expended in tombs and monuments, nor the loss from depreciation of property in the vicinity of cemeteries.
' For the rich, cremation would answer as well as burial; for the ceremonies connected with it could be made as costly and ostentatious as a Hindu suttee; while for the poor, cremation would be better than burial, because so cheap {footnote [Four or five
]}--so cheap until the poor got to imitating the rich, which they would do by-and-bye.
The adoption of cremation would relieve us of a muck of threadbare burial-witticisms; but, on the other hand, it would resurrect a lot of mildewed old cremation-jokes that have had a rest for two thousand years.
I have a colored acquaintance who earns his living by odd jobs and heavy manual labor.
He never earns above four hundred dollars in a year, and as he has a wife and several young children, the closest scrimping is necessary to get him through to the end of the twelve months debtless.
To such a man a funeral is a colossal financial disaster.
While I was writing one of the preceding chapters, this man lost a little child.
He walked the town over with a friend, trying to find a coffin that was within his means.
He bought the very cheapest one he could find, plain wood, stained.
It cost him twenty-six dollars.
It would have cost less than four, probably, if it had been built to put something useful into.
He and his family will feel that outlay a good many months.
CHAPTER 43 The Art of Inhumation ABOUT the same time, I encountered a man in the street, whom I had not seen for six or seven years; and something like this talk followed.
I said-- 'But you used to look sad and oldish; you don't now.
Where did you get all this youth and bubbling cheerfulness?
Give me the address.
' He chuckled blithely, took off his shining tile, pointed to a notched pink circlet of paper pasted into its crown, with something lettered on it, and went on chuckling while I read, 'J.
B----, _Undertaker_.
' Then he clapped his hat on, gave it an irreverent tilt to leeward, and cried out-- 'That's what's the matter!
It used to be rough times with me when you knew me--insurance-agency business, you know; mighty irregular.
Big fire, all right--brisk trade for ten days while people scared; after that, dull policy-business till next fire.
Town like this don't have fires often enough--a fellow strikes so many dull weeks in a row that he gets discouraged.
But you bet you, this is the business!
People don't wait for examples to die.
No, sir, they drop off right along--there ain't any dull spots in the undertaker line.
I just started in with two or three little old coffins and a hired hearse, and now look at the thing!
I've worked up a business here that would satisfy any man, don't care who he is.
Five years ago, lodged in an attic; live in a swell house now, with a mansard roof, and all the modern inconveniences.
' 'Does a coffin pay so well.
Is there much profit on a coffin?
' 'Go-way!
How you talk!
' Then, with a confidential wink, a dropping of the voice, and an impressive laying of his hand on my arm; 'Look here; there's one thing in this world which isn't ever cheap.
That's a coffin.
There's one thing in this world which a person don't ever try to jew you down on.
That's a coffin.
There's one thing in this world which a person don't say--"I'll look around a little, and if I find I can't do better I'll come back and take it".
That's a coffin.
There's one thing in this world which a person won't take in pine if he can go walnut; and won't take in walnut if he can go mahogany; and won't take in mahogany if he can go an iron casket with silver door-plate and bronze handles.
That's a coffin.
And there's one thing in this world which you don't have to worry around after a person to get him to pay for.
And that's a coffin.
Undertaking?
--why it's the dead-surest business in Christendom, and the nobbiest.
'Why, just look at it.
A rich man won't have anything but your very best; and you can just pile it on, too--pile it on and sock it to him--he won't ever holler.
And you take in a poor man, and if you work him right he'll bust himself on a single lay-out.
Or especially a woman.
F'r instance: Mrs. O'Flaherty comes in--widow--wiping her eyes and kind of moaning.
Unhandkerchiefs one eye, bats it around tearfully over the stock; says-- '"And fhat might ye ask for that wan"?
'"Thirty-nine dollars, madam," says I. '"It 's a foine big price, sure, but Pat shall be buried like a gintleman, as he was, if I have to work me fingers off for it.
I'll have that wan, sor".
'"Yes, madam," says I, "and it is a very good one, too; not costly, to be sure, but in this life we must cut our garment to our clothes, as the saying is".
And as she starts out, I heave in, kind of casually, "This one with the white satin lining is a beauty, but I am afraid--well, sixty-five dollars is a rather--rather--but no matter, I felt obliged to say to Mrs. O'Shaughnessy--" '"D'ye mane to soy that
'"Yes, madam".
'"Then Pat shall go to heaven in the twin to it, if it takes the last rap the O'Flaherties can raise; and moind you, stick on some extras, too, and I'll give ye another dollar".
'And as I lay-in with the livery stables, of course I don't forget to mention that Mrs. O'Shaughnessy hired fifty-four dollars' worth of hacks and flung as much style into Dennis's funeral as if he had been a duke or an assassin.
And of course she sails in and goes the O'Shaughnessy about four hacks and an omnibus better.
That used to be, but that's all played now; that is, in this particular town.
The Irish got to piling up hacks so, on their funerals, that a funeral left them ragged and hungry for two years afterward; so the priest pitched in and broke it all up.
He don't allow them to have but two hacks now, and sometimes only one.
' 'Well,' said I, 'if you are so light-hearted and jolly in ordinary times, what must you be in an epidemic?
' He shook his head.
'No, you're off, there.
We don't like to see an epidemic.
An epidemic don't pay.
Well, of course I don't mean that, exactly; but it don't pay in proportion to the regular thing.
Don't it occur to you, why?
' No.
'Think.
' 'I can't imagine.
What is it?
' 'It's just two things.
' 'Well, what are they?
' 'One's Embamming.
' 'And what's the other?
' 'Ice.
' 'How is that?
' 'Well, in ordinary times, a person dies, and we lay him up in ice; one day two days, maybe three, to wait for friends to come.
Takes a lot of it--melts fast.
We charge jewelry rates for that ice, and war-prices for attendance.
Well, don't you know, when there's an epidemic, they rush 'em to the cemetery the minute the breath's out.
No market for ice in an epidemic.
Same with Embamming.
You take a family that's able to embam, and you've got a soft thing.
You can mention sixteen different ways to do it--though there _ain't_ only one or two ways, when you come down to the bottom facts of it--and they'll take the highest-priced way, every time.
It's human nature--human nature in grief.
It don't reason, you see.
Time being, it don't care a dam.
All it wants is physical immortality for deceased, and they're willing to pay for it.
All you've got to do is to just be ca'm and stack it up--they'll stand the racket.
Why, man, you can take a defunct that you couldn't _give _away; and get your embamming traps around you and go to work; and in a couple of hours he is worth a cool six hundred--that's what _he's_ worth.
There ain't anything equal to it but trading rats for di'monds in time of famine.
Well, don't you see, when there's an epidemic, people don't wait to embam.
No, indeed they don't; and it hurts the business like hell-th, as we say--hurts it like hell-th, _health_, see?
--Our little joke in the trade.
Well, I must be going.
Give me a call whenever you need any--I mean, when you're going by, sometime.
' In his joyful high spirits, he did the exaggerating himself, if any has been done.
I have not enlarged on him.
With the above brief references to inhumation, let us leave the subject.
As for me, I hope to be cremated.
I made that remark to my pastor once, who said, with what he seemed to think was an impressive manner-- 'I wouldn't worry about that, if I had your chances.
' Much he knew about it--the family all so opposed to it.
CHAPTER 44 City Sights THE old French part of New Orleans--anciently the Spanish part--bears no resemblance to the American end of the city: the American end which lies beyond the intervening brick business-center.
The houses are massed in blocks; are austerely plain and dignified; uniform of pattern, with here and there a departure from it with pleasant effect; all are plastered on the outside, and nearly all have long, iron-railed verandas running along the several
Their chief beauty is the deep, warm, varicolored stain with which time and the weather have enriched the plaster.
It harmonizes with all the surroundings, and has as natural a look of belonging there as has the flush upon sunset clouds.
This charming decoration cannot be successfully imitated; neither is it to be found elsewhere in America.
The iron railings are a specialty, also.
The pattern is often exceedingly light and dainty, and airy and graceful--with a large cipher or monogram in the center, a delicate cobweb of baffling, intricate forms, wrought in steel.
The ancient railings are hand-made, and are now comparatively rare and proportionately valuable.
They are become _bric-a-brac_.
The party had the privilege of idling through this ancient quarter of New Orleans with the South's finest literary genius, the author of 'the Grandissimes.
' In him the South has found a masterly delineator of its interior life and its history.
In truth, I find by experience, that the untrained eye and vacant mind can inspect it, and learn of it, and judge of it, more clearly and profitably in his books than by personal contact with it.
With Mr. Cable along to see for you, and describe and explain and illuminate, a jog through that old quarter is a vivid pleasure.
And you have a vivid sense as of unseen or dimly seen things--vivid, and yet fitful and darkling; you glimpse salient features, but lose the fine shades or catch them imperfectly through the vision of the imagination: a case, as it were, of ignorant
We visited the old St. Louis Hotel, now occupied by municipal offices.
There is nothing strikingly remarkable about it; but one can say of it as of the Academy of Music in New York, that if a broom or a shovel has ever been used in it there is no circumstantial evidence to back up the fact.
It is curious that cabbages and hay and things do not grow in the Academy of Music; but no doubt it is on account of the interruption of the light by the benches, and the impossibility of hoeing the crop except in the aisles.
The fact that the ushers grow their buttonhole-bouquets on the premises shows what might be done if they had the right kind of an agricultural head to the establishment.
We visited also the venerable Cathedral, and the pretty square in front of it; the one dim with religious light, the other brilliant with the worldly sort, and lovely with orange-trees and blossomy shrubs; then we drove in the hot sun through the
He was a pirate with a tremendous and sanguinary history; and as long as he preserved unspotted, in retirement, the dignity of his name and the grandeur of his ancient calling, homage and reverence were his from high and low; but when at last he descended
When he died, they set up a monument over him; and little by little he has come into respect again; but it is respect for the pirate, not the alderman.
To-day the loyal and generous remember only what he was, and charitably forget what he became.
Thence, we drove a few miles across a swamp, along a raised shell road, with a canal on one hand and a dense wood on the other; and here and there, in the distance, a ragged and angular-limbed and moss-bearded cypress, top standing out, clear cut against
There was an occasional alligator swimming comfortably along in the canal, and an occasional picturesque colored person on the bank, flinging his statue-rigid reflection upon the still water and watching for a bite.
And by-and-bye we reached the West End, a collection of hotels of the usual light summer-resort pattern, with broad verandas all around, and the waves of the wide and blue Lake Pontchartrain lapping the thresholds.
We had dinner on a ground-veranda over the water--the chief dish the renowned fish called the pompano, delicious as the less criminal forms of sin.
Thousands of people come by rail and carriage to West End and to Spanish Fort every evening, and dine, listen to the bands, take strolls in the open air under the electric lights, go sailing on the lake, and entertain themselves in various and sundry other
We had opportunities on other days and in other places to test the pompano.
Notably, at an editorial dinner at one of the clubs in the city.
He was in his last possible perfection there, and justified his fame.
In his suite was a tall pyramid of scarlet cray-fish--large ones; as large as one's thumb--delicate, palatable, appetizing.
Also deviled whitebait; also shrimps of choice quality; and a platter of small soft-shell crabs of a most superior breed.
The other dishes were what one might get at Delmonico's, or Buckingham Palace; those I have spoken of can be had in similar perfection in New Orleans only, I suppose.
In the West and South they have a new institution--the Broom Brigade.
It is composed of young ladies who dress in a uniform costume, and go through the infantry drill, with broom in place of musket.
It is a very pretty sight, on private view.
When they perform on the stage of a theater, in the blaze of colored fires, it must be a fine and fascinating spectacle.
I saw them go through their complex manual with grace, spirit, and admirable precision.
I saw them do everything which a human being can possibly do with a broom, except sweep.
I did not see them sweep.
But I know they could learn.
What they have already learned proves that.
And if they ever should learn, and should go on the war-path down Tchoupitoulas or some of those other streets around there, those thoroughfares would bear a greatly improved aspect in a very few minutes.
But the girls themselves wouldn't; so nothing would be really gained, after all.
The drill was in the Washington Artillery building.
In this building we saw many interesting relics of the war.
Also a fine oil-painting representing Stonewall Jackson's last interview with General Lee.
Both men are on horseback.
Jackson has just ridden up, and is accosting Lee.
The picture is very valuable, on account of the portraits, which are authentic.
But, like many another historical picture, it means nothing without its label.
And one label will fit it as well as another-- First Interview between Lee and Jackson.
Last Interview between Lee and Jackson.
Jackson Introducing Himself to Lee.
Jackson Accepting Lee's Invitation to Dinner.
Jackson Declining Lee's Invitation to Dinner--with Thanks.
Jackson Apologizing for a Heavy Defeat.
Jackson Reporting a Great Victory.
Jackson Asking Lee for a Match.
It tells _one _story, and a sufficient one; for it says quite plainly and satisfactorily, 'Here are Lee and Jackson together.
' The artist would have made it tell that this is Lee and Jackson's last interview if he could have done it.
But he couldn't, for there wasn't any way to do it.
A good legible label is usually worth, for information, a ton of significant attitude and expression in a historical picture.
In Rome, people with fine sympathetic natures stand up and weep in front of the celebrated 'Beatrice Cenci the Day before her Execution.
' It shows what a label can do.
If they did not know the picture, they would inspect it unmoved, and say, 'Young girl with hay fever; young girl with her head in a bag.
' I found the half-forgotten Southern intonations and elisions as pleasing to my ear as they had formerly been.
A Southerner talks music.
At least it is music to me, but then I was born in the South.
The educated Southerner has no use for an r, except at the beginning of a word.
He says 'honah,' and 'dinnah,' and 'Gove'nuh,' and 'befo' the waw,' and so on.
The words may lack charm to the eye, in print, but they have it to the ear.
When did the r disappear from Southern speech, and how did it come to disappear?
The custom of dropping it was not borrowed from the North, nor inherited from England.
Many Southerners--most Southerners--put a y into occasional words that begin with the k sound.
For instance, they say Mr. K'yahtah (Carter) and speak of playing k'yahds or of riding in the k'yahs.
And they have the pleasant custom--long ago fallen into decay in the North--of frequently employing the respectful 'Sir.
' Instead of the curt Yes, and the abrupt No, they say 'Yes, Suh', 'No, Suh.
' But there are some infelicities.
Such as 'like' for 'as,' and the addition of an 'at' where it isn't needed.
I heard an educated gentleman say, 'Like the flag-officer did.
' His cook or his butler would have said, 'Like the flag-officer done.
' You hear gentlemen say, 'Where have you been at?
' And here is the aggravated form--heard a ragged street Arab say it to a comrade: 'I was a-ask'n' Tom whah you was a-sett'n' at.
' The very elect carelessly say 'will' when they mean 'shall'; and many of them say, 'I didn't go to do it,' meaning 'I didn't mean to do it.
' The Northern word 'guess'--imported from England, where it used to be common, and now regarded by satirical Englishmen as a Yankee original--is but little used among Southerners.
They say 'reckon.
' They haven't any 'doesn't' in their language; they say 'don't' instead.
The unpolished often use 'went' for 'gone.
' It is nearly as bad as the Northern 'hadn't ought.
' This reminds me that a remark of a very peculiar nature was made here in my neighborhood (in the North) a few days ago: 'He hadn't ought to have went.
' How is that?
Isn't that a good deal of a triumph?
One knows the orders combined in this half-breed's architecture without inquiring: one parent Northern, the other Southern.
To-day I heard a schoolmistress ask, 'Where is John gone?
' This form is so common--so nearly universal, in fact--that if she had used 'whither' instead of 'where,' I think it would have sounded like an affectation.
We picked up one excellent word--a word worth traveling to New Orleans to get; a nice limber, expressive, handy word--'lagniappe.
' They pronounce it lanny-yap.
It is Spanish--so they said.
We discovered it at the head of a column of odds and ends in the Picayune, the first day; heard twenty people use it the second; inquired what it meant the third; adopted it and got facility in swinging it the fourth.
It has a restricted meaning, but I think the people spread it out a little when they choose.
It is the equivalent of the thirteenth roll in a 'baker's dozen.
' It is something thrown in, gratis, for good measure.
The custom originated in the Spanish quarter of the city.
When a child or a servant buys something in a shop--or even the mayor or the governor, for aught I know--he finishes the operation by saying-- 'Give me something for lagniappe.
' The shopman always responds; gives the child a bit of licorice-root, gives the servant a cheap cigar or a spool of thread, gives the governor--I don't know what he gives the governor; support, likely.
When you are invited to drink, and this does occur now and then in New Orleans--and you say, 'What, again?
--no, I've had enough;' the other party says, 'But just this one time more--this is for lagniappe.
' When the beau perceives that he is stacking his compliments a trifle too high, and sees by the young lady's countenance that the edifice would have been better with the top compliment left off, he puts his 'I beg pardon--no harm intended,' into the
' If the waiter in the restaurant stumbles and spills a gill of coffee down the back of your neck, he says 'For lagniappe, sah,' and gets you another cup without extra charge.
CHAPTER 45 Southern Sports IN the North one hears the war mentioned, in social conversation, once a month; sometimes as often as once a week; but as a distinct subject for talk, it has long ago been relieved of duty.
There are sufficient reasons for this.
Given a dinner company of six gentlemen to-day, it can easily happen that four of them--and possibly five--were not in the field at all.
So the chances are four to two, or five to one, that the war will at no time during the evening become the topic of conversation; and the chances are still greater that if it become the topic it will remain so but a little while.
If you add six ladies to the company, you have added six people who saw so little of the dread realities of the war that they ran out of talk concerning them years ago, and now would soon weary of the war topic if you brought it up.
The case is very different in the South.
There, every man you meet was in the war; and every lady you meet saw the war.
The war is the great chief topic of conversation.
The interest in it is vivid and constant; the interest in other topics is fleeting.
Mention of the war will wake up a dull company and set their tongues going, when nearly any other topic would fail.
In the South, the war is what A.D. is elsewhere: they date from it.
All day long you hear things 'placed' as having happened since the waw; or du'in' the waw; or befo' the waw; or right aftah the waw; or 'bout two yeahs or five yeahs or ten yeahs befo' the waw or aftah the waw.
It shows how intimately every individual was visited, in his own person, by that tremendous episode.
It gives the inexperienced stranger a better idea of what a vast and comprehensive calamity invasion is than he can ever get by reading books at the fireside.
At a club one evening, a gentleman turned to me and said, in an aside-- 'You notice, of course, that we are nearly always talking about the war.
It isn't because we haven't anything else to talk about, but because nothing else has so strong an interest for us.
And there is another reason: In the war, each of us, in his own person, seems to have sampled all the different varieties of human experience; as a consequence, you can't mention an outside matter of any sort but it will certainly remind some listener of
Of course that brings the talk back to the war.
You may try all you want to, to keep other subjects before the house, and we may all join in and help, but there can be but one result: the most random topic would load every man up with war reminiscences, and shut him up, too; and talk would be likely to
' The poet was sitting some little distance away; and presently he began to speak--about the moon.
The gentleman who had been talking to me remarked in an 'aside:' 'There, the moon is far enough from the seat of war, but you will see that it will suggest something to somebody about the war; in ten minutes from now the moon, as a topic, will be shelved.
' The poet was saying he had noticed something which was a surprise to him; had had the impression that down here, toward the equator, the moonlight was much stronger and brighter than up North; had had the impression that when he visited New Orleans, many
Reminds me of an anecdote.
Everything is changed since the war, for better or for worse; but you'll find people down here born grumblers, who see no change except the change for the worse.
There was an old negro woman of this sort.
A young New-Yorker said in her presence, "What a wonderful moon you have down here"!
She sighed and said, "Ah, bless yo' heart, honey, you ought to seen dat moon befo' de waw"!
' The new topic was dead already.
But the poet resurrected it, and gave it a new start.
A brief dispute followed, as to whether the difference between Northern and Southern moonlight really existed or was only imagined.
Moonlight talk drifted easily into talk about artificial methods of dispelling darkness.
Then somebody remembered that when Farragut advanced upon Port Hudson on a dark night--and did not wish to assist the aim of the Confederate gunners--he carried no battle-lanterns, but painted the decks of his ships white, and thus created a dim but
At this point the war got the floor again--the ten minutes not quite up yet.
I was not sorry, for war talk by men who have been in a war is always interesting; whereas moon talk by a poet who has not been in the moon is likely to be dull.
We went to a cockpit in New Orleans on a Saturday afternoon.
I had never seen a cock-fight before.
There were men and boys there of all ages and all colors, and of many languages and nationalities.
But I noticed one quite conspicuous and surprising absence: the traditional brutal faces.
There were no brutal faces.
With no cock-fighting going on, you could have played the gathering on a stranger for a prayer-meeting; and after it began, for a revival--provided you blindfolded your stranger--for the shouting was something prodigious.
A negro and a white man were in the ring; everybody else outside.
The cocks were brought in in sacks; and when time was called, they were taken out by the two bottle-holders, stroked, caressed, poked toward each other, and finally liberated.
The big black cock plunged instantly at the little gray one and struck him on the head with his spur.
The gray responded with spirit.
Then the Babel of many-tongued shoutings broke out, and ceased not thenceforth.
When the cocks had been fighting some little time, I was expecting them momently to drop dead, for both were blind, red with blood, and so exhausted that they frequently fell down.
Yet they would not give up, neither would they die.
The negro and the white man would pick them up every few seconds, wipe them off, blow cold water on them in a fine spray, and take their heads in their mouths and hold them there a moment--to warm back the perishing life perhaps; I do not know.
Then, being set down again, the dying creatures would totter gropingly about, with dragging wings, find each other, strike a guesswork blow or two, and fall exhausted once more.
I did not see the end of the battle.
I forced myself to endure it as long as I could, but it was too pitiful a sight; so I made frank confession to that effect, and we retired.
We heard afterward that the black cock died in the ring, and fighting to the last.
Evidently there is abundant fascination about this 'sport' for such as have had a degree of familiarity with it.
I never saw people enjoy anything more than this gathering enjoyed this fight.
The case was the same with old gray-heads and with boys of ten.
They lost themselves in frenzies of delight.
The 'cocking-main' is an inhuman sort of entertainment, there is no question about that; still, it seems a much more respectable and far less cruel sport than fox-hunting--for the cocks like it; they experience, as well as confer enjoyment; which is not
We assisted--in the French sense--at a mule race, one day.
I believe I enjoyed this contest more than any other mule there.
I enjoyed it more than I remember having enjoyed any other animal race I ever saw.
The grand-stand was well filled with the beauty and the chivalry of New Orleans.
That phrase is not original with me.
It is the Southern reporter's.
He has used it for two generations.
He uses it twenty times a day, or twenty thousand times a day; or a million times a day--according to the exigencies.
He is obliged to use it a million times a day, if he have occasion to speak of respectable men and women that often; for he has no other phrase for such service except that single one.
He never tires of it; it always has a fine sound to him.
There is a kind of swell medieval bulliness and tinsel about it that pleases his gaudy barbaric soul.
If he had been in Palestine in the early times, we should have had no references to 'much people' out of him.
No, he would have said 'the beauty and the chivalry of Galilee' assembled to hear the Sermon on the Mount.
It is likely that the men and women of the South are sick enough of that phrase by this time, and would like a change, but there is no immediate prospect of their getting it.
The New Orleans editor has a strong, compact, direct, unflowery style; wastes no words, and does not gush.
Not so with his average correspondent.
In the Appendix I have quoted a good letter, penned by a trained hand; but the average correspondent hurls a style which differs from that.
For instance-- The 'Times-Democrat' sent a relief-steamer up one of the bayous, last April.
This steamer landed at a village, up there somewhere, and the Captain invited some of the ladies of the village to make a short trip with him.
They accepted and came aboard, and the steamboat shoved out up the creek.
That was all there was 'to it.
' And that is all that the editor of the 'Times-Democrat' would have got out of it.
There was nothing in the thing but statistics, and he would have got nothing else out of it.
He would probably have even tabulated them, partly to secure perfect clearness of statement, and partly to save space.
But his special correspondent knows other methods of handling statistics.
He just throws off all restraint and wallows in them-- 'On Saturday, early in the morning, the beauty of the place graced our cabin, and proud of her fair freight the gallant little boat glided up the bayou.
' Twenty-two words to say the ladies came aboard and the boat shoved out up the creek, is a clean waste of ten good words, and is also destructive of compactness of statement.
The trouble with the Southern reporter is--Women.
They unsettle him; they throw him off his balance.
He is plain, and sensible, and satisfactory, until a woman heaves in sight.
Then he goes all to pieces; his mind totters, he becomes flowery and idiotic.
From reading the above extract, you would imagine that this student of Sir Walter Scott is an apprentice, and knows next to nothing about handling a pen.
On the contrary, he furnishes plenty of proofs, in his long letter, that he knows well enough how to handle it when the women are not around to give him the artificial-flower complaint.
For instance-- 'At 4 o'clock ominous clouds began to gather in the south-east, and presently from the Gulf there came a blow which increased in severity every moment.
It was not safe to leave the landing then, and there was a delay.
The oaks shook off long tresses of their mossy beards to the tugging of the wind, and the bayou in its ambition put on miniature waves in mocking of much larger bodies of water.
A lull permitted a start, and homewards we steamed, an inky sky overhead and a heavy wind blowing.
As darkness crept on, there were few on board who did not wish themselves nearer home.
' There is nothing the matter with that.
It is good description, compactly put.
Yet there was great temptation, there, to drop into lurid writing.
But let us return to the mule.
Since I left him, I have rummaged around and found a full report of the race.
In it I find confirmation of the theory which I broached just now--namely, that the trouble with the Southern reporter is Women: Women, supplemented by Walter Scott and his knights and beauty and chivalry, and so on.
This is an excellent report, as long as the women stay out of it.
But when they intrude, we have this frantic result-- 'It will be probably a long time before the ladies' stand presents such a sea of foam-like loveliness as it did yesterday.
The New Orleans women are always charming, but never so much so as at this time of the year, when in their dainty spring costumes they bring with them a breath of balmy freshness and an odor of sanctity unspeakable.
The stand was so crowded with them that, walking at their feet and seeing no possibility of approach, many a man appreciated as he never did before the Peri's feeling at the Gates of Paradise, and wondered what was the priceless boon that would admit him
Sparkling on their white-robed breasts or shoulders were the colors of their favorite knights, and were it not for the fact that the doughty heroes appeared on unromantic mules, it would have been easy to imagine one of King Arthur's gala-days.
' There were thirteen mules in the first heat; all sorts of mules, they were; all sorts of complexions, gaits, dispositions, aspects.
Some were handsome creatures, some were not; some were sleek, some hadn't had their fur brushed lately; some were innocently gay and frisky; some were full of malice and all unrighteousness; guessing from looks, some of them thought the matter on hand was
And each mule acted according to his convictions.
The result was an absence of harmony well compensated by a conspicuous presence of variety--variety of a picturesque and entertaining sort.
All the riders were young gentlemen in fashionable society.
If the reader has been wondering why it is that the ladies of New Orleans attend so humble an orgy as a mule-race, the thing is explained now.
It is a fashion-freak; all connected with it are people of fashion.
It is great fun, and cordially liked.
The mule-race is one of the marked occasions of the year.
It has brought some pretty fast mules to the front.
One of these had to be ruled out, because he was so fast that he turned the thing into a one-mule contest, and robbed it of one of its best features--variety.
But every now and then somebody disguises him with a new name and a new complexion, and rings him in again.
The riders dress in full jockey costumes of bright-colored silks, satins, and velvets.
The thirteen mules got away in a body, after a couple of false starts, and scampered off with prodigious spirit.
As each mule and each rider had a distinct opinion of his own as to how the race ought to be run, and which side of the track was best in certain circumstances, and how often the track ought to be crossed, and when a collision ought to be accomplished, and
Mile heat; time 2:22.
Eight of the thirteen mules distanced.
I had a bet on a mule which would have won if the procession had been reversed.
The second heat was good fun; and so was the 'consolation race for beaten mules,' which followed later; but the first heat was the best in that respect.
I think that much the most enjoyable of all races is a steamboat race; but, next to that, I prefer the gay and joyous mule-rush.
Two red-hot steamboats raging along, neck-and-neck, straining every nerve--that is to say, every rivet in the boilers--quaking and shaking and groaning from stem to stern, spouting white steam from the pipes, pouring black smoke from the chimneys, raining
A horse-race is pretty tame and colorless in comparison.
Still, a horse-race might be well enough, in its way, perhaps, if it were not for the tiresome false starts.
But then, nobody is ever killed.
At least, nobody was ever killed when I was at a horse-race.
They have been crippled, it is true; but this is little to the purpose.
CHAPTER 46 Enchantments and Enchanters THE largest annual event in New Orleans is a something which we arrived too late to sample--the Mardi-Gras festivities.
I saw the procession of the Mystic Crew of Comus there, twenty-four years ago--with knights and nobles and so on, clothed in silken and golden Paris-made gorgeousnesses, planned and bought for that single night's use; and in their train all manner of
There is a chief personage--'Rex;' and if I remember rightly, neither this king nor any of his great following of subordinates is known to any outsider.
All these people are gentlemen of position and consequence; and it is a proud thing to belong to the organization; so the mystery in which they hide their personality is merely for romance's sake, and not on account of the police.
Mardi-Gras is of course a relic of the French and Spanish occupation; but I judge that the religious feature has been pretty well knocked out of it now.
Sir Walter has got the advantage of the gentlemen of the cowl and rosary, and he will stay.
His medieval business, supplemented by the monsters and the oddities, and the pleasant creatures from fairy-land, is finer to look at than the poor fantastic inventions and performances of the reveling rabble of the priest's day, and serves quite as well,
This Mardi-Gras pageant was the exclusive possession of New Orleans until recently.
But now it has spread to Memphis and St. Louis and Baltimore.
It has probably reached its limit.
It is a thing which could hardly exist in the practical North; would certainly last but a very brief time; as brief a time as it would last in London.
For the soul of it is the romantic, not the funny and the grotesque.
Take away the romantic mysteries, the kings and knights and big-sounding titles, and Mardi-Gras would die, down there in the South.
The very feature that keeps it alive in the South--girly-girly romance--would kill it in the North or in London.
Puck and Punch, and the press universal, would fall upon it and make merciless fun of it, and its first exhibition would be also its last.
Against the crimes of the French Revolution and of Bonaparte may be set two compensating benefactions: the Revolution broke the chains of the _ancien regime_ and of the Church, and made of a nation of abject slaves a nation of freemen; and Bonaparte
Such benefactions as these compensate the temporary harm which Bonaparte and the Revolution did, and leave the world in debt to them for these great and permanent services to liberty, humanity, and progress.
Then comes Sir Walter Scott with his enchantments, and by his single might checks this wave of progress, and even turns it back; sets the world in love with dreams and phantoms; with decayed and swinish forms of religion; with decayed and degraded systems
He did measureless harm; more real and lasting harm, perhaps, than any other individual that ever wrote.
Most of the world has now outlived good part of these harms, though by no means all of them; but in our South they flourish pretty forcefully still.
Not so forcefully as half a generation ago, perhaps, but still forcefully.
There, the genuine and wholesome civilization of the nineteenth century is curiously confused and commingled with the Walter Scott Middle-Age sham civilization; and so you have practical, common-sense, progressive ideas, and progressive works; mixed up
But for the Sir Walter disease, the character of the Southerner--or Southron, according to Sir Walter's starchier way of phrasing it--would be wholly modern, in place of modern and medieval mixed, and the South would be fully a generation further advanced
It was Sir Walter that made every gentleman in the South a Major or a Colonel, or a General or a Judge, before the war; and it was he, also, that made these gentlemen value these bogus decorations.
For it was he that created rank and caste down there, and also reverence for rank and caste, and pride and pleasure in them.
Enough is laid on slavery, without fathering upon it these creations and contributions of Sir Walter.
Sir Walter had so large a hand in making Southern character, as it existed before the war, that he is in great measure responsible for the war.
It seems a little harsh toward a dead man to say that we never should have had any war but for Sir Walter; and yet something of a plausible argument might, perhaps, be made in support of that wild proposition.
The Southerner of the American Revolution owned slaves; so did the Southerner of the Civil War: but the former resembles the latter as an Englishman resembles a Frenchman.
The change of character can be traced rather more easily to Sir Walter's influence than to that of any other thing or person.
One may observe, by one or two signs, how deeply that influence penetrated, and how strongly it holds.
If one take up a Northern or Southern literary periodical of forty or fifty years ago, he will find it filled with wordy, windy, flowery 'eloquence,' romanticism, sentimentality--all imitated from Sir Walter, and sufficiently badly done, too--innocent
This sort of literature being the fashion in both sections of the country, there was opportunity for the fairest competition; and as a consequence, the South was able to show as many well-known literary names, proportioned to population, as the North
But a change has come, and there is no opportunity now for a fair competition between North and South.
For the North has thrown out that old inflated style, whereas the Southern writer still clings to it--clings to it and has a restricted market for his wares, as a consequence.
There is as much literary talent in the South, now, as ever there was, of course; but its work can gain but slight currency under present conditions; the authors write for the past, not the present; they use obsolete forms, and a dead language.
But when a Southerner of genius writes modern English, his book goes upon crutches no longer, but upon wings; and they carry it swiftly all about America and England, and through the great English reprint publishing houses of Germany--as witness the
Instead of three or four widely-known literary names, the South ought to have a dozen or two--and will have them when Sir Walter's time is out.
A curious exemplification of the power of a single book for good or harm is shown in the effects wrought by 'Don Quixote' and those wrought by 'Ivanhoe.
' The first swept the world's admiration for the medieval chivalry-silliness out of existence; and the other restored it.
As far as our South is concerned, the good work done by Cervantes is pretty nearly a dead letter, so effectually has Scott's pernicious work undermined it.
CHAPTER 47 Uncle Remus and Mr. Cable MR.
JOEL CHANDLER HARRIS ('Uncle Remus') was to arrive from Atlanta at seven o'clock Sunday morning; so we got up and received him.
We were able to detect him among the crowd of arrivals at the hotel-counter by his correspondence with a description of him which had been furnished us from a trustworthy source.
He was said to be undersized, red-haired, and somewhat freckled.
He was the only man in the party whose outside tallied with this bill of particulars.
He was said to be very shy.
He is a shy man.
Of this there is no doubt.
It may not show on the surface, but the shyness is there.
After days of intimacy one wonders to see that it is still in about as strong force as ever.
There is a fine and beautiful nature hidden behind it, as all know who have read the Uncle Remus book; and a fine genius, too, as all know by the same sign.
I seem to be talking quite freely about this neighbor; but in talking to the public I am but talking to his personal friends, and these things are permissible among friends.
He deeply disappointed a number of children who had flocked eagerly to Mr. Cable's house to get a glimpse of the illustrious sage and oracle of the nation's nurseries.
They said-- 'Why, he 's white!
' They were grieved about it.
So, to console them, the book was brought, that they might hear Uncle Remus's Tar-Baby story from the lips of Uncle Remus himself--or what, in their outraged eyes, was left of him.
But it turned out that he had never read aloud to people, and was too shy to venture the attempt now.
Mr. Cable and I read from books of ours, to show him what an easy trick it was; but his immortal shyness was proof against even this sagacious strategy, so we had to read about Brer Rabbit ourselves.
Mr. Harris ought to be able to read the negro dialect better than anybody else, for in the matter of writing it he is the only master the country has produced.
Mr. Cable is the only master in the writing of French dialects that the country has produced; and he reads them in perfection.
It was a great treat to hear him read about Jean-ah Poquelin, and about Innerarity and his famous 'pigshoo' representing 'Louisihanna _rif_-fusing to Hanter the Union,' along with passages of nicely-shaded German dialect from a novel which was still in
It came out in conversation, that in two different instances Mr. Cable got into grotesque trouble by using, in his books, next-to-impossible French names which nevertheless happened to be borne by living and sensitive citizens of New Orleans.
His names were either inventions or were borrowed from the ancient and obsolete past, I do not now remember which; but at any rate living bearers of them turned up, and were a good deal hurt at having attention directed to themselves and their affairs in
Mr. Warner and I had an experience of the same sort when we wrote the book called 'The Gilded Age.
' There is a character in it called 'Sellers.
' I do not remember what his first name was, in the beginning; but anyway, Mr. Warner did not like it, and wanted it improved.
He asked me if I was able to imagine a person named 'Eschol Sellers.
' Of course I said I could not, without stimulants.
He said that away out West, once, he had met, and contemplated, and actually shaken hands with a man bearing that impossible name--'Eschol Sellers.
' He added-- 'It was twenty years ago; his name has probably carried him off before this; and if it hasn't, he will never see the book anyhow.
We will confiscate his name.
The name you are using is common, and therefore dangerous; there are probably a thousand Sellerses bearing it, and the whole horde will come after us; but Eschol Sellers is a safe name--it is a rock.
' So we borrowed that name; and when the book had been out about a week, one of the stateliest and handsomest and most aristocratic looking white men that ever lived, called around, with the most formidable libel suit in his pocket that ever--well, in
Think it was more.
]} copies of the book and change that name to 'Mulberry Sellers' in future editions.
CHAPTER 48 Sugar and Postage ONE day, on the street, I encountered the man whom, of all men, I most wished to see--Horace Bixby; formerly pilot under me--or rather, over me--now captain of the great steamer 'City of Baton Rouge,' the latest and swiftest
The same slender figure, the same tight curls, the same springy step, the same alertness, the same decision of eye and answering decision of hand, the same erect military bearing; not an inch gained or lost in girth, not an ounce gained or lost in weight,
It is a curious thing, to leave a man thirty-five years old, and come back at the end of twenty-one years and find him still only thirty-five.
I have not had an experience of this kind before, I believe.
There were some crow's-feet, but they counted for next to nothing, since they were inconspicuous.
His boat was just in.
I had been waiting several days for her, purposing to return to St. Louis in her.
The captain and I joined a party of ladies and gentlemen, guests of Major Wood, and went down the river fifty-four miles, in a swift tug, to ex-Governor Warmouth's sugar plantation.
Strung along below the city, were a number of decayed, ram-shackly, superannuated old steamboats, not one of which had I ever seen before.
They had all been built, and worn out, and thrown aside, since I was here last.
This gives one a realizing sense of the frailness of a Mississippi boat and the briefness of its life.
Six miles below town a fat and battered brick chimney, sticking above the magnolias and live-oaks, was pointed out as the monument erected by an appreciative nation to celebrate the battle of New Orleans--Jackson's victory over the British, January 8,
The war had ended, the two nations were at peace, but the news had not yet reached New Orleans.
If we had had the cable telegraph in those days, this blood would not have been spilt, those lives would not have been wasted; and better still, Jackson would probably never have been president.
We have gotten over the harms done us by the war of 1812, but not over some of those done us by Jackson's presidency.
The Warmouth plantation covers a vast deal of ground, and the hospitality of the Warmouth mansion is graduated to the same large scale.
We saw steam-plows at work, here, for the first time.
The traction engine travels about on its own wheels, till it reaches the required spot; then it stands still and by means of a wire rope pulls the huge plow toward itself two or three hundred yards across the field, between the rows of cane.
The thing cuts down into the black mold a foot and a half deep.
The plow looks like a fore-and-aft brace of a Hudson river steamer, inverted.
When the negro steersman sits on one end of it, that end tilts down near the ground, while the other sticks up high in air.
This great see-saw goes rolling and pitching like a ship at sea, and it is not every circus rider that could stay on it.
The plantation contains two thousand six hundred acres; six hundred and fifty are in cane; and there is a fruitful orange grove of five thousand trees.
The cane is cultivated after a modern and intricate scientific fashion, too elaborate and complex for me to attempt to describe; but it lost $40,000 last year.
I forget the other details.
However, this year's crop will reach ten or twelve hundred tons of sugar, consequently last year's loss will not matter.
These troublesome and expensive scientific methods achieve a yield of a ton and a half and from that to two tons, to the acre; which is three or four times what the yield of an acre was in my time.
The drainage-ditches were everywhere alive with little crabs--'fiddlers.
' One saw them scampering sidewise in every direction whenever they heard a disturbing noise.
Expensive pests, these crabs; for they bore into the levees, and ruin them.
The great sugar-house was a wilderness of tubs and tanks and vats and filters, pumps, pipes, and machinery.
The process of making sugar is exceedingly interesting.
First, you heave your cane into the centrifugals and grind out the juice; then run it through the evaporating pan to extract the fiber; then through the bone-filter to remove the alcohol; then through the clarifying tanks to discharge the molasses; then
It is now ready for market.
I have jotted these particulars down from memory.
The thing looks simple and easy.
Do not deceive yourself.
To make sugar is really one of the most difficult things in the world.
And to make it right, is next to impossible.
If you will examine your own supply every now and then for a term of years, and tabulate the result, you will find that not two men in twenty can make sugar without getting sand into it.
We could have gone down to the mouth of the river and visited Captain Eads' great work, the 'jetties,' where the river has been compressed between walls, and thus deepened to twenty-six feet; but it was voted useless to go, since at this stage of the water
We could have visited that ancient and singular burg, 'Pilot-town,' which stands on stilts in the water--so they say; where nearly all communication is by skiff and canoe, even to the attending of weddings and funerals; and where the littlest boys and
We could have done a number of other things; but on account of limited time, we went back home.
The sail up the breezy and sparkling river was a charming experience, and would have been satisfyingly sentimental and romantic but for the interruptions of the tug's pet parrot, whose tireless comments upon the scenery and the guests were always
He had also a superabundance of the discordant, ear-splitting, metallic laugh common to his breed--a machine-made laugh, a Frankenstein laugh, with the soul left out of it.
He applied it to every sentimental remark, and to every pathetic song.
He cackled it out with hideous energy after 'Home again, home again from a foreign shore,' and said he 'wouldn't give a damn for a tug-load of such rot.
' Romance and sentiment cannot long survive this sort of discouragement; so the singing and talking presently ceased; which so delighted the parrot that he cursed himself hoarse for joy.
Then the male members of the party moved to the forecastle, to smoke and gossip.
There were several old steamboatmen along, and I learned from them a great deal of what had been happening to my former river friends during my long absence.
I learned that a pilot whom I used to steer for is become a spiritualist, and for more than fifteen years has been receiving a letter every week from a deceased relative, through a New York spiritualist medium named Manchester--postage graduated by
I remember Mr. Manchester very well.
I called on him once, ten years ago, with a couple of friends, one of whom wished to inquire after a deceased uncle.
This uncle had lost his life in a peculiarly violent and unusual way, half a dozen years before: a cyclone blew him some three miles and knocked a tree down with him which was four feet through at the butt and sixty-five feet high.
He did not survive this triumph.
At the seance just referred to, my friend questioned his late uncle, through Mr. Manchester, and the late uncle wrote down his replies, using Mr. Manchester's hand and pencil for that purpose.
The following is a fair example of the questions asked, and also of the sloppy twaddle in the way of answers, furnished by Manchester under the pretense that it came from the specter.
If this man is not the paltriest fraud that lives, I owe him an apology-- QUESTION.
Where are you?
ANSWER.
In the spirit world.
Q. Are you happy?
A. Very happy.
Perfectly happy.
Q. How do you amuse yourself?
A. Conversation with friends, and other spirits.
Q. What else?
A. Nothing else.
Nothing else is necessary.
Q. What do you talk about?
A. About how happy we are; and about friends left behind in the earth, and how to influence them for their good.
Q. When your friends in the earth all get to the spirit land, what shall you have to talk about then?
--nothing but about how happy you all are?
No reply.
It is explained that spirits will not answer frivolous questions.
Q. How is it that spirits that are content to spend an eternity in frivolous employments, and accept it as happiness, are so fastidious about frivolous questions upon the subject?
No reply.
Q. Would you like to come back?
A. No.
Q. Would you say that under oath?
A. Yes.
Q. What do you eat there?
A. We do not eat.
Q. What do you drink?
A. We do not drink.
Q. What do you smoke?
A. We do not smoke.
Q. What do you read?
A. We do not read.
Q. Do all the good people go to your place?
A. Yes.
Q. You know my present way of life.
Can you suggest any additions to it, in the way of crime, that will reasonably insure my going to some other place.
A. No reply.
Q. When did you die?
A. I did not die, I passed away.
Q. Very well, then, when did you pass away?
How long have you been in the spirit land?
A. We have no measurements of time here.
Q. Though you may be indifferent and uncertain as to dates and times in your present condition and environment, this has nothing to do with your former condition.
You had dates then.
One of these is what I ask for.
You departed on a certain day in a certain year.
Is not this true?
A. Yes.
Q. Then name the day of the month.
(Much fumbling with pencil, on the part of the medium, accompanied by violent spasmodic jerkings of his head and body, for some little time.
Finally, explanation to the effect that spirits often forget dates, such things being without importance to them.
) Q. Then this one has actually forgotten the date of its translation to the spirit land?
This was granted to be the case.
Q. This is very curious.
Well, then, what year was it?
(More fumbling, jerking, idiotic spasms, on the part of the medium.
Finally, explanation to the effect that the spirit has forgotten the year.
) Q. This is indeed stupendous.
Let me put one more question, one last question, to you, before we part to meet no more;--for even if I fail to avoid your asylum, a meeting there will go for nothing as a meeting, since by that time you will easily have forgotten me and my name: did you
A. (After long hesitation and many throes and spasms.
) _Natural death_.
This ended the interview.
My friend told the medium that when his relative was in this poor world, he was endowed with an extraordinary intellect and an absolutely defectless memory, and it seemed a great pity that he had not been allowed to keep some shred of these for his
This man had plenty of clients--has plenty yet.
He receives letters from spirits located in every part of the spirit world, and delivers them all over this country through the United States mail.
These letters are filled with advice--advice from 'spirits' who don't know as much as a tadpole--and this advice is religiously followed by the receivers.
One of these clients was a man whom the spirits (if one may thus plurally describe the ingenious Manchester) were teaching how to contrive an improved railway car-wheel.
It is coarse employment for a spirit, but it is higher and wholesomer activity than talking for ever about 'how happy we are.
' CHAPTER 49 Episodes in Pilot Life IN the course of the tug-boat gossip, it came out that out of every five of my former friends who had quitted the river, four had chosen farming as an occupation.
Of course this was not because they were peculiarly gifted, agriculturally, and thus more likely to succeed as farmers than in other industries: the reason for their choice must be traced to some other source.
Doubtless they chose farming because that life is private and secluded from irruptions of undesirable strangers--like the pilot-house hermitage.
And doubtless they also chose it because on a thousand nights of black storm and danger they had noted the twinkling lights of solitary farm-houses, as the boat swung by, and pictured to themselves the serenity and security and coziness of such refuges at
But I did not learn that any of these pilot-farmers had astonished anybody with their successes.
Their farms do not support them: they support their farms.
The pilot-farmer disappears from the river annually, about the breaking of spring, and is seen no more till next frost.
Then he appears again, in damaged homespun, combs the hayseed out of his hair, and takes a pilot-house berth for the winter.
In this way he pays the debts which his farming has achieved during the agricultural season.
So his river bondage is but half broken; he is still the river's slave the hardest half of the year.
One of these men bought a farm, but did not retire to it.
He knew a trick worth two of that.
He did not propose to pauperize his farm by applying his personal ignorance to working it.
No, he put the farm into the hands of an agricultural expert to be worked on shares--out of every three loads of corn the expert to have two and the pilot the third.
But at the end of the season the pilot received no corn.
The expert explained that his share was not reached.
The farm produced only two loads.
Some of the pilots whom I had known had had adventures--the outcome fortunate, sometimes, but not in all cases.
Captain Montgomery, whom I had steered for when he was a pilot, commanded the Confederate fleet in the great battle before Memphis; when his vessel went down, he swam ashore, fought his way through a squad of soldiers, and made a gallant and narrow escape.
He was always a cool man; nothing could disturb his serenity.
Once when he was captain of the 'Crescent City,' I was bringing the boat into port at New Orleans, and momently expecting orders from the hurricane deck, but received none.
I had stopped the wheels, and there my authority and responsibility ceased.
It was evening--dim twilight--the captain's hat was perched upon the big bell, and I supposed the intellectual end of the captain was in it, but such was not the case.
The captain was very strict; therefore I knew better than to touch a bell without orders.
My duty was to hold the boat steadily on her calamitous course, and leave the consequences to take care of themselves--which I did.
So we went plowing past the sterns of steamboats and getting closer and closer--the crash was bound to come very soon--and still that hat never budged; for alas, the captain was napping in the texas...
.
Things were becoming exceedingly nervous and uncomfortable.
It seemed to me that the captain was not going to appear in time to see the entertainment.
But he did.
Just as we were walking into the stern of a steamboat, he stepped out on deck, and said, with heavenly serenity, 'Set her back on both'--which I did; but a trifle late, however, for the next moment we went smashing through that other boat's flimsy outer
The captain never said a word to me about the matter afterwards, except to remark that I had done right, and that he hoped I would not hesitate to act in the same way again in like circumstances.
One of the pilots whom I had known when I was on the river had died a very honorable death.
His boat caught fire, and he remained at the wheel until he got her safe to land.
Then he went out over the breast-board with his clothing in flames, and was the last person to get ashore.
He died from his injuries in the course of two or three hours, and his was the only life lost.
The history of Mississippi piloting affords six or seven instances of this sort of martyrdom, and half a hundred instances of escapes from a like fate which came within a second or two of being fatally too late; _but there is no instance of a pilot
_ It is well worth while to set down this noble fact, and well worth while to put it in italics, too.
The 'cub' pilot is early admonished to despise all perils connected with a pilot's calling, and to prefer any sort of death to the deep dishonor of deserting his post while there is any possibility of his being useful in it.
And so effectively are these admonitions inculcated, that even young and but half-tried pilots can be depended upon to stick to the wheel, and die there when occasion requires.
In a Memphis graveyard is buried a young fellow who perished at the wheel a great many years ago, in White River, to save the lives of other men.
He said to the captain that if the fire would give him time to reach a sand bar, some distance away, all could be saved, but that to land against the bluff bank of the river would be to insure the loss of many lives.
He reached the bar and grounded the boat in shallow water; but by that time the flames had closed around him, and in escaping through them he was fatally burned.
He had been urged to fly sooner, but had replied as became a pilot to reply-- 'I will not go.
If I go, nobody will be saved; if I stay, no one will be lost but me.
I will stay.
' There were two hundred persons on board, and no life was lost but the pilot's.
There used to be a monument to this young fellow, in that Memphis graveyard.
While we tarried in Memphis on our down trip, I started out to look for it, but our time was so brief that I was obliged to turn back before my object was accomplished.
The tug-boat gossip informed me that Dick Kennet was dead--blown up, near Memphis, and killed; that several others whom I had known had fallen in the war--one or two of them shot down at the wheel; that another and very particular friend, whom I had
A heedless, reckless creature he was, and always in hot water, always in mischief.
An Arkansas passenger brought an enormous bear aboard, one day, and chained him to a life-boat on the hurricane deck.
Thornburgh's 'cub' could not rest till he had gone there and unchained the bear, to 'see what he would do.
' He was promptly gratified.
The bear chased him around and around the deck, for miles and miles, with two hundred eager faces grinning through the railings for audience, and finally snatched off the lad's coat-tail and went into the texas to chew it.
The off-watch turned out with alacrity, and left the bear in sole possession.
He presently grew lonesome, and started out for recreation.
He ranged the whole boat--visited every part of it, with an advance guard of fleeing people in front of him and a voiceless vacancy behind him; and when his owner captured him at last, those two were the only visible beings anywhere; everybody else was in
I was told that one of my pilot friends fell dead at the wheel, from heart disease, in 1869.
The captain was on the roof at the time.
He saw the boat breaking for the shore; shouted, and got no answer; ran up, and found the pilot lying dead on the floor.
Mr. Bixby had been blown up, in Madrid bend; was not injured, but the other pilot was lost.
George Ritchie had been blown up near Memphis--blown into the river from the wheel, and disabled.
The water was very cold; he clung to a cotton bale--mainly with his teeth--and floated until nearly exhausted, when he was rescued by some deck hands who were on a piece of the wreck.
They tore open the bale and packed him in the cotton, and warmed the life back into him, and got him safe to Memphis.
He is one of Bixby's pilots on the 'Baton Rouge' now.
Into the life of a steamboat clerk, now dead, had dropped a bit of romance--somewhat grotesque romance, but romance nevertheless.
When I knew him he was a shiftless young spendthrift, boisterous, goodhearted, full of careless generosities, and pretty conspicuously promising to fool his possibilities away early, and come to nothing.
In a Western city lived a rich and childless old foreigner and his wife; and in their family was a comely young girl--sort of friend, sort of servant.
The young clerk of whom I have been speaking--whose name was not George Johnson, but who shall be called George Johnson for the purposes of this narrative--got acquainted with this young girl, and they sinned; and the old foreigner found them out, and
Being ashamed, they lied, and said they were married; that they had been privately married.
Then the old foreigner's hurt was healed, and he forgave and blessed them.
After that, they were able to continue their sin without concealment.
By-and-bye the foreigner's wife died; and presently he followed after her.
Friends of the family assembled to mourn; and among the mourners sat the two young sinners.
The will was opened and solemnly read.
It bequeathed every penny of that old man's great wealth to _Mrs. George Johnson!
_ And there was no such person.
The young sinners fled forth then, and did a very foolish thing: married themselves before an obscure Justice of the Peace, and got him to antedate the thing.
That did no sort of good.
The distant relatives flocked in and exposed the fraudful date with extreme suddenness and surprising ease, and carried off the fortune, leaving the Johnsons very legitimately, and legally, and irrevocably chained together in honorable marriage, but with
Such are the actual facts; and not all novels have for a base so telling a situation.
CHAPTER 50 The 'Original Jacobs' WE had some talk about Captain Isaiah Sellers, now many years dead.
He was a fine man, a high-minded man, and greatly respected both ashore and on the river.
He was very tall, well built, and handsome; and in his old age--as I remember him--his hair was as black as an Indian's, and his eye and hand were as strong and steady and his nerve and judgment as firm and clear as anybody's, young or old, among the
He was the patriarch of the craft; he had been a keelboat pilot before the day of steamboats; and a steamboat pilot before any other steamboat pilot, still surviving at the time I speak of, had ever turned a wheel.
Consequently his brethren held him in the sort of awe in which illustrious survivors of a bygone age are always held by their associates.
He knew how he was regarded, and perhaps this fact added some trifle of stiffening to his natural dignity, which had been sufficiently stiff in its original state.
He left a diary behind him; but apparently it did not date back to his first steamboat trip, which was said to be 1811, the year the first steamboat disturbed the waters of the Mississippi.
At the time of his death a correspondent of the 'St. Louis Republican' culled the following items from the diary-- 'In February, 1825, he shipped on board the steamer "Rambler," at Florence, Ala.
, and made during that year three trips to New Orleans and back--this on the "Gen.
Carrol," between Nashville and New Orleans.
It was during his stay on this boat that Captain Sellers introduced the tap of the bell as a signal to heave the lead, previous to which time it was the custom for the pilot to speak to the men below when soundings were wanted.
The proximity of the forecastle to the pilot-house, no doubt, rendered this an easy matter; but how different on one of our palaces of the present day.
'In 1827 we find him on board the "President," a boat of two hundred and eighty-five tons burden, and plying between Smithland and New Orleans.
Thence he joined the "Jubilee" in 1828, and on this boat he did his first piloting in the St. Louis trade; his first watch extending from Herculaneum to St. Genevieve.
On May 26, 1836, he completed and left Pittsburgh in charge of the steamer "Prairie," a boat of four hundred tons, and the first steamer with a _State-Room cabin_ ever seen at St. Louis.
In 1857 he introduced the signal for meeting boats, and which has, with some slight change, been the universal custom of this day; in fact, is rendered obligatory by act of Congress.
'As general items of river history, we quote the following marginal notes from his general log-- 'In March, 1825, Gen.
Lafayette left New Orleans for St. Louis on the low-pressure steamer "Natchez".
'In January, 1828, twenty-one steamers left the New Orleans wharf to celebrate the occasion of Gen.
Jackson's visit to that city.
'In 1830 the "North American" made the run from New Orleans to Memphis in six days--best time on record to that date.
It has since been made in two days and ten hours.
'In 1831 the Red River cut-off formed.
'In 1832 steamer "Hudson" made the run from White River to Helena, a distance of seventy-five miles, in twelve hours.
This was the source of much talk and speculation among parties directly interested.
'In 1839 Great Horseshoe cut-off formed.
'Up to the present time, a term of thirty-five years, we ascertain, by reference to the diary, he has made four hundred and sixty round trips to New Orleans, which gives a distance of one million one hundred and four thousand miles, or an average of
' Whenever Captain Sellers approached a body of gossiping pilots, a chill fell there, and talking ceased.
For this reason: whenever six pilots were gathered together, there would always be one or two newly fledged ones in the lot, and the elder ones would be always 'showing off' before these poor fellows; making them sorrowfully feel how callow they were, how
And how these complacent baldheads _would_ swell, and brag, and lie, and date back--ten, fifteen, twenty years,--and how they did enjoy the effect produced upon the marveling and envying youngsters!
And perhaps just at this happy stage of the proceedings, the stately figure of Captain Isaiah Sellers, that real and only genuine Son of Antiquity, would drift solemnly into the midst.
Imagine the size of the silence that would result on the instant.
And imagine the feelings of those bald-heads, and the exultation of their recent audience when the ancient captain would begin to drop casual and indifferent remarks of a reminiscent nature--about islands that had disappeared, and cutoffs that had been
Many and many a time did this ancient mariner appear on the scene in the above fashion, and spread disaster and humiliation around him.
If one might believe the pilots, he always dated his islands back to the misty dawn of river history; and he never used the same island twice; and never did he employ an island that still existed, or give one a name which anybody present was old enough to
If you might believe the pilots, he was always conscientiously particular about little details; never spoke of 'the State of Mississippi,' for instance--no, he would say, 'When the State of Mississippi was where Arkansas now is,' and would never speak of
' The old gentleman was not of literary turn or capacity, but he used to jot down brief paragraphs of plain practical information about the river, and sign them '_Mark Twain_,' and give them to the 'New Orleans Picayune.
' They related to the stage and condition of the river, and were accurate and valuable; and thus far, they contained no poison.
But in speaking of the stage of the river to-day, at a given point, the captain was pretty apt to drop in a little remark about this being the first time he had seen the water so high or so low at that particular point for forty-nine years; and now and
' In these antique interjections lay poison and bitterness for the other old pilots, and they used to chaff the 'Mark Twain' paragraphs with unsparing mockery.
It so chanced that one of these paragraphs--{footnote [The original MS.
of it, in the captain's own hand, has been sent to me from New Orleans.
It reads as follows-- VICKSBURG May 4, 1859.
'My opinion for the benefit of the citizens of New Orleans: The water is higher this far up than it has been since 8.
My opinion is that the water will be feet deep in Canal street before the first of next June.
Mrs. Turner's plantation at the head of Big Black Island is all under water, and it has not been since 1815.
'I.
Sellers.
']} became the text for my first newspaper article.
I burlesqued it broadly, very broadly, stringing my fantastics out to the extent of eight hundred or a thousand words.
I was a 'cub' at the time.
I showed my performance to some pilots, and they eagerly rushed it into print in the 'New Orleans True Delta.
' It was a great pity; for it did nobody any worthy service, and it sent a pang deep into a good man's heart.
There was no malice in my rubbish; but it laughed at the captain.
It laughed at a man to whom such a thing was new and strange and dreadful.
I did not know then, though I do now, that there is no suffering comparable with that which a private person feels when he is for the first time pilloried in print.
Captain Sellers did me the honor to profoundly detest me from that day forth.
When I say he did me the honor, I am not using empty words.
It was a very real honor to be in the thoughts of so great a man as Captain Sellers, and I had wit enough to appreciate it and be proud of it.
It was distinction to be loved by such a man; but it was a much greater distinction to be hated by him, because he loved scores of people; but he didn't sit up nights to hate anybody but me.
He never printed another paragraph while he lived, and he never again signed 'Mark Twain' to anything.
At the time that the telegraph brought the news of his death, I was on the Pacific coast.
I was a fresh new journalist, and needed a nom de guerre; so I confiscated the ancient mariner's discarded one, and have done my best to make it remain what it was in his hands--a sign and symbol and warrant that whatever is found in its company may be
The captain had an honorable pride in his profession and an abiding love for it.
He ordered his monument before he died, and kept it near him until he did die.
It stands over his grave now, in Bellefontaine cemetery, St. Louis.
It is his image, in marble, standing on duty at the pilot wheel; and worthy to stand and confront criticism, for it represents a man who in life would have stayed there till he burned to a cinder, if duty required it.
The finest thing we saw on our whole Mississippi trip, we saw as we approached New Orleans in the steam-tug.
This was the curving frontage of the crescent city lit up with the white glare of five miles of electric lights.
It was a wonderful sight, and very beautiful.
CHAPTER 51 Reminiscences WE left for St. Louis in the 'City of Baton Rouge,' on a delightfully hot day, but with the main purpose of my visit but lamely accomplished.
I had hoped to hunt up and talk with a hundred steamboatmen, but got so pleasantly involved in the social life of the town that I got nothing more than mere five-minute talks with a couple of dozen of the craft.
I was on the bench of the pilot-house when we backed out and 'straightened up' for the start--the boat pausing for a 'good ready,' in the old-fashioned way, and the black smoke piling out of the chimneys equally in the old-fashioned way.
Then we began to gather momentum, and presently were fairly under way and booming along.
It was all as natural and familiar--and so were the shoreward sights--as if there had been no break in my river life.
There was a 'cub,' and I judged that he would take the wheel now; and he did.
Captain Bixby stepped into the pilot-house.
Presently the cub closed up on the rank of steamships.
He made me nervous, for he allowed too much water to show between our boat and the ships.
I knew quite well what was going to happen, because I could date back in my own life and inspect the record.
The captain looked on, during a silent half-minute, then took the wheel himself, and crowded the boat in, till she went scraping along within a hand-breadth of the ships.
It was exactly the favor which he had done me, about a quarter of a century before, in that same spot, the first time I ever steamed out of the port of New Orleans.
It was a very great and sincere pleasure to me to see the thing repeated--with somebody else as victim.
We made Natchez (three hundred miles) in twenty-two hours and a half-- much the swiftest passage I have ever made over that piece of water.
The next morning I came on with the four o'clock watch, and saw Ritchie successfully run half a dozen crossings in a fog, using for his guidance the marked chart devised and patented by Bixby and himself.
This sufficiently evidenced the great value of the chart.
By and by, when the fog began to clear off, I noticed that the reflection of a tree in the smooth water of an overflowed bank, six hundred yards away, was stronger and blacker than the ghostly tree itself.
The faint spectral trees, dimly glimpsed through the shredding fog, were very pretty things to see.
We had a heavy thunder-storm at Natchez, another at Vicksburg, and still another about fifty miles below Memphis.
They had an old-fashioned energy which had long been unfamiliar to me.
This third storm was accompanied by a raging wind.
We tied up to the bank when we saw the tempest coming, and everybody left the pilot-house but me.
The wind bent the young trees down, exposing the pale underside of the leaves; and gust after gust followed, in quick succession, thrashing the branches violently up and down, and to this side and that, and creating swift waves of alternating green and
No color that was visible anywhere was quite natural--all tints were charged with a leaden tinge from the solid cloud-bank overhead.
The river was leaden; all distances the same; and even the far-reaching ranks of combing white-caps were dully shaded by the dark, rich atmosphere through which their swarming legions marched.
The thunder-peals were constant and deafening; explosion followed explosion with but inconsequential intervals between, and the reports grew steadily sharper and higher-keyed, and more trying to the ear; the lightning was as diligent as the thunder, and
The rain poured down in amazing volume; the ear-splitting thunder-peals broke nearer and nearer; the wind increased in fury and began to wrench off boughs and tree-tops and send them sailing away through space; the pilot-house fell to rocking and straining
People boast a good deal about Alpine thunderstorms; but the storms which I have had the luck to see in the Alps were not the equals of some which I have seen in the Mississippi Valley.
I may not have seen the Alps do their best, of course, and if they can beat the Mississippi, I don't wish to.
On this up trip I saw a little towhead (infant island) half a mile long, which had been formed during the past nineteen years.
Since there was so much time to spare that nineteen years of it could be devoted to the construction of a mere towhead, where was the use, originally, in rushing this whole globe through in six days?
It is likely that if more time had been taken, in the first place, the world would have been made right, and this ceaseless improving and repairing would not be necessary now.
But if you hurry a world or a house, you are nearly sure to find out by and by that you have left out a towhead, or a broom-closet, or some other little convenience, here and there, which has got to be supplied, no matter how much expense and vexation it
We had a succession of black nights, going up the river, and it was observable that whenever we landed, and suddenly inundated the trees with the intense sunburst of the electric light, a certain curious effect was always produced: hundreds of birds
We judged that they mistook this superb artificial day for the genuine article.
We had a delightful trip in that thoroughly well-ordered steamer, and regretted that it was accomplished so speedily.
By means of diligence and activity, we managed to hunt out nearly all the old friends.
One was missing, however; he went to his reward, whatever it was, two years ago.
But I found out all about him.
His case helped me to realize how lasting can be the effect of a very trifling occurrence.
When he was an apprentice-blacksmith in our village, and I a schoolboy, a couple of young Englishmen came to the town and sojourned a while; and one day they got themselves up in cheap royal finery and did the Richard III swordfight with maniac energy and
This blacksmith cub was there, and the histrionic poison entered his bones.
This vast, lumbering, ignorant, dull-witted lout was stage-struck, and irrecoverably.
He disappeared, and presently turned up in St. Louis.
I ran across him there, by and by.
He was standing musing on a street corner, with his left hand on his hip, the thumb of his right supporting his chin, face bowed and frowning, slouch hat pulled down over his forehead--imagining himself to be Othello or some such character, and imagining
I joined him, and tried to get him down out of the clouds, but did not succeed.
However, he casually informed me, presently, that he was a member of the Walnut Street theater company--and he tried to say it with indifference, but the indifference was thin, and a mighty exultation showed through it.
He said he was cast for a part in Julius Caesar, for that night, and if I should come I would see him.
_If_ I should come!
I said I wouldn't miss it if I were dead.
I went away stupefied with astonishment, and saying to myself, 'How strange it is!
_We_ always thought this fellow a fool; yet the moment he comes to a great city, where intelligence and appreciation abound, the talent concealed in this shabby napkin is at once discovered, and promptly welcomed and honored.
' But I came away from the theater that night disappointed and offended; for I had had no glimpse of my hero, and his name was not in the bills.
I met him on the street the next morning, and before I could speak, he asked-- 'Did you see me?
' 'No, you weren't there.
' He looked surprised and disappointed.
He said-- 'Yes, I was.
Indeed I was.
I was a Roman soldier.
' 'Which one?
' 'Why didn't you see them Roman soldiers that stood back there in a rank, and sometimes marched in procession around the stage?
' 'Do you mean the Roman army?
--those six sandaled roustabouts in nightshirts, with tin shields and helmets, that marched around treading on each other's heels, in charge of a spider-legged consumptive dressed like themselves?
' 'That's it!
that's it!
I was one of them Roman soldiers.
I was the next to the last one.
A half a year ago I used to always be the last one; but I've been promoted.
' Well, they told me that that poor fellow remained a Roman soldier to the last--a matter of thirty-four years.
Sometimes they cast him for a 'speaking part,' but not an elaborate one.
He could be trusted to go and say, 'My lord, the carriage waits,' but if they ventured to add a sentence or two to this, his memory felt the strain and he was likely to miss fire.
Yet, poor devil, he had been patiently studying the part of Hamlet for more than thirty years, and he lived and died in the belief that some day he would be invited to play it!
And this is what came of that fleeting visit of those young Englishmen to our village such ages and ages ago!
What noble horseshoes this man might have made, but for those Englishmen; and what an inadequate Roman soldier he _did _make!
A day or two after we reached St. Louis, I was walking along Fourth Street when a grizzly-headed man gave a sort of start as he passed me, then stopped, came back, inspected me narrowly, with a clouding brow, and finally said with deep asperity-- 'Look
_' A maniac, I judged, at first.
But all in a flash I recognized him.
I made an effort to blush that strained every muscle in me, and answered as sweetly and winningly as ever I knew how-- 'Been a little slow, but am just this minute closing in on the place where they keep it.
Come in and help.
' He softened, and said make it a bottle of champagne and he was agreeable.
He said he had seen my name in the papers, and had put all his affairs aside and turned out, resolved to find me or die; and make me answer that question satisfactorily, or kill me; though the most of his late asperity had been rather counterfeit than
This meeting brought back to me the St. Louis riots of about thirty years ago.
I spent a week there, at that time, in a boarding-house, and had this young fellow for a neighbor across the hall.
We saw some of the fightings and killings; and by and by we went one night to an armory where two hundred young men had met, upon call, to be armed and go forth against the rioters, under command of a military man.
We drilled till about ten o'clock at night; then news came that the mob were in great force in the lower end of the town, and were sweeping everything before them.
Our column moved at once.
It was a very hot night, and my musket was very heavy.
We marched and marched; and the nearer we approached the seat of war, the hotter I grew and the thirstier I got.
I was behind my friend; so, finally, I asked him to hold my musket while I dropped out and got a drink.
Then I branched off and went home.
I was not feeling any solicitude about him of course, because I knew he was so well armed, now, that he could take care of himself without any trouble.
If I had had any doubts about that, I would have borrowed another musket for him.
I left the city pretty early the next morning, and if this grizzled man had not happened to encounter my name in the papers the other day in St. Louis, and felt moved to seek me out, I should have carried to my grave a heart-torturing uncertainty as to
I ought to have inquired, thirty years ago; I know that.
And I would have inquired, if I had had the muskets; but, in the circumstances, he seemed better fixed to conduct the investigations than I was.
One Monday, near the time of our visit to St. Louis, the 'Globe-Democrat' came out with a couple of pages of Sunday statistics, whereby it appeared that 119,448 St. Louis people attended the morning and evening church services the day before, and 23,102
Thus 142,550 persons, out of the city's total of 400,000 population, respected the day religious-wise.
I found these statistics, in a condensed form, in a telegram of the Associated Press, and preserved them.
They made it apparent that St. Louis was in a higher state of grace than she could have claimed to be in my time.
But now that I canvass the figures narrowly, I suspect that the telegraph mutilated them.
It cannot be that there are more than 150,000 Catholics in the town; the other 250,000 must be classified as Protestants.
Out of these 250,000, according to this questionable telegram, only 26,362 attended church and Sunday-school, while out of the 150,000 Catholics, 116,188 went to church and Sunday-school.
CHAPTER 52 A Burning Brand _All _at once the thought came into my mind, 'I have not sought out Mr. Brown.
' Upon that text I desire to depart from the direct line of my subject, and make a little excursion.
I wish to reveal a secret which I have carried with me nine years, and which has become burdensome.
Upon a certain occasion, nine years ago, I had said, with strong feeling, 'If ever I see St. Louis again, I will seek out Mr. Brown, the great grain merchant, and ask of him the privilege of shaking him by the hand.
' The occasion and the circumstances were as follows.
A friend of mine, a clergyman, came one evening and said-- 'I have a most remarkable letter here, which I want to read to you, if I can do it without breaking down.
I must preface it with some explanations, however.
The letter is written by an ex-thief and ex-vagabond of the lowest origin and basest rearing, a man all stained with crime and steeped in ignorance; but, thank God, with a mine of pure gold hidden away in him, as you shall see.
His letter is written to a burglar named Williams, who is serving a nine-year term in a certain State prison, for burglary.
Williams was a particularly daring burglar, and plied that trade during a number of years; but he was caught at last and jailed, to await trial in a town where he had broken into a house at night, pistol in hand, and forced the owner to hand over to him
Williams was not a common sort of person, by any means; he was a graduate of Harvard College, and came of good New England stock.
His father was a clergyman.
While lying in jail, his health began to fail, and he was threatened with consumption.
This fact, together with the opportunity for reflection afforded by solitary confinement, had its effect--its natural effect.
He fell into serious thought; his early training asserted itself with power, and wrought with strong influence upon his mind and heart.
He put his old life behind him, and became an earnest Christian.
Some ladies in the town heard of this, visited him, and by their encouraging words supported him in his good resolutions and strengthened him to continue in his new life.
The trial ended in his conviction and sentence to the State prison for the term of nine years, as I have before said.
In the prison he became acquainted with the poor wretch referred to in the beginning of my talk, Jack Hunt, the writer of the letter which I am going to read.
You will see that the acquaintanceship bore fruit for Hunt.
When Hunt's time was out, he wandered to St. Louis; and from that place he wrote his letter to Williams.
The letter got no further than the office of the prison warden, of course; prisoners are not often allowed to receive letters from outside.
The prison authorities read this letter, but did not destroy it.
They had not the heart to do it.
They read it to several persons, and eventually it fell into the hands of those ladies of whom I spoke a while ago.
The other day I came across an old friend of mine--a clergyman--who had seen this letter, and was full of it.
The mere remembrance of it so moved him that he could not talk of it without his voice breaking.
He promised to get a copy of it for me; and here it is--an exact copy, with all the imperfections of the original preserved.
It has many slang expressions in it--thieves' argot--but their meaning has been interlined, in parentheses, by the prison authorities'-- St. Louis, June 9th 1872.
Mr. W---- friend Charlie if i may call you so: i no you are surprised to get a letter from me, but i hope you won't be mad at my writing to you.
i want to tell you my thanks for the way you talked to me when i was in prison--it has led me to try and be a better man; i guess you thought i did not cair for what you said, & at the first go off I didn't, but i noed you was a man who had don big work
I used to think at nite what you said, & for it i nocked off swearing months before my time was up, for i saw it want no good, nohow--the day my time was up you told me if i would shake the cross (_quit stealing_) & live on the square for months, it would
The state agent give me a ticket to here, & on the car i thought more of what you said to me, but didn't make up my mind.
When we got to Chicago on the cars from there to here, I pulled off an old woman's leather; (_Robbed her of her pocketbook_) i hadn't no more than got it off when i wished i hadn't done it, for awhile before that i made up my mind to be a square bloke, for
& she tumbled (_discovered_) her leather was off (_gone_)--is this it says i, giving it to her--well if you aint honest, says she, but i hadn't got cheak enough to stand that sort of talk, so i left her in a hurry.
When i got here i had $1 and 25 cents left & i didn't get no work for 3 days as i aint strong enough for roust about on a steam bote (_for a deck hand_)--The afternoon of the 3rd day I spent my last 10 cts for moons (_large, round sea-biscuit_) & cheese &
As i was walking along herd a big noise & saw a horse running away with a carriage with 2 children in it, & I grabed up a peace of box cover from the side walk & run in the middle of the street, & when the horse came up i smashed him over the head as hard
& the thought come into my head just then to ask him for work; & i asked him to take back the bill and give me a job--says he, jump in here & lets talk about it, but keep the money--he asked me if i could take care of horses & i said yes, for i used to
You bet i took that chance at once.
that nite in my little room over the stable i sat a long time thinking over my past life & of what had just happened & i just got down on my nees & thanked the Lord for the job & to help me to square it, & to bless you for putting me up to it, & the next
When I had been there about a week Mr. Brown (that's his name) came in my room one nite and saw me reading the bible--he asked me if i was a Christian & i told him no--he asked me how it was i read the bible instead of papers & books--Well Charlie i
Now, Charlie the 3 months on the square are up 2 months ago, & as you said, it is the best job i ever did in my life, & i commenced another of the same sort right away, only it is to God helping me to last a lifetime Charlie--i wrote this letter to tell
i wish you would let me send you some now.
I send you with this a receipt for a year of Littles Living Age, i didn't know what you would like & i told Mr. Brown & he said he thought you would like it--i wish i was nere you so i could send you chuck (_refreshments_) on holidays; it would spoil this
two of them new as much as i did & i had them put in a class where they could learn something.
i dont no much myself, but as these kids cant read i get on nicely with them.
i make sure of them by going after them every Sunday hour before school time, I also got 4 girls to come.
tell Mack and Harry about me, if they will come out here when their time is up i will get them jobs at once.
i hope you will excuse this long letter & all mistakes, i wish i could see you for i cant write as i would talk--i hope the warm weather is doing your lungs good--i was afraid when you was bleeding you would die--give my respects to all the boys and tell
I send you Mr. Brown's card.
Send my letter to him.
Here was true eloquence; irresistible eloquence; and without a single grace or ornament to help it out.
I have seldom been so deeply stirred by any piece of writing.
The reader of it halted, all the way through, on a lame and broken voice; yet he had tried to fortify his feelings by several private readings of the letter before venturing into company with it.
He was practising upon me to see if there was any hope of his being able to read the document to his prayer-meeting with anything like a decent command over his feelings.
The result was not promising.
However, he determined to risk it; and did.
He got through tolerably well; but his audience broke down early, and stayed in that condition to the end.
The fame of the letter spread through the town.
A brother minister came and borrowed the manuscript, put it bodily into a sermon, preached the sermon to twelve hundred people on a Sunday morning, and the letter drowned them in their own tears.
Then my friend put it into a sermon and went before his Sunday morning congregation with it.
It scored another triumph.
The house wept as one individual.
My friend went on summer vacation up into the fishing regions of our northern British neighbors, and carried this sermon with him, since he might possibly chance to need a sermon.
He was asked to preach, one day.
The little church was full.
Among the people present were the late Dr. J. G. Holland, the late Mr. Seymour of the 'New York Times,' Mr. Page, the philanthropist and temperance advocate, and, I think, Senator Frye, of Maine.
The marvelous letter did its wonted work; all the people were moved, all the people wept; the tears flowed in a steady stream down Dr. Holland's cheeks, and nearly the same can be said with regard to all who were there.
Mr. Page was so full of enthusiasm over the letter that he said he would not rest until he made pilgrimage to that prison, and had speech with the man who had been able to inspire a fellow-unfortunate to write so priceless a tract.
Ah, that unlucky Page!
--and another man.
If they had only been in Jericho, that letter would have rung through the world and stirred all the hearts of all the nations for a thousand years to come, and nobody might ever have found out that it was the confoundedest, brazenest, ingeniousest piece of
The letter was a pure swindle, and that is the truth.
And take it by and large, it was without a compeer among swindles.
It was perfect, it was rounded, symmetrical, complete, colossal!
The reader learns it at this point; but we didn't learn it till some miles and weeks beyond this stage of the affair.
My friend came back from the woods, and he and other clergymen and lay missionaries began once more to inundate audiences with their tears and the tears of said audiences; I begged hard for permission to print the letter in a magazine and tell the watery
Charles Dudley Warner was at church, one day, when the worn letter was read and wept over.
At the church door, afterward, he dropped a peculiarly cold iceberg down the clergyman's back with the question-- 'Do you know that letter to be genuine?
' It was the first suspicion that had ever been voiced; but it had that sickening effect which first-uttered suspicions against one's idol always have.
Some talk followed-- 'Why--what should make you suspect that it isn't genuine?
' 'Nothing that I know of, except that it is too neat, and compact, and fluent, and nicely put together for an ignorant person, an unpractised hand.
I think it was done by an educated man.
' The literary artist had detected the literary machinery.
If you will look at the letter now, you will detect it yourself--it is observable in every line.
Straightway the clergyman went off, with this seed of suspicion sprouting in him, and wrote to a minister residing in that town where Williams had been jailed and converted; asked for light; and also asked if a person in the literary line (meaning me)
He presently received this answer-- Rev.
-------- MY dear friend,--In regard to that 'convict's letter' there can be no doubt as to its genuineness.
'Williams,' to whom it was written, lay in our jail and professed to have been converted, and Rev.
Mr.----, the chaplain, had great faith in the genuineness of the change--as much as one can have in any such case.
The letter was sent to one of our ladies, who is a Sunday-school teacher,--sent either by Williams himself, or the chaplain of the State's prison, probably.
She has been greatly annoyed in having so much publicity, lest it might seem a breach of confidence, or be an injury to Williams.
In regard to its publication, I can give no permission; though if the names and places were omitted, and especially if sent out of the country, I think you might take the responsibility and do it.
It is a wonderful letter, which no Christian genius, much less one unsanctified, could ever have written.
As showing the work of grace in a human heart, and in a very degraded and wicked one, it proves its own origin and reproves our weak faith in its power to cope with any form of wickedness.
'Mr. Brown' of St. Louis, some one said, was a Hartford man.
Do all whom you send from Hartford serve their Master as well?
P.S.--Williams is still in the State's prison, serving out a long sentence--of nine years, I think.
He has been sick and threatened with consumption, but I have not inquired after him lately.
This lady that I speak of corresponds with him, I presume, and will be quite sure to look after him.
This letter arrived a few days after it was written--and up went Mr. Williams's stock again.
Mr. Warner's low-down suspicion was laid in the cold, cold grave, where it apparently belonged.
It was a suspicion based upon mere internal evidence, anyway; and when you come to internal evidence, it's a big field and a game that two can play at: as witness this other internal evidence, discovered by the writer of the note above quoted, that 'it is
' I had permission now to print--provided I suppressed names and places and sent my narrative out of the country.
So I chose an Australian magazine for vehicle, as being far enough out of the country, and set myself to work on my article.
And the ministers set the pumps going again, with the letter to work the handles.
But meantime Brother Page had been agitating.
He had not visited the penitentiary, but he had sent a copy of the illustrious letter to the chaplain of that institution, and accompanied it with--apparently inquiries.
He got an answer, dated four days later than that other Brother's reassuring epistle; and before my article was complete, it wandered into my hands.
The original is before me, now, and I here append it.
It is pretty well loaded with internal evidence of the most solid description-- STATE'S PRISON, CHAPLAIN'S OFFICE, July 11, 1873.
_Dear Bro.
Page_,--Herewith please find the letter kindly loaned me.
I am afraid its genuineness cannot be established.
It purports to be addressed to some prisoner here.
No such letter ever came to a prisoner here.
All letters received are carefully read by officers of the prison before they go into the hands of the convicts, and any such letter could not be forgotten.
Again, Charles Williams is not a Christian man, but a dissolute, cunning prodigal, whose father is a minister of the gospel.
His name is an assumed one.
I am glad to have made your acquaintance.
I am preparing a lecture upon life seen through prison bars, and should like to deliver the same in your vicinity.
And so ended that little drama.
My poor article went into the fire; for whereas the materials for it were now more abundant and infinitely richer than they had previously been, there were parties all around me, who, although longing for the publication before, were a unit for suppression
They said: 'Wait--the wound is too fresh, yet.
' All the copies of the famous letter except mine disappeared suddenly; and from that time onward, the aforetime same old drought set in in the churches.
As a rule, the town was on a spacious grin for a while, but there were places in it where the grin did not appear, and where it was dangerous to refer to the ex-convict's letter.
A word of explanation.
'Jack Hunt,' the professed writer of the letter, was an imaginary person.
The burglar Williams--Harvard graduate, son of a minister--wrote the letter himself, to himself: got it smuggled out of the prison; got it conveyed to persons who had supported and encouraged him in his conversion--where he knew two things would happen:
That 'nub' is so ingeniously, so casually, flung in, and immediately left there in the tail of the letter, undwelt upon, that an indifferent reader would never suspect that it was the heart and core of the epistle, if he even took note of it at all, This
That is all there is of it--simply touch and go--no dwelling upon it.
Nevertheless it was intended for an eye that would be swift to see it; and it was meant to move a kind heart to try to effect the liberation of a poor reformed and purified fellow lying in the fell grip of consumption.
When I for the first time heard that letter read, nine years ago, I felt that it was the most remarkable one I had ever encountered.
And it so warmed me toward Mr. Brown of St. Louis that I said that if ever I visited that city again, I would seek out that excellent man and kiss the hem of his garment if it was a new one.
Well, I visited St. Louis, but I did not hunt for Mr. Brown; for, alas!
the investigations of long ago had proved that the benevolent Brown, like 'Jack Hunt,' was not a real person, but a sheer invention of that gifted rascal, Williams-- burglar, Harvard graduate, son of a clergyman.
CHAPTER 53 My Boyhood's Home WE took passage in one of the fast boats of the St. Louis and St. Paul Packet Company, and started up the river.
When I, as a boy, first saw the mouth of the Missouri River, it was twenty-two or twenty-three miles above St. Louis, according to the estimate of pilots; the wear and tear of the banks have moved it down eight miles since then; and the pilots say that
About nightfall we passed the large and flourishing town of Alton, Illinois; and before daylight next morning the town of Louisiana, Missouri, a sleepy village in my day, but a brisk railway center now; however, all the towns out there are railway centers
I could not clearly recognize the place.
This seemed odd to me, for when I retired from the rebel army in '61 I retired upon Louisiana in good order; at least in good enough order for a person who had not yet learned how to retreat according to the rules of war, and had to trust to native genius.
It seemed to me that for a first attempt at a retreat it was not badly done.
I had done no advancing in all that campaign that was at all equal to it.
There was a railway bridge across the river here well sprinkled with glowing lights, and a very beautiful sight it was.
At seven in the morning we reached Hannibal, Missouri, where my boyhood was spent.
I had had a glimpse of it fifteen years ago, and another glimpse six years earlier, but both were so brief that they hardly counted.
The only notion of the town that remained in my mind was the memory of it as I had known it when I first quitted it twenty-nine years ago.
That picture of it was still as clear and vivid to me as a photograph.
I stepped ashore with the feeling of one who returns out of a dead-and-gone generation.
I had a sort of realizing sense of what the Bastille prisoners must have felt when they used to come out and look upon Paris after years of captivity, and note how curiously the familiar and the strange were mixed together before them.
I saw the new houses-- saw them plainly enough--but they did not affect the older picture in my mind, for through their solid bricks and mortar I saw the vanished houses, which had formerly stood there, with perfect distinctness.
It was Sunday morning, and everybody was abed yet.
So I passed through the vacant streets, still seeing the town as it was, and not as it is, and recognizing and metaphorically shaking hands with a hundred familiar objects which no longer exist; and finally climbed Holiday's Hill to get a comprehensive
The whole town lay spread out below me then, and I could mark and fix every locality, every detail.
Naturally, I was a good deal moved.
I said, 'Many of the people I once knew in this tranquil refuge of my childhood are now in heaven; some, I trust, are in the other place.
' The things about me and before me made me feel like a boy again--convinced me that I was a boy again, and that I had simply been dreaming an unusually long dream; but my reflections spoiled all that; for they forced me to say, 'I see fifty old houses
' From this vantage ground the extensive view up and down the river, and wide over the wooded expanses of Illinois, is very beautiful--one of the most beautiful on the Mississippi, I think; which is a hazardous remark to make, for the eight hundred miles
It may be that my affection for the one in question biases my judgment in its favor; I cannot say as to that.
No matter, it was satisfyingly beautiful to me, and it had this advantage over all the other friends whom I was about to greet again: it had suffered no change; it was as young and fresh and comely and gracious as ever it had been; whereas, the faces of
An old gentleman, out on an early morning walk, came along, and we discussed the weather, and then drifted into other matters.
I could not remember his face.
He said he had been living here twenty-eight years.
So he had come after my time, and I had never seen him before.
I asked him various questions; first about a mate of mine in Sunday school--what became of him?
'He graduated with honor in an Eastern college, wandered off into the world somewhere, succeeded at nothing, passed out of knowledge and memory years ago, and is supposed to have gone to the dogs.
' 'He was bright, and promised well when he was a boy.
' 'Yes, but the thing that happened is what became of it all.
' I asked after another lad, altogether the brightest in our village school when I was a boy.
'He, too, was graduated with honors, from an Eastern college; but life whipped him in every battle, straight along, and he died in one of the Territories, years ago, a defeated man.
' I asked after another of the bright boys.
'He is a success, always has been, always will be, I think.
' I inquired after a young fellow who came to the town to study for one of the professions when I was a boy.
'He went at something else before he got through--went from medicine to law, or from law to medicine--then to some other new thing; went away for a year, came back with a young wife; fell to drinking, then to gambling behind the door; finally took his wife
' 'Pity, for he was the best-natured, and most cheery and hopeful young fellow that ever was.
' I named another boy.
'Oh, he is all right.
Lives here yet; has a wife and children, and is prospering.
' Same verdict concerning other boys.
I named three school-girls.
'The first two live here, are married and have children; the other is long ago dead--never married.
' I named, with emotion, one of my early sweethearts.
'She is all right.
Been married three times; buried two husbands, divorced from the third, and I hear she is getting ready to marry an old fellow out in Colorado somewhere.
She's got children scattered around here and there, most everywheres.
' The answer to several other inquiries was brief and simple-- 'Killed in the war.
' I named another boy.
'Well, now, his case is curious!
There wasn't a human being in this town but knew that that boy was a perfect chucklehead; perfect dummy; just a stupid ass, as you may say.
Everybody knew it, and everybody said it.
Well, if that very boy isn't the first lawyer in the State of Missouri to-day, I'm a Democrat!
' 'Is that so?
' 'It's actually so.
I'm telling you the truth.
' 'How do you account for it?
' 'Account for it?
There ain't any accounting for it, except that if you send a damned fool to St. Louis, and you don't tell them he's a damned fool they'll never find it out.
There's one thing sure--if I had a damned fool I should know what to do with him: ship him to St. Louis-- it's the noblest market in the world for that kind of property.
Well, when you come to look at it all around, and chew at it and think it over, don't it just bang anything you ever heard of?
' 'Well, yes, it does seem to.
But don't you think maybe it was the Hannibal people who were mistaken about the boy, and not the St. Louis people.
' 'Oh, nonsense!
The people here have known him from the very cradle-- they knew him a hundred times better than the St. Louis idiots could have known him.
No, if you have got any damned fools that you want to realize on, take my advice--send them to St. Louis.
' I mentioned a great number of people whom I had formerly known.
Some were dead, some were gone away, some had prospered, some had come to naught; but as regarded a dozen or so of the lot, the answer was comforting: 'Prosperous--live here yet--town littered with their children.
' I asked about Miss----.
Died in the insane asylum three or four years ago--never was out of it from the time she went in; and was always suffering, too; never got a shred of her mind back.
' If he spoke the truth, here was a heavy tragedy, indeed.
Thirty-six years in a madhouse, that some young fools might have some fun!
I was a small boy, at the time; and I saw those giddy young ladies come tiptoeing into the room where Miss ---- sat reading at midnight by a lamp.
The girl at the head of the file wore a shroud and a doughface, she crept behind the victim, touched her on the shoulder, and she looked up and screamed, and then fell into convulsions.
She did not recover from the fright, but went mad.
In these days it seems incredible that people believed in ghosts so short a time ago.
But they did.
After asking after such other folk as I could call to mind, I finally inquired about _myself_: 'Oh, he succeeded well enough--another case of damned fool.
If they'd sent him to St. Louis, he'd have succeeded sooner.
' It was with much satisfaction that I recognized the wisdom of having told this candid gentleman, in the beginning, that my name was Smith.
CHAPTER 54 Past and Present Being left to myself, up there, I went on picking out old houses in the distant town, and calling back their former inmates out of the moldy past.
Among them I presently recognized the house of the father of Lem Hackett (fictitious name).
It carried me back more than a generation in a moment, and landed me in the midst of a time when the happenings of life were not the natural and logical results of great general laws, but of special orders, and were freighted with very precise and distinct
When I was a small boy, Lem Hackett was drowned--on a Sunday.
He fell out of an empty flat-boat, where he was playing.
Being loaded with sin, he went to the bottom like an anvil.
He was the only boy in the village who slept that night.
We others all lay awake, repenting.
We had not needed the information, delivered from the pulpit that evening, that Lem's was a case of special judgment--we knew that, already.
There was a ferocious thunder-storm, that night, and it raged continuously until near dawn.
The winds blew, the windows rattled, the rain swept along the roof in pelting sheets, and at the briefest of intervals the inky blackness of the night vanished, the houses over the way glared out white and blinding for a quivering instant, then the solid
I sat up in bed quaking and shuddering, waiting for the destruction of the world, and expecting it.
To me there was nothing strange or incongruous in heaven's making such an uproar about Lem Hackett.
Apparently it was the right and proper thing to do.
Not a doubt entered my mind that all the angels were grouped together, discussing this boy's case and observing the awful bombardment of our beggarly little village with satisfaction and approval.
There was one thing which disturbed me in the most serious way; that was the thought that this centering of the celestial interest on our village could not fail to attract the attention of the observers to people among us who might otherwise have escaped
I felt that I was not only one of those people, but the very one most likely to be discovered.
That discovery could have but one result: I should be in the fire with Lem before the chill of the river had been fairly warmed out of him.
I knew that this would be only just and fair.
I was increasing the chances against myself all the time, by feeling a secret bitterness against Lem for having attracted this fatal attention to me, but I could not help it--this sinful thought persisted in infesting my breast in spite of me.
Every time the lightning glared I caught my breath, and judged I was gone.
In my terror and misery, I meanly began to suggest other boys, and mention acts of theirs which were wickeder than mine, and peculiarly needed punishment--and I tried to pretend to myself that I was simply doing this in a casual way, and without intent to
With deep sagacity I put these mentions into the form of sorrowing recollections and left-handed sham-supplications that the sins of those boys might be allowed to pass unnoticed--'Possibly they may repent.
' 'It is true that Jim Smith broke a window and lied about it--but maybe he did not mean any harm.
And although Tom Holmes says more bad words than any other boy in the village, he probably intends to repent--though he has never said he would.
And whilst it is a fact that John Jones did fish a little on Sunday, once, he didn't really catch anything but only just one small useless mud-cat; and maybe that wouldn't have been so awful if he had thrown it back--as he says he did, but he didn't.
Pity but they would repent of these dreadful things--and maybe they will yet.
' But while I was shamefully trying to draw attention to these poor chaps--who were doubtless directing the celestial attention to me at the same moment, though I never once suspected that--I had heedlessly left my candle burning.
It was not a time to neglect even trifling precautions.
There was no occasion to add anything to the facilities for attracting notice to me--so I put the light out.
It was a long night to me, and perhaps the most distressful one I ever spent.
I endured agonies of remorse for sins which I knew I had committed, and for others which I was not certain about, yet was sure that they had been set down against me in a book by an angel who was wiser than I and did not trust such important matters to
It struck me, by and by, that I had been making a most foolish and calamitous mistake, in one respect: doubtless I had not only made my own destruction sure by directing attention to those other boys, but had already accomplished theirs!
--Doubtless the lightning had stretched them all dead in their beds by this time!
The anguish and the fright which this thought gave me made my previous sufferings seem trifling by comparison.
Things had become truly serious.
I resolved to turn over a new leaf instantly; I also resolved to connect myself with the church the next day, if I survived to see its sun appear.
I resolved to cease from sin in all its forms, and to lead a high and blameless life for ever after.
I would be punctual at church and Sunday-school; visit the sick; carry baskets of victuals to the poor (simply to fulfil the regulation conditions, although I knew we had none among us so poor but they would smash the basket over my head for my pains); I
The storm subsided toward daybreak, and I dozed gradually to sleep with a sense of obligation to Lem Hackett for going to eternal suffering in that abrupt way, and thus preventing a far more dreadful disaster--my own loss.
But when I rose refreshed, by and by, and found that those other boys were still alive, I had a dim sense that perhaps the whole thing was a false alarm; that the entire turmoil had been on Lem's account and nobody's else.
The world looked so bright and safe that there did not seem to be any real occasion to turn over a new leaf.
I was a little subdued, during that day, and perhaps the next; after that, my purpose of reforming slowly dropped out of my mind, and I had a peaceful, comfortable time again, until the next storm.
That storm came about three weeks later; and it was the most unaccountable one, to me, that I had ever experienced; for on the afternoon of that day, 'Dutchy' was drowned.
Dutchy belonged to our Sunday-school.
He was a German lad who did not know enough to come in out of the rain; but he was exasperatingly good, and had a prodigious memory.
One Sunday he made himself the envy of all the youth and the talk of all the admiring village, by reciting three thousand verses of Scripture without missing a word; then he went off the very next day and got drowned.
Circumstances gave to his death a peculiar impressiveness.
We were all bathing in a muddy creek which had a deep hole in it, and in this hole the coopers had sunk a pile of green hickory hoop poles to soak, some twelve feet under water.
We were diving and 'seeing who could stay under longest.
' We managed to remain down by holding on to the hoop poles.
Dutchy made such a poor success of it that he was hailed with laughter and derision every time his head appeared above water.
At last he seemed hurt with the taunts, and begged us to stand still on the bank and be fair with him and give him an honest count--'be friendly and kind just this once, and not miscount for the sake of having the fun of laughing at him.
' Treacherous winks were exchanged, and all said 'All right, Dutchy--go ahead, we'll play fair.
' Dutchy plunged in, but the boys, instead of beginning to count, followed the lead of one of their number and scampered to a range of blackberry bushes close by and hid behind it.
They imagined Dutchy's humiliation, when he should rise after a superhuman effort and find the place silent and vacant, nobody there to applaud.
They were 'so full of laugh' with the idea, that they were continually exploding into muffled cackles.
Time swept on, and presently one who was peeping through the briers, said, with surprise-- 'Why, he hasn't come up, yet!
' The laughing stopped.
'Boys, it 's a splendid dive,' said one.
'Never mind that,' said another, 'the joke on him is all the better for it.
' There was a remark or two more, and then a pause.
Talking ceased, and all began to peer through the vines.
Before long, the boys' faces began to look uneasy, then anxious, then terrified.
Still there was no movement of the placid water.
Hearts began to beat fast, and faces to turn pale.
We all glided out, silently, and stood on the bank, our horrified eyes wandering back and forth from each other's countenances to the water.
'Somebody must go down and see!
' Yes, that was plain; but nobody wanted that grisly task.
'Draw straws!
' So we did--with hands which shook so, that we hardly knew what we were about.
The lot fell to me, and I went down.
The water was so muddy I could not see anything, but I felt around among the hoop poles, and presently grasped a limp wrist which gave me no response--and if it had I should not have known it, I let it go with such a frightened suddenness.
The boy had been caught among the hoop poles and entangled there, helplessly.
I fled to the surface and told the awful news.
Some of us knew that if the boy were dragged out at once he might possibly be resuscitated, but we never thought of that.
We did not think of anything; we did not know what to do, so we did nothing--except that the smaller lads cried, piteously, and we all struggled frantically into our clothes, putting on anybody's that came handy, and getting them wrong-side-out and
Then we scurried away and gave the alarm, but none of us went back to see the end of the tragedy.
We had a more important thing to attend to: we all flew home, and lost not a moment in getting ready to lead a better life.
The night presently closed down.
Then came on that tremendous and utterly unaccountable storm.
I was perfectly dazed; I could not understand it.
It seemed to me that there must be some mistake.
The elements were turned loose, and they rattled and banged and blazed away in the most blind and frantic manner.
All heart and hope went out of me, and the dismal thought kept floating through my brain, 'If a boy who knows three thousand verses by heart is not satisfactory, what chance is there for anybody else?
' Of course I never questioned for a moment that the storm was on Dutchy's account, or that he or any other inconsequential animal was worthy of such a majestic demonstration from on high; the lesson of it was the only thing that troubled me; for it
Nevertheless I did turn it over--a highly educated fear compelled me to do that--but succeeding days of cheerfulness and sunshine came bothering around, and within a month I had so drifted backward that again I was as lost and comfortable as ever.
Breakfast time approached while I mused these musings and called these ancient happenings back to mind; so I got me back into the present and went down the hill.
On my way through town to the hotel, I saw the house which was my home when I was a boy.
At present rates, the people who now occupy it are of no more value than I am; but in my time they would have been worth not less than five hundred dollars apiece.
They are colored folk.
After breakfast, I went out alone again, intending to hunt up some of the Sunday-schools and see how this generation of pupils might compare with their progenitors who had sat with me in those places and had probably taken me as a model--though I do not
By the public square there had been in my day a shabby little brick church called the 'Old Ship of Zion,' which I had attended as a Sunday-school scholar; and I found the locality easily enough, but not the old church; it was gone, and a trig and rather
The pupils were better dressed and better looking than were those of my time; consequently they did not resemble their ancestors; and consequently there was nothing familiar to me in their faces.
Still, I contemplated them with a deep interest and a yearning wistfulness, and if I had been a girl I would have cried; for they were the offspring, and represented, and occupied the places, of boys and girls some of whom I had loved to love, and some of
I was mightily stirred, and would have been grateful to be allowed to remain unmolested and look my fill; but a bald-summited superintendent who had been a tow-headed Sunday-school mate of mine on that spot in the early ages, recognized me, and I talked a
Making speeches without preparation is no gift of mine; and I was resolved to shirk any new opportunity, but in the next and larger Sunday-school I found myself in the rear of the assemblage; so I was very willing to go on the platform a moment for the
On the spur of the moment I could not recall any of the old idiotic talks which visitors used to insult me with when I was a pupil there; and I was sorry for this, since it would have given me time and excuse to dawdle there and take a long and satisfying
As I talked merely to get a chance to inspect; and as I strung out the random rubbish solely to prolong the inspection, I judged it but decent to confess these low motives, and I did so.
If the Model Boy was in either of these Sunday-schools, I did not see him.
The Model Boy of my time--we never had but the one--was perfect: perfect in manners, perfect in dress, perfect in conduct, perfect in filial piety, perfect in exterior godliness; but at bottom he was a prig; and as for the contents of his skull, they could
This fellow's reproachlessness was a standing reproach to every lad in the village.
He was the admiration of all the mothers, and the detestation of all their sons.
I was told what became of him, but as it was a disappointment to me, I will not enter into details.
He succeeded in life.
CHAPTER 55 A Vendetta and Other Things DURING my three days' stay in the town, I woke up every morning with the impression that I was a boy--for in my dreams the faces were all young again, and looked as they had looked in the old times--but I went to bed
Of course I suffered some surprises, along at first, before I had become adjusted to the changed state of things.
I met young ladies who did not seem to have changed at all; but they turned out to be the daughters of the young ladies I had in mind--sometimes their grand-daughters.
When you are told that a stranger of fifty is a grandmother, there is nothing surprising about it; but if, on the contrary, she is a person whom you knew as a little girl, it seems impossible.
You say to yourself, 'How can a little girl be a grandmother.
' It takes some little time to accept and realize the fact that while you have been growing old, your friends have not been standing still, in that matter.
I noticed that the greatest changes observable were with the women, not the men.
I saw men whom thirty years had changed but slightly; but their wives had grown old.
These were good women; it is very wearing to be good.
There was a saddler whom I wished to see; but he was gone.
Dead, these many years, they said.
Once or twice a day, the saddler used to go tearing down the street, putting on his coat as he went; and then everybody knew a steamboat was coming.
Everybody knew, also, that John Stavely was not expecting anybody by the boat--or any freight, either; and Stavely must have known that everybody knew this, still it made no difference to him; he liked to seem to himself to be expecting a hundred thousand
A malicious Quincy paper used always to refer to this town, in derision as 'Stavely's Landing.
' Stavely was one of my earliest admirations; I envied him his rush of imaginary business, and the display he was able to make of it, before strangers, as he went flying down the street struggling with his fluttering coat.
But there was a carpenter who was my chiefest hero.
He was a mighty liar, but I did not know that; I believed everything he said.
He was a romantic, sentimental, melodramatic fraud, and his bearing impressed me with awe.
I vividly remember the first time he took me into his confidence.
He was planing a board, and every now and then he would pause and heave a deep sigh; and occasionally mutter broken sentences-- confused and not intelligible--but out of their midst an ejaculation sometimes escaped which made me shiver and did me good: one
' I sat on the tool-chest and humbly and shudderingly admired him; for I judged he was full of crime.
At last he said in a low voice-- 'My little friend, can you keep a secret?
' I eagerly said I could.
'A dark and dreadful one?
' I satisfied him on that point.
'Then I will tell you some passages in my history; for oh, I _must _relieve my burdened soul, or I shall die!
' He cautioned me once more to be 'as silent as the grave;' then he told me he was a 'red-handed murderer.
' He put down his plane, held his hands out before him, contemplated them sadly, and said-- 'Look--with these hands I have taken the lives of thirty human beings!
' The effect which this had upon me was an inspiration to him, and he turned himself loose upon his subject with interest and energy.
He left generalizing, and went into details,--began with his first murder; described it, told what measures he had taken to avert suspicion; then passed to his second homicide, his third, his fourth, and so on.
He had always done his murders with a bowie-knife, and he made all my hairs rise by suddenly snatching it out and showing it to me.
At the end of this first seance I went home with six of his fearful secrets among my freightage, and found them a great help to my dreams, which had been sluggish for a while back.
I sought him again and again, on my Saturday holidays; in fact I spent the summer with him--all of it which was valuable to me.
His fascinations never diminished, for he threw something fresh and stirring, in the way of horror, into each successive murder.
He always gave names, dates, places--everything.
This by and by enabled me to note two things: that he had killed his victims in every quarter of the globe, and that these victims were always named Lynch.
The destruction of the Lynches went serenely on, Saturday after Saturday, until the original thirty had multiplied to sixty--and more to be heard from yet; then my curiosity got the better of my timidity, and I asked how it happened that these justly
My hero said he had never divulged that dark secret to any living being; but felt that he could trust me, and therefore he would lay bare before me the story of his sad and blighted life.
He had loved one 'too fair for earth,' and she had reciprocated 'with all the sweet affection of her pure and noble nature.
' But he had a rival, a 'base hireling' named Archibald Lynch, who said the girl should be his, or he would 'dye his hands in her heart's best blood.
' The carpenter, 'innocent and happy in love's young dream,' gave no weight to the threat, but led his 'golden-haired darling to the altar,' and there, the two were made one; there also, just as the minister's hands were stretched in blessing over their
And what did the husband do?
He plucked forth that knife, and kneeling by the body of his lost one, swore to 'consecrate his life to the extermination of all the human scum that bear the hated name of Lynch.
' That was it.
He had been hunting down the Lynches and slaughtering them, from that day to this--twenty years.
He had always used that same consecrated knife; with it he had murdered his long array of Lynches, and with it he had left upon the forehead of each victim a peculiar mark--a cross, deeply incised.
Said he-- 'The cross of the Mysterious Avenger is known in Europe, in America, in China, in Siam, in the Tropics, in the Polar Seas, in the deserts of Asia, in all the earth.
Wherever in the uttermost parts of the globe, a Lynch has penetrated, there has the Mysterious Cross been seen, and those who have seen it have shuddered and said, "It is his mark, he has been here".
You have heard of the Mysterious Avenger--look upon him, for before you stands no less a person!
But beware--breathe not a word to any soul.
Be silent, and wait.
Some morning this town will flock aghast to view a gory corpse; on its brow will be seen the awful sign, and men will tremble and whisper, "He has been here--it is the Mysterious Avenger's mark"!
You will come here, but I shall have vanished; you will see me no more.
' This ass had been reading the 'Jibbenainosay,' no doubt, and had had his poor romantic head turned by it; but as I had not yet seen the book then, I took his inventions for truth, and did not suspect that he was a plagiarist.
However, we had a Lynch living in the town; and the more I reflected upon his impending doom, the more I could not sleep.
It seemed my plain duty to save him, and a still plainer and more important duty to get some sleep for myself, so at last I ventured to go to Mr. Lynch and tell him what was about to happen to him--under strict secrecy.
I advised him to 'fly,' and certainly expected him to do it.
But he laughed at me; and he did not stop there; he led me down to the carpenter's shop, gave the carpenter a jeering and scornful lecture upon his silly pretensions, slapped his face, made him get down on his knees and beg--then went off and left me to
The carpenter blustered, flourished his knife, and doomed this Lynch in his usual volcanic style, the size of his fateful words undiminished; but it was all wasted upon me; he was a hero to me no longer, but only a poor, foolish, exposed humbug.
I was ashamed of him, and ashamed of myself; I took no further interest in him, and never went to his shop any more.
He was a heavy loss to me, for he was the greatest hero I had ever known.
The fellow must have had some talent; for some of his imaginary murders were so vividly and dramatically described that I remember all their details yet.
The people of Hannibal are not more changed than is the town.
It is no longer a village; it is a city, with a mayor, and a council, and water-works, and probably a debt.
It has fifteen thousand people, is a thriving and energetic place, and is paved like the rest of the west and south--where a well-paved street and a good sidewalk are things so seldom seen, that one doubts them when he does see them.
The customary half-dozen railways center in Hannibal now, and there is a new depot which cost a hundred thousand dollars.
In my time the town had no specialty, and no commercial grandeur; the daily packet usually landed a passenger and bought a catfish, and took away another passenger and a hatful of freight; but now a huge commerce in lumber has grown up and a large
A deal of money changes hands there now.
Bear Creek--so called, perhaps, because it was always so particularly bare of bears--is hidden out of sight now, under islands and continents of piled lumber, and nobody but an expert can find it.
I used to get drowned in it every summer regularly, and be drained out, and inflated and set going again by some chance enemy; but not enough of it is unoccupied now to drown a person in.
It was a famous breeder of chills and fever in its day.
I remember one summer when everybody in town had this disease at once.
Many chimneys were shaken down, and all the houses were so racked that the town had to be rebuilt.
The chasm or gorge between Lover's Leap and the hill west of it is supposed by scientists to have been caused by glacial action.
This is a mistake.
There is an interesting cave a mile or two below Hannibal, among the bluffs.
I would have liked to revisit it, but had not time.
In my time the person who then owned it turned it into a mausoleum for his daughter, aged fourteen.
The body of this poor child was put into a copper cylinder filled with alcohol, and this was suspended in one of the dismal avenues of the cave.
The top of the cylinder was removable; and it was said to be a common thing for the baser order of tourists to drag the dead face into view and examine it and comment upon it.
CHAPTER 56 A Question of Law THE slaughter-house is gone from the mouth of Bear Creek and so is the small jail (or 'calaboose') which once stood in its neighborhood.
A citizen asked, 'Do you remember when Jimmy Finn, the town drunkard, was burned to death in the calaboose?
' Observe, now, how history becomes defiled, through lapse of time and the help of the bad memories of men.
Jimmy Finn was not burned in the calaboose, but died a natural death in a tan vat, of a combination of delirium tremens and spontaneous combustion.
When I say natural death, I mean it was a natural death for Jimmy Finn to die.
The calaboose victim was not a citizen; he was a poor stranger, a harmless whiskey-sodden tramp.
I know more about his case than anybody else; I knew too much of it, in that bygone day, to relish speaking of it.
That tramp was wandering about the streets one chilly evening, with a pipe in his mouth, and begging for a match; he got neither matches nor courtesy; on the contrary, a troop of bad little boys followed him around and amused themselves with nagging and
I assisted; but at last, some appeal which the wayfarer made for forbearance, accompanying it with a pathetic reference to his forlorn and friendless condition, touched such sense of shame and remnant of right feeling as were left in me, and I went away
An hour or two afterward, the man was arrested and locked up in the calaboose by the marshal--large name for a constable, but that was his title.
At two in the morning, the church bells rang for fire, and everybody turned out, of course--I with the rest.
The tramp had used his matches disastrously: he had set his straw bed on fire, and the oaken sheathing of the room had caught.
When I reached the ground, two hundred men, women, and children stood massed together, transfixed with horror, and staring at the grated windows of the jail.
Behind the iron bars, and tugging frantically at them, and screaming for help, stood the tramp; he seemed like a black object set against a sun, so white and intense was the light at his back.
That marshal could not be found, and he had the only key.
A battering-ram was quickly improvised, and the thunder of its blows upon the door had so encouraging a sound that the spectators broke into wild cheering, and believed the merciful battle won.
But it was not so.
The timbers were too strong; they did not yield.
It was said that the man's death-grip still held fast to the bars after he was dead; and that in this position the fires wrapped him about and consumed him.
As to this, I do not know.
What was seen after I recognized the face that was pleading through the bars was seen by others, not by me.
I saw that face, so situated, every night for a long time afterward; and I believed myself as guilty of the man's death as if I had given him the matches purposely that he might burn himself up with them.
I had not a doubt that I should be hanged if my connection with this tragedy were found out.
The happenings and the impressions of that time are burnt into my memory, and the study of them entertains me as much now as they themselves distressed me then.
If anybody spoke of that grisly matter, I was all ears in a moment, and alert to hear what might be said, for I was always dreading and expecting to find out that I was suspected; and so fine and so delicate was the perception of my guilty conscience, that
And how sick it made me when somebody dropped, howsoever carelessly and barren of intent, the remark that 'murder will out!
' For a boy of ten years, I was carrying a pretty weighty cargo.
All this time I was blessedly forgetting one thing--the fact that I was an inveterate talker in my sleep.
But one night I awoke and found my bed-mate--my younger brother--sitting up in bed and contemplating me by the light of the moon.
I said-- 'What is the matter?
' 'You talk so much I can't sleep.
' I came to a sitting posture in an instant, with my kidneys in my throat and my hair on end.
'What did I say.
Quick--out with it--what did I say?
' 'Nothing much.
' 'It's a lie--you know everything.
' 'Everything about what?
' 'You know well enough.
About _that_.
' 'About _what_?
--I don't know what you are talking about.
I think you are sick or crazy or something.
But anyway, you're awake, and I'll get to sleep while I've got a chance.
' He fell asleep and I lay there in a cold sweat, turning this new terror over in the whirling chaos which did duty as my mind.
The burden of my thought was, How much did I divulge?
How much does he know?
--what a distress is this uncertainty!
But by and by I evolved an idea--I would wake my brother and probe him with a supposititious case.
I shook him up, and said-- 'Suppose a man should come to you drunk--' 'This is foolish--I never get drunk.
' 'I don't mean you, idiot--I mean the man.
Suppose a _man _should come to you drunk, and borrow a knife, or a tomahawk, or a pistol, and you forgot to tell him it was loaded, and--' 'How could you load a tomahawk?
' 'I don't mean the tomahawk, and I didn't say the tomahawk; I said the pistol.
Now don't you keep breaking in that way, because this is serious.
There's been a man killed.
' 'What!
in this town?
' 'Yes, in this town.
' 'Well, go on--I won't say a single word.
' 'Well, then, suppose you forgot to tell him to be careful with it, because it was loaded, and he went off and shot himself with that pistol--fooling with it, you know, and probably doing it by accident, being drunk.
Well, would it be murder?
' 'No--suicide.
' 'No, no.
I don't mean _his _act, I mean yours: would you be a murderer for letting him have that pistol?
' After deep thought came this answer-- 'Well, I should think I was guilty of something--maybe murder--yes, probably murder, but I don't quite know.
' This made me very uncomfortable.
However, it was not a decisive verdict.
I should have to set out the real case--there seemed to be no other way.
But I would do it cautiously, and keep a watch out for suspicious effects.
I said-- 'I was supposing a case, but I am coming to the real one now.
Do you know how the man came to be burned up in the calaboose?
' 'No.
' 'Haven't you the least idea?
' 'Not the least.
' 'Wish you may die in your tracks if you have?
' 'Yes, wish I may die in my tracks.
' 'Well, the way of it was this.
The man wanted some matches to light his pipe.
A boy got him some.
The man set fire to the calaboose with those very matches, and burnt himself up.
' 'Is that so?
' 'Yes, it is.
Now, is that boy a murderer, do you think?
' 'Let me see.
The man was drunk?
' 'Yes, he was drunk.
' 'Very drunk?
' 'Yes.
' 'And the boy knew it?
' 'Yes, he knew it.
' There was a long pause.
Then came this heavy verdict-- 'If the man was drunk, and the boy knew it, the boy murdered that man.
This is certain.
' Faint, sickening sensations crept along all the fibers of my body, and I seemed to know how a person feels who hears his death sentence pronounced from the bench.
I waited to hear what my brother would say next.
I believed I knew what it would be, and I was right.
He said-- 'I know the boy.
' I had nothing to say; so I said nothing.
I simply shuddered.
Then he added-- 'Yes, before you got half through telling about the thing, I knew perfectly well who the boy was; it was Ben Coontz!
' I came out of my collapse as one who rises from the dead.
I said, with admiration-- 'Why, how in the world did you ever guess it?
' 'You told it in your sleep.
' I said to myself, 'How splendid that is!
This is a habit which must be cultivated.
' My brother rattled innocently on-- 'When you were talking in your sleep, you kept mumbling something about "matches," which I couldn't make anything out of; but just now, when you began to tell me about the man and the calaboose and the matches, I
' I praised his sagacity effusively.
Presently he asked-- 'Are you going to give him up to the law?
' 'No,' I said; 'I believe that this will be a lesson to him.
I shall keep an eye on him, of course, for that is but right; but if he stops where he is and reforms, it shall never be said that I betrayed him.
' 'How good you are!
' 'Well, I try to be.
It is all a person can do in a world like this.
' And now, my burden being shifted to other shoulders, my terrors soon faded away.
The day before we left Hannibal, a curious thing fell under my notice--the surprising spread which longitudinal time undergoes there.
I learned it from one of the most unostentatious of men--the colored coachman of a friend of mine, who lives three miles from town.
He was to call for me at the Park Hotel at 7.
30 P.M., and drive me out.
But he missed it considerably--did not arrive till ten.
He excused himself by saying-- 'De time is mos' an hour en a half slower in de country en what it is in de town; you'll be in plenty time, boss.
Sometimes we shoves out early for church, Sunday, en fetches up dah right plum in de middle er de sermon.
Diffunce in de time.
A body can't make no calculations 'bout it.
' I had lost two hours and a half; but I had learned a fact worth four.
CHAPTER 57 An Archangel FROM St. Louis northward there are all the enlivening signs of the presence of active, energetic, intelligent, prosperous, practical nineteenth-century populations.
The people don't dream, they work.
The happy result is manifest all around in the substantial outside aspect of things, and the suggestions of wholesome life and comfort that everywhere appear.
Quincy is a notable example--a brisk, handsome, well-ordered city; and now, as formerly, interested in art, letters, and other high things.
But Marion City is an exception.
Marion City has gone backwards in a most unaccountable way.
This metropolis promised so well that the projectors tacked 'city' to its name in the very beginning, with full confidence; but it was bad prophecy.
When I first saw Marion City, thirty-five years ago, it contained one street, and nearly or quite six houses.
It contains but one house now, and this one, in a state of ruin, is getting ready to follow the former five into the river.
Doubtless Marion City was too near to Quincy.
It had another disadvantage: it was situated in a flat mud bottom, below high-water mark, whereas Quincy stands high up on the slope of a hill.
In the beginning Quincy had the aspect and ways of a model New England town: and these she has yet: broad, clean streets, trim, neat dwellings and lawns, fine mansions, stately blocks of commercial buildings.
And there are ample fair-grounds, a well kept park, and many attractive drives; library, reading-rooms, a couple of colleges, some handsome and costly churches, and a grand court-house, with grounds which occupy a square.
The population of the city is thirty thousand.
There are some large factories here, and manufacturing, of many sorts, is done on a great scale.
La Grange and Canton are growing towns, but I missed Alexandria; was told it was under water, but would come up to blow in the summer.
Keokuk was easily recognizable.
I lived there in 1857--an extraordinary year there in real-estate matters.
The 'boom' was something wonderful.
Everybody bought, everybody sold--except widows and preachers; they always hold on; and when the tide ebbs, they get left.
Anything in the semblance of a town lot, no matter how situated, was salable, and at a figure which would still have been high if the ground had been sodded with greenbacks.
The town has a population of fifteen thousand now, and is progressing with a healthy growth.
It was night, and we could not see details, for which we were sorry, for Keokuk has the reputation of being a beautiful city.
It was a pleasant one to live in long ago, and doubtless has advanced, not retrograded, in that respect.
A mighty work which was in progress there in my day is finished now.
This is the canal over the Rapids.
It is eight miles long, three hundred feet wide, and is in no place less than six feet deep.
Its masonry is of the majestic kind which the War Department usually deals in, and will endure like a Roman aqueduct.
The work cost four or five millions.
After an hour or two spent with former friends, we started up the river again.
Keokuk, a long time ago, was an occasional loafing-place of that erratic genius, Henry Clay Dean.
I believe I never saw him but once; but he was much talked of when I lived there.
This is what was said of him-- He began life poor and without education.
But he educated himself--on the curbstones of Keokuk.
He would sit down on a curbstone with his book, careless or unconscious of the clatter of commerce and the tramp of the passing crowds, and bury himself in his studies by the hour, never changing his position except to draw in his knees now and then to let
In this way he acquired a vast hoard of all sorts of learning, and had it pigeon-holed in his head where he could put his intellectual hand on it whenever it was wanted.
His clothes differed in no respect from a 'wharf-rat's,' except that they were raggeder, more ill-assorted and inharmonious (and therefore more extravagantly picturesque), and several layers dirtier.
Nobody could infer the master-mind in the top of that edifice from the edifice itself.
He was an orator--by nature in the first place, and later by the training of experience and practice.
When he was out on a canvass, his name was a lodestone which drew the farmers to his stump from fifty miles around.
His theme was always politics.
He used no notes, for a volcano does not need notes.
In 1862, a son of Keokuk's late distinguished citizen, Mr. Claggett, gave me this incident concerning Dean-- The war feeling was running high in Keokuk (in '61), and a great mass meeting was to be held on a certain day in the new Athenaeum.
A distinguished stranger was to address the house.
After the building had been packed to its utmost capacity with sweltering folk of both sexes, the stage still remained vacant--the distinguished stranger had failed to connect.
The crowd grew impatient, and by and by indignant and rebellious.
About this time a distressed manager discovered Dean on a curb-stone, explained the dilemma to him, took his book away from him, rushed him into the building the back way, and told him to make for the stage and save his country.
Presently a sudden silence fell upon the grumbling audience, and everybody's eyes sought a single point--the wide, empty, carpetless stage.
A figure appeared there whose aspect was familiar to hardly a dozen persons present.
It was the scarecrow Dean--in foxy shoes, down at the heels; socks of odd colors, also 'down;' damaged trousers, relics of antiquity, and a world too short, exposing some inches of naked ankle; an unbuttoned vest, also too short, and exposing a zone of
This figure moved gravely out upon the stage and, with sedate and measured step, down to the front, where it paused, and dreamily inspected the house, saying no word.
The silence of surprise held its own for a moment, then was broken by a just audible ripple of merriment which swept the sea of faces like the wash of a wave.
The figure remained as before, thoughtfully inspecting.
Another wave started--laughter, this time.
It was followed by another, then a third--this last one boisterous.
And now the stranger stepped back one pace, took off his soldier-cap, tossed it into the wing, and began to speak, with deliberation, nobody listening, everybody laughing and whispering.
The speaker talked on unembarrassed, and presently delivered a shot which went home, and silence and attention resulted.
He followed it quick and fast, with other telling things; warmed to his work and began to pour his words out, instead of dripping them; grew hotter and hotter, and fell to discharging lightnings and thunder--and now the house began to break into applause,
'When Dean came,' said Claggett, 'the people thought he was an escaped lunatic; but when he went, they thought he was an escaped archangel.
' Burlington, home of the sparkling Burdette, is another hill city; and also a beautiful one; unquestionably so; a fine and flourishing city, with a population of twenty-five thousand, and belted with busy factories of nearly every imaginable description.
It was a very sober city, too--for the moment--for a most sobering bill was pending; a bill to forbid the manufacture, exportation, importation, purchase, sale, borrowing, lending, stealing, drinking, smelling, or possession, by conquest, inheritance,
This measure was approved by all the rational people in the State; but not by the bench of Judges.
Burlington has the progressive modern city's full equipment of devices for right and intelligent government; including a paid fire department, a thing which the great city of New Orleans is without, but still employs that relic of antiquity, the
In Burlington, as in all these Upper-River towns, one breathes a go-ahead atmosphere which tastes good in the nostrils.
An opera-house has lately been built there which is in strong contrast with the shabby dens which usually do duty as theaters in cities of Burlington's size.
We had not time to go ashore in Muscatine, but had a daylight view of it from the boat.
I lived there awhile, many years ago, but the place, now, had a rather unfamiliar look; so I suppose it has clear outgrown the town which I used to know.
In fact, I know it has; for I remember it as a small place--which it isn't now.
But I remember it best for a lunatic who caught me out in the fields, one Sunday, and extracted a butcher-knife from his boot and proposed to carve me up with it, unless I acknowledged him to be the only son of the Devil.
I tried to compromise on an acknowledgment that he was the only member of the family I had met; but that did not satisfy him; he wouldn't have any half-measures; I must say he was the sole and only son of the Devil--he whetted his knife on his boot.
It did not seem worth while to make trouble about a little thing like that; so I swung round to his view of the matter and saved my skin whole.
Shortly afterward, he went to visit his father; and as he has not turned up since, I trust he is there yet.
And I remember Muscatine--still more pleasantly--for its summer sunsets.
I have never seen any, on either side of the ocean, that equaled them.
They used the broad smooth river as a canvas, and painted on it every imaginable dream of color, from the mottled daintinesses and delicacies of the opal, all the way up, through cumulative intensities, to blinding purple and crimson conflagrations which
All the Upper Mississippi region has these extraordinary sunsets as a familiar spectacle.
It is the true Sunset Land: I am sure no other country can show so good a right to the name.
The sunrises are also said to be exceedingly fine.
I do not know.
CHAPTER 58 On the Upper River THE big towns drop in, thick and fast, now: and between stretch processions of thrifty farms, not desolate solitude.
Hour by hour, the boat plows deeper and deeper into the great and populous North-west; and with each successive section of it which is revealed, one's surprise and respect gather emphasis and increase.
Such a people, and such achievements as theirs, compel homage.
This is an independent race who think for themselves, and who are competent to do it, because they are educated and enlightened; they read, they keep abreast of the best and newest thought, they fortify every weak place in their land with a school, a
Solicitude for the future of a race like this is not in order.
This region is new; so new that it may be said to be still in its babyhood.
By what it has accomplished while still teething, one may forecast what marvels it will do in the strength of its maturity.
It is so new that the foreign tourist has not heard of it yet; and has not visited it.
For sixty years, the foreign tourist has steamed up and down the river between St. Louis and New Orleans, and then gone home and written his book, believing he had seen all of the river that was worth seeing or that had anything to see.
In not six of all these books is there mention of these Upper River towns--for the reason that the five or six tourists who penetrated this region did it before these towns were projected.
The latest tourist of them all (1878) made the same old regulation trip--he had not heard that there was anything north of St. Louis.
Yet there was.
There was this amazing region, bristling with great towns, projected day before yesterday, so to speak, and built next morning.
A score of them number from fifteen hundred to five thousand people.
Then we have Muscatine, ten thousand; Winona, ten thousand; Moline, ten thousand; Rock Island, twelve thousand; La Crosse, twelve thousand; Burlington, twenty-five thousand; Dubuque, twenty-five thousand; Davenport, thirty thousand; St. Paul, fifty-eight
The foreign tourist has never heard of these; there is no note of them in his books.
They have sprung up in the night, while he slept.
So new is this region, that I, who am comparatively young, am yet older than it is.
When I was born, St. Paul had a population of three persons, Minneapolis had just a third as many.
The then population of Minneapolis died two years ago; and when he died he had seen himself undergo an increase, in forty years, of fifty-nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine persons.
He had a frog's fertility.
I must explain that the figures set down above, as the population of St. Paul and Minneapolis, are several months old.
These towns are far larger now.
In fact, I have just seen a newspaper estimate which gives the former seventy-one thousand, and the latter seventy-eight thousand.
This book will not reach the public for six or seven months yet; none of the figures will be worth much then.
We had a glimpse of Davenport, which is another beautiful city, crowning a hill--a phrase which applies to all these towns; for they are all comely, all well built, clean, orderly, pleasant to the eye, and cheering to the spirit; and they are all situated
Therefore we will give that phrase a rest.
The Indians have a tradition that Marquette and Joliet camped where Davenport now stands, in 1673.
The next white man who camped there, did it about a hundred and seventy years later--in 1834.
Davenport has gathered its thirty thousand people within the past thirty years.
She sends more children to her schools now, than her whole population numbered twenty-three years ago.
She has the usual Upper River quota of factories, newspapers, and institutions of learning; she has telephones, local telegraphs, an electric alarm, and an admirable paid fire department, consisting of six hook and ladder companies, four steam fire
Davenport is the official residence of two bishops--Episcopal and Catholic.
Opposite Davenport is the flourishing town of Rock Island, which lies at the foot of the Upper Rapids.
A great railroad bridge connects the two towns--one of the thirteen which fret the Mississippi and the pilots, between St. Louis and St. Paul.
The charming island of Rock Island, three miles long and half a mile wide, belongs to the United States, and the Government has turned it into a wonderful park, enhancing its natural attractions by art, and threading its fine forests with many miles of
Near the center of the island one catches glimpses, through the trees, of ten vast stone four-story buildings, each of which covers an acre of ground.
These are the Government workshops; for the Rock Island establishment is a national armory and arsenal.
We move up the river--always through enchanting scenery, there being no other kind on the Upper Mississippi--and pass Moline, a center of vast manufacturing industries; and Clinton and Lyons, great lumber centers; and presently reach Dubuque, which is
The lead mines are very productive, and of wide extent.
Dubuque has a great number of manufacturing establishments; among them a plow factory which has for customers all Christendom in general.
At least so I was told by an agent of the concern who was on the boat.
He said-- 'You show me any country under the sun where they really know how to plow, and if I don't show you our mark on the plow they use, I'll eat that plow; and I won't ask for any Woostershyre sauce to flavor it up with, either.
' All this part of the river is rich in Indian history and traditions.
Black Hawk's was once a puissant name hereabouts; as was Keokuk's, further down.
A few miles below Dubuque is the Tete de Mort--Death's-head rock, or bluff--to the top of which the French drove a band of Indians, in early times, and cooped them up there, with death for a certainty, and only the manner of it matter of choice--to starve,
Black Hawk adopted the ways of the white people, toward the end of his life; and when he died he was buried, near Des Moines, in Christian fashion, modified by Indian custom; that is to say, clothed in a Christian military uniform, and with a Christian
Formerly, a horse had always been buried with a chief.
The substitution of the cane shows that Black Hawk's haughty nature was really humbled, and he expected to walk when he got over.
We noticed that above Dubuque the water of the Mississippi was olive-green--rich and beautiful and semi-transparent, with the sun on it.
Of course the water was nowhere as clear or of as fine a complexion as it is in some other seasons of the year; for now it was at flood stage, and therefore dimmed and blurred by the mud manufactured from caving banks.
The majestic bluffs that overlook the river, along through this region, charm one with the grace and variety of their forms, and the soft beauty of their adornment.
The steep verdant slope, whose base is at the water's edge is topped by a lofty rampart of broken, turreted rocks, which are exquisitely rich and mellow in color--mainly dark browns and dull greens, but splashed with other tints.
And then you have the shining river, winding here and there and yonder, its sweep interrupted at intervals by clusters of wooded islands threaded by silver channels; and you have glimpses of distant villages, asleep upon capes; and of stealthy rafts
And it is all as tranquil and reposeful as dreamland, and has nothing this-worldly about it--nothing to hang a fret or a worry upon.
Until the unholy train comes tearing along--which it presently does, ripping the sacred solitude to rags and tatters with its devil's warwhoop and the roar and thunder of its rushing wheels--and straightway you are back in this world, and with one of its
It makes me shudder to this day, to remember that I once came near not getting rid of my stock at all.
It must be an awful thing to have a railroad left on your hands.
The locomotive is in sight from the deck of the steamboat almost the whole way from St. Louis to St. Paul--eight hundred miles.
These railroads have made havoc with the steamboat commerce.
The clerk of our boat was a steamboat clerk before these roads were built.
In that day the influx of population was so great, and the freight business so heavy, that the boats were not able to keep up with the demands made upon their carrying capacity; consequently the captains were very independent and airy--pretty 'biggity,' as
The clerk nut-shelled the contrast between the former time and the present, thus-- 'Boat used to land--captain on hurricane roof--mighty stiff and straight--iron ramrod for a spine--kid gloves, plug tile, hair parted behind--man on shore takes off hat and
'Captain says-- '"'ll take two of them"--and don't even condescend to look at him.
'But nowadays the captain takes off his old slouch, and smiles all the way around to the back of his ears, and gets off a bow which he hasn't got any ramrod to interfere with, and says-- '"Glad to see you, Smith, glad to see you--you're looking
'"Nuth'n", says Smith; and keeps his hat on, and just turns his back and goes to talking with somebody else.
'Oh, yes, eight years ago, the captain was on top; but it's Smith's turn now.
Eight years ago a boat used to go up the river with every stateroom full, and people piled five and six deep on the cabin floor; and a solid deck-load of immigrants and harvesters down below, into the bargain.
To get a first-class stateroom, you'd got to prove sixteen quarterings of nobility and four hundred years of descent, or be personally acquainted with the nigger that blacked the captain's boots.
But it's all changed now; plenty staterooms above, no harvesters below--there's a patent self-binder now, and they don't have harvesters any more; they've gone where the woodbine twineth--and they didn't go by steamboat, either; went by the train.
' Up in this region we met massed acres of lumber rafts coming down--but not floating leisurely along, in the old-fashioned way, manned with joyous and reckless crews of fiddling, song-singing, whiskey-drinking, breakdown-dancing rapscallions; no, the
Along here, somewhere, on a black night, we ran some exceedingly narrow and intricate island-chutes by aid of the electric light.
Behind was solid blackness--a crackless bank of it; ahead, a narrow elbow of water, curving between dense walls of foliage that almost touched our bows on both sides; and here every individual leaf, and every individual ripple stood out in its natural
The effect was strange, and fine, and very striking.
We passed Prairie du Chien, another of Father Marquette's camping-places; and after some hours of progress through varied and beautiful scenery, reached La Crosse.
Here is a town of twelve or thirteen thousand population, with electric lighted streets, and with blocks of buildings which are stately enough, and also architecturally fine enough, to command respect in any city.
It is a choice town, and we made satisfactory use of the hour allowed us, in roaming it over, though the weather was rainier than necessary.
CHAPTER 59 Legends and Scenery WE added several passengers to our list, at La Crosse; among others an old gentleman who had come to this north-western region with the early settlers, and was familiar with every part of it.
Pardonably proud of it, too.
He said-- 'You'll find scenery between here and St. Paul that can give the Hudson points.
You'll have the Queen's Bluff--seven hundred feet high, and just as imposing a spectacle as you can find anywheres; and Trempeleau Island, which isn't like any other island in America, I believe, for it is a gigantic mountain, with precipitous sides, and
And above Winona you'll have lovely prairies; and then come the Thousand Islands, too beautiful for anything; green?
why you never saw foliage so green, nor packed so thick; it's like a thousand plush cushions afloat on a looking-glass--when the water 's still; and then the monstrous bluffs on both sides of the river--ragged, rugged, dark-complected--just the frame
' The old gentleman also told us a touching Indian legend or two--but not very powerful ones.
After this excursion into history, he came back to the scenery, and described it, detail by detail, from the Thousand Islands to St. Paul; naming its names with such facility, tripping along his theme with such nimble and confident ease, slamming in a
Hear him-- 'Ten miles above Winona we come to Fountain City, nestling sweetly at the feet of cliffs that lift their awful fronts, Jovelike, toward the blue depths of heaven, bathing them in virgin atmospheres that have known no other contact save that of
'And next we glide through silver waters, amid lovely and stupendous aspects of nature that attune our hearts to adoring admiration, about twelve miles, and strike Mount Vernon, six hundred feet high, with romantic ruins of a once first-class hotel perched
'And so we move on.
Past Chimney Rock we fly--noble shaft of six hundred feet; then just before landing at Minnieska our attention is attracted by a most striking promontory rising over five hundred feet--the ideal mountain pyramid.
Its conic shape--thickly-wooded surface girding its sides, and its apex like that of a cone, cause the spectator to wonder at nature's workings.
From its dizzy heights superb views of the forests, streams, bluffs, hills and dales below and beyond for miles are brought within its focus.
What grander river scenery can be conceived, as we gaze upon this enchanting landscape, from the uppermost point of these bluffs upon the valleys below?
The primeval wildness and awful loneliness of these sublime creations of nature and nature's God, excite feelings of unbounded admiration, and the recollection of which can never be effaced from the memory, as we view them in any direction.
'Next we have the Lion's Head and the Lioness's Head, carved by nature's hand, to adorn and dominate the beauteous stream; and then anon the river widens, and a most charming and magnificent view of the valley before us suddenly bursts upon our vision;
'And so we glide along; in due time encountering those majestic domes, the mighty Sugar Loaf, and the sublime Maiden's Rock--which latter, romantic superstition has invested with a voice; and oft-times as the birch canoe glides near, at twilight, the dusky
'Then Frontenac looms upon our vision, delightful resort of jaded summer tourists; then progressive Red Wing; and Diamond Bluff, impressive and preponderous in its lone sublimity; then Prescott and the St. Croix; and anon we see bursting upon us the domes
' 'I have formerly served in that capacity.
' My suspicion was confirmed.
'Do you still travel with it?
' 'No, she is laid up till the fall season opens.
I am helping now to work up the materials for a Tourist's Guide which the St. Louis and St. Paul Packet Company are going to issue this summer for the benefit of travelers who go by that line.
' 'When you were talking of Maiden's Rock, you spoke of the long-departed Winona, darling of Indian song and story.
Is she the maiden of the rock?
--and are the two connected by legend?
' 'Yes, and a very tragic and painful one.
Perhaps the most celebrated, as well as the most pathetic, of all the legends of the Mississippi.
' We asked him to tell it.
He dropped out of his conversational vein and back into his lecture-gait without an effort, and rolled on as follows-- 'A little distance above Lake City is a famous point known as Maiden's Rock, which is not only a picturesque spot, but is full of
Among the families which used to resort here, was one belonging to the tribe of Wabasha.
We-no-na (first-born) was the name of a maiden who had plighted her troth to a lover belonging to the same band.
But her stern parents had promised her hand to another, a famous warrior, and insisted on her wedding him.
The day was fixed by her parents, to her great grief.
She appeared to accede to the proposal and accompany them to the rock, for the purpose of gathering flowers for the feast.
On reaching the rock, We-no-na ran to its summit and standing on its edge upbraided her parents who were below, for their cruelty, and then singing a death-dirge, threw herself from the precipice and dashed them in pieces on the rock below.
' 'Dashed who in pieces--her parents?
' 'Yes.
' 'Well, it certainly was a tragic business, as you say.
And moreover, there is a startling kind of dramatic surprise about it which I was not looking for.
It is a distinct improvement upon the threadbare form of Indian legend.
There are fifty Lover's Leaps along the Mississippi from whose summit disappointed Indian girls have jumped, but this is the only jump in the lot hat turned out in the right and satisfactory way.
What became of Winona?
' 'She was a good deal jarred up and jolted: but she got herself together and disappeared before the coroner reached the fatal spot; and 'tis said she sought and married her true love, and wandered with him to some distant clime, where she lived happy ever
' I was glad to hear the lecturer's description of the scenery, for it assisted my appreciation of what I saw of it, and enabled me to imagine such of it as we lost by the intrusion of night.
As the lecturer remarked, this whole region is blanketed with Indian tales and traditions.
But I reminded him that people usually merely mention this fact--doing it in a way to make a body's mouth water--and judiciously stopped there.
Why?
Because the impression left, was that these tales were full of incident and imagination--a pleasant impression which would be promptly dissipated if the tales were told.
I showed him a lot of this sort of literature which I had been collecting, and he confessed that it was poor stuff, exceedingly sorry rubbish; and I ventured to add that the legends which he had himself told us were of this character, with the single
He granted these facts, but said that if I would hunt up Mr. Schoolcraft's book, published near fifty years ago, and now doubtless out of print, I would find some Indian inventions in it that were very far from being barren of incident and imagination;
For instance, there was the legend of 'The Undying Head.
' He could not tell it, for many of the details had grown dim in his memory; but he would recommend me to find it and enlarge my respect for the Indian imagination.
He said that this tale, and most of the others in the book, were current among the Indians along this part of the Mississippi when he first came here; and that the contributors to Schoolcraft's book had got them directly from Indian lips, and had written
I have found the book.
The lecturer was right.
There are several legends in it which confirm what he said.
I will offer two of them--'The Undying Head,' and 'Peboan and Seegwun, an Allegory of the Seasons.
' The latter is used in Hiawatha; but it is worth reading in the original form, if only that one may see how effective a genuine poem can be without the helps and graces of poetic measure and rhythm-- PEBOAN AND SEEGWUN.
An old man was sitting alone in his lodge, by the side of a frozen stream.
It was the close of winter, and his fire was almost out, He appeared very old and very desolate.
His locks were white with age, and he trembled in every joint.
Day after day passed in solitude, and he heard nothing but the sound of the tempest, sweeping before it the new-fallen snow.
One day, as his fire was just dying, a handsome young man approached and entered his dwelling.
His cheeks were red with the blood of youth, his eyes sparkled with animation, and a smile played upon his lips.
He walked with a light and quick step.
His forehead was bound with a wreath of sweet grass, in place of a warrior's frontlet, and he carried a bunch of flowers in his hand.
'Ah, my son,' said the old man, 'I am happy to see you.
Come in.
Come and tell me of your adventures, and what strange lands you have been to see.
Let us pass the night together.
I will tell you of my prowess and exploits, and what I can perform.
You shall do the same, and we will amuse ourselves.
' He then drew from his sack a curiously wrought antique pipe, and having filled it with tobacco, rendered mild by a mixture of certain leaves, handed it to his guest.
When this ceremony was concluded they began to speak.
'I blow my breath,' said the old man, 'and the stream stands still.
The water becomes stiff and hard as clear stone.
' 'I breathe,' said the young man, 'and flowers spring up over the plain.
' 'I shake my locks,' retorted the old man, 'and snow covers the land.
The leaves fall from the trees at my command, and my breath blows them away.
The birds get up from the water, and fly to a distant land.
The animals hide themselves from my breath, and the very ground becomes as hard as flint.
' 'I shake my ringlets,' rejoined the young man, 'and warm showers of soft rain fall upon the earth.
The plants lift up their heads out of the earth, like the eyes of children glistening with delight.
My voice recalls the birds.
The warmth of my breath unlocks the streams.
Music fills the groves wherever I walk, and all nature rejoices.
' At length the sun began to rise.
A gentle warmth came over the place.
The tongue of the old man became silent.
The robin and bluebird began to sing on the top of the lodge.
The stream began to murmur by the door, and the fragrance of growing herbs and flowers came softly on the vernal breeze.
Daylight fully revealed to the young man the character of his entertainer.
When he looked upon him, he had the icy visage of Peboan.
{footnote [Winter.
]} Streams began to flow from his eyes.
As the sun increased, he grew less and less in stature, and anon had melted completely away.
Nothing remained on the place of his lodge-fire but the miskodeed,{footnote [The trailing arbutus.
]} a small white flower, with a pink border, which is one of the earliest species of northern plants.
'The Undying Head' is a rather long tale, but it makes up in weird conceits, fairy-tale prodigies, variety of incident, and energy of movement, for what it lacks in brevity.
{footnote [See appendix D.]} CHAPTER 60 Speculations and Conclusions WE reached St. Paul, at the head of navigation of the Mississippi, and there our voyage of two thousand miles from New Orleans ended.
It is about a ten-day trip by steamer.
It can probably be done quicker by rail.
I judge so because I know that one may go by rail from St. Louis to Hannibal--a distance of at least a hundred and twenty miles--in seven hours.
This is better than walking; unless one is in a hurry.
The season being far advanced when we were in New Orleans, the roses and magnolia blossoms were falling; but here in St. Paul it was the snow, In New Orleans we had caught an occasional withering breath from over a crater, apparently; here in St. Paul we
But I wander from my theme.
St. Paul is a wonderful town.
It is put together in solid blocks of honest brick and stone, and has the air of intending to stay.
Its post-office was established thirty-six years ago; and by and by, when the postmaster received a letter, he carried it to Washington, horseback, to inquire what was to be done with it.
Such is the legend.
Two frame houses were built that year, and several persons were added to the population.
A recent number of the leading St. Paul paper, the 'Pioneer Press,' gives some statistics which furnish a vivid contrast to that old state of things, to wit: Population, autumn of the present year (1882), 71,000; number of letters handled, first half of
The increase of letters over the corresponding six months of last year was fifty per cent.
Last year the new buildings added to the city cost above $4,500,000.
St. Paul's strength lies in her commerce--I mean his commerce.
He is a manufacturing city, of course--all the cities of that region are--but he is peculiarly strong in the matter of commerce.
Last year his jobbing trade amounted to upwards of $52,000,000.
He has a custom-house, and is building a costly capitol to replace the one recently burned--for he is the capital of the State.
He has churches without end; and not the cheap poor kind, but the kind that the rich Protestant puts up, the kind that the poor Irish 'hired-girl' delights to erect.
What a passion for building majestic churches the Irish hired-girl has.
It is a fine thing for our architecture but too often we enjoy her stately fanes without giving her a grateful thought.
In fact, instead of reflecting that 'every brick and every stone in this beautiful edifice represents an ache or a pain, and a handful of sweat, and hours of heavy fatigue, contributed by the back and forehead and bones of poverty,' it is our habit to
This is a land of libraries and schools.
St. Paul has three public libraries, and they contain, in the aggregate, some forty thousand books.
He has one hundred and sixteen school-houses, and pays out more than seventy thousand dollars a year in teachers' salaries.
There is an unusually fine railway station; so large is it, in fact, that it seemed somewhat overdone, in the matter of size, at first; but at the end of a few months it was perceived that the mistake was distinctly the other way.
The error is to be corrected.
The town stands on high ground; it is about seven hundred feet above the sea level.
It is so high that a wide view of river and lowland is offered from its streets.
It is a very wonderful town indeed, and is not finished yet.
All the streets are obstructed with building material, and this is being compacted into houses as fast as possible, to make room for more--for other people are anxious to build, as soon as they can get the use of the streets to pile up their bricks and
How solemn and beautiful is the thought, that the earliest pioneer of civilization, the van-leader of civilization, is never the steamboat, never the railroad, never the newspaper, never the Sabbath-school, never the missionary--but always whiskey!
Such is the case.
Look history over; you will see.
The missionary comes after the whiskey--I mean he arrives after the whiskey has arrived; next comes the poor immigrant, with ax and hoe and rifle; next, the trader; next, the miscellaneous rush; next, the gambler, the desperado, the highwayman, and all
All these interests bring the newspaper; the newspaper starts up politics and a railroad; all hands turn to and build a church and a jail--and behold, civilization is established for ever in the land.
But whiskey, you see, was the van-leader in this beneficent work.
It always is.
It was like a foreigner--and excusable in a foreigner--to be ignorant of this great truth, and wander off into astronomy to borrow a symbol.
But if he had been conversant with the facts, he would have said-- Westward the Jug of Empire takes its way.
This great van-leader arrived upon the ground which St. Paul now occupies, in June 1837.
Yes, at that date, Pierre Parrant, a Canadian, built the first cabin, uncorked his jug, and began to sell whiskey to the Indians.
The result is before us.
All that I have said of the newness, briskness, swift progress, wealth, intelligence, fine and substantial architecture, and general slash and go, and energy of St. Paul, will apply to his near neighbor, Minneapolis--with the addition that the latter is
These extraordinary towns were ten miles apart, a few months ago, but were growing so fast that they may possibly be joined now, and getting along under a single mayor.
At any rate, within five years from now there will be at least such a substantial ligament of buildings stretching between them and uniting them that a stranger will not be able to tell where the one Siamese twin leaves off and the other begins.
Combined, they will then number a population of two hundred and fifty thousand, if they continue to grow as they are now growing.
Thus, this center of population at the head of Mississippi navigation, will then begin a rivalry as to numbers, with that center of population at the foot of it--New Orleans.
Minneapolis is situated at the falls of St. Anthony, which stretch across the river, fifteen hundred feet, and have a fall of eighty-two feet--a waterpower which, by art, has been made of inestimable value, business-wise, though somewhat to the damage of
Thirty flouring-mills turn out two million barrels of the very choicest of flour every year; twenty sawmills produce two hundred million feet of lumber annually; then there are woolen mills, cotton mills, paper and oil mills; and sash, nail, furniture,
The great flouring-mills here and at St. Paul use the 'new process' and mash the wheat by rolling, instead of grinding it.
Sixteen railroads meet in Minneapolis, and sixty-five passenger trains arrive and depart daily.
In this place, as in St. Paul, journalism thrives.
Here there are three great dailies, ten weeklies, and three monthlies.
There is a university, with four hundred students--and, better still, its good efforts are not confined to enlightening the one sex.
There are sixteen public schools, with buildings which cost $500,000; there are six thousand pupils and one hundred and twenty-eight teachers.
There are also seventy churches existing, and a lot more projected.
The banks aggregate a capital of $3,000,000, and the wholesale jobbing trade of the town amounts to $50,000,000 a year.
Near St. Paul and Minneapolis are several points of interest--Fort Snelling, a fortress occupying a river-bluff a hundred feet high; the falls of Minnehaha, White-bear Lake, and so forth.
The beautiful falls of Minnehaha are sufficiently celebrated--they do not need a lift from me, in that direction.
The White-bear Lake is less known.
It is a lovely sheet of water, and is being utilized as a summer resort by the wealth and fashion of the State.
It has its club-house, and its hotel, with the modern improvements and conveniences; its fine summer residences; and plenty of fishing, hunting, and pleasant drives.
There are a dozen minor summer resorts around about St. Paul and Minneapolis, but the White-bear Lake is the resort.
Connected with White-bear Lake is a most idiotic Indian legend.
I would resist the temptation to print it here, if I could, but the task is beyond my strength.
The guide-book names the preserver of the legend, and compliments his 'facile pen.
' Without further comment or delay then, let us turn the said facile pen loose upon the reader-- A LEGEND OF WHITE-BEAR LAKE.
Every spring, for perhaps a century, or as long as there has been a nation of red men, an island in the middle of White-bear Lake has been visited by a band of Indians for the purpose of making maple sugar.
Tradition says that many springs ago, while upon this island, a young warrior loved and wooed the daughter of his chief, and it is said, also, the maiden loved the warrior.
He had again and again been refused her hand by her parents, the old chief alleging that he was no brave, and his old consort called him a woman!
The sun had again set upon the 'sugar-bush,' and the bright moon rose high in the bright blue heavens, when the young warrior took down his flute and went out alone, once more to sing the story of his love, the mild breeze gently moved the two gay feathers
As he raised his flute to his lips, his blanket slipped from his well-formed shoulders, and lay partly on the snow beneath.
He began his weird, wild love-song, but soon felt that he was cold, and as he reached back for his blanket, some unseen hand laid it gently on his shoulders; it was the hand of his love, his guardian angel.
She took her place beside him, and for the present they were happy; for the Indian has a heart to love, and in this pride he is as noble as in his own freedom, which makes him the child of the forest.
As the legend runs, a large white-bear, thinking, perhaps, that polar snows and dismal winter weather extended everywhere, took up his journey southward.
He at length approached the northern shore of the lake which now bears his name, walked down the bank and made his way noiselessly through the deep heavy snow toward the island.
It was the same spring ensuing that the lovers met.
They had left their first retreat, and were now seated among the branches of a large elm which hung far over the lake.
(The same tree is still standing, and excites universal curiosity and interest.
) For fear of being detected, they talked almost in a whisper, and now, that they might get back to camp in good time and thereby avoid suspicion, they were just rising to return, when the maiden uttered a shriek which was heard at the camp, and bounding
Instantly every man, woman, and child of the band were upon the bank, but all unarmed.
Cries and wailings went up from every mouth.
What was to be done'?
In the meantime this white and savage beast held the breathless maiden in his huge grasp, and fondled with his precious prey as if he were used to scenes like this.
One deafening yell from the lover warrior is heard above the cries of hundreds of his tribe, and dashing away to his wigwam he grasps his faithful knife, returns almost at a single bound to the scene of fear and fright, rushes out along the leaning tree to
The animal turned, and with one stroke of his huge paw brought the lovers heart to heart, but the next moment the warrior, with one plunge of the blade of his knife, opened the crimson sluices of death, and the dying bear relaxed his hold.
That night there was no more sleep for the band or the lovers, and as the young and the old danced about the carcass of the dead monster, the gallant warrior was presented with another plume, and ere another moon had set he had a living treasure added to
Their children for many years played upon the skin of the white-bear--from which the lake derives its name--and the maiden and the brave remembered long the fearful scene and rescue that made them one, for Kis-se-me-pa and Ka-go-ka could never forget their
It is a perplexing business.
First, she fell down out of the tree--she and the blanket; and the bear caught her and fondled her--her and the blanket; then she fell up into the tree again--leaving the blanket; meantime the lover goes war-whooping home and comes back 'heeled,' climbs
No--nothing of the sort.
You get yourself all worked up and excited about that blanket, and then all of a sudden, just when a happy climax seems imminent you are let down flat--nothing saved but the girl.
Whereas, one is not interested in the girl; she is not the prominent feature of the legend.
Nevertheless, there you are left, and there you must remain; for if you live a thousand years you will never know who got the blanket.
A dead man could get up a better legend than this one.
I don't mean a fresh dead man either; I mean a man that's been dead weeks and weeks.
We struck the home-trail now, and in a few hours were in that astonishing Chicago--a city where they are always rubbing the lamp, and fetching up the genii, and contriving and achieving new impossibilities.
It is hopeless for the occasional visitor to try to keep up with Chicago--she outgrows his prophecies faster than he can make them.
She is always a novelty; for she is never the Chicago you saw when you passed through the last time.
The Pennsylvania road rushed us to New York without missing schedule time ten minutes anywhere on the route; and there ended one of the most enjoyable five-thousand-mile journeys I have ever had the good fortune to make.
APPENDIX APPENDIX A (FROM THE NEW ORLEANS TIMES DEMOCRAT OF MARCH 29, 1882.
) VOYAGE OF THE TIMES-DEMOCRAT'S RELIEF BOAT THROUGH THE INUNDATED REGIONS IT was nine o'clock Thursday morning when the 'Susie' left the Mississippi and entered Old River, or what is now called the mouth of the Red.
Ascending on the left, a flood was pouring in through and over the levees on the Chandler plantation, the most northern point in Pointe Coupee parish.
The water completely covered the place, although the levees had given way but a short time before.
The stock had been gathered in a large flat-boat, where, without food, as we passed, the animals were huddled together, waiting for a boat to tow them off.
On the right-hand side of the river is Turnbull's Island, and on it is a large plantation which formerly was pronounced one of the most fertile in the State.
The water has hitherto allowed it to go scot-free in usual floods, but now broad sheets of water told only where fields were.
The top of the protecting levee could be seen here and there, but nearly all of it was submerged.
The trees have put on a greener foliage since the water has poured in, and the woods look bright and fresh, but this pleasant aspect to the eye is neutralized by the interminable waste of water.
We pass mile after mile, and it is nothing but trees standing up to their branches in water.
A water-turkey now and again rises and flies ahead into the long avenue of silence.
A pirogue sometimes flits from the bushes and crosses the Red River on its way out to the Mississippi, but the sad-faced paddlers never turn their heads to look at our boat.
The puffing of the boat is music in this gloom, which affects one most curiously.
It is not the gloom of deep forests or dark caverns, but a peculiar kind of solemn silence and impressive awe that holds one perforce to its recognition.
We passed two negro families on a raft tied up in the willows this morning.
They were evidently of the well-to-do class, as they had a supply of meal and three or four hogs with them.
Their rafts were about twenty feet square, and in front of an improvised shelter earth had been placed, on which they built their fire.
The current running down the Atchafalaya was very swift, the Mississippi showing a predilection in that direction, which needs only to be seen to enforce the opinion of that river's desperate endeavors to find a short way to the Gulf.
Small boats, skiffs, pirogues, etc.
, are in great demand, and many have been stolen by piratical negroes, who take them where they will bring the greatest price.
From what was told me by Mr. C. P. Ferguson, a planter near Red River Landing, whose place has just gone under, there is much suffering in the rear of that place.
The negroes had given up all thoughts of a crevasse there, as the upper levee had stood so long, and when it did come they were at its mercy.
On Thursday a number were taken out of trees and off of cabin roofs and brought in, many yet remaining.
One does not appreciate the sight of earth until he has traveled through a flood.
At sea one does not expect or look for it, but here, with fluttering leaves, shadowy forest aisles, house-tops barely visible, it is expected.
In fact a grave-yard, if the mounds were above water, would be appreciated.
The river here is known only because there is an opening in the trees, and that is all.
It is in width, from Fort Adams on the left bank of the Mississippi to the bank of Rapides Parish, a distance of about sixty miles.
A large portion of this was under cultivation, particularly along the Mississippi and back of the Red.
When Red River proper was entered, a strong current was running directly across it, pursuing the same direction as that of the Mississippi.
After a run of some hours, Black River was reached.
Hardly was it entered before signs of suffering became visible.
All the willows along the banks were stripped of their leaves.
One man, whom your correspondent spoke to, said that he had had one hundred and fifty head of cattle and one hundred head of hogs.
At the first appearance of water he had started to drive them to the high lands of Avoyelles, thirty-five miles off, but he lost fifty head of the beef cattle and sixty hogs.
Black River is quite picturesque, even if its shores are under water.
A dense growth of ash, oak, gum, and hickory make the shores almost impenetrable, and where one can get a view down some avenue in the trees, only the dim outlines of distant trunks can be barely distinguished in the gloom.
A few miles up this river, the depth of water on the banks was fully eight feet, and on all sides could be seen, still holding against the strong current, the tops of cabins.
Here and there one overturned was surrounded by drift-wood, forming the nucleus of possibly some future island.
In order to save coal, as it was impossible to get that fuel at any point to be touched during the expedition, a look-out was kept for a wood-pile.
On rounding a point a pirogue, skilfully paddled by a youth, shot out, and in its bow was a girl of fifteen, of fair face, beautiful black eyes, and demure manners.
The boy asked for a paper, which was thrown to him, and the couple pushed their tiny craft out into the swell of the boat.
Presently a little girl, not certainly over twelve years, paddled out in the smallest little canoe and handled it with all the deftness of an old voyageur.
The little one looked more like an Indian than a white child, and laughed when asked if she were afraid.
She had been raised in a pirogue and could go anywhere.
She was bound out to pick willow leaves for the stock, and she pointed to a house near by with water three inches deep on the floors.
At its back door was moored a raft about thirty feet square, with a sort of fence built upon it, and inside of this some sixteen cows and twenty hogs were standing.
The family did not complain, except on account of losing their stock, and promptly brought a supply of wood in a flat.
From this point to the Mississippi River, fifteen miles, there is not a spot of earth above water, and to the westward for thirty-five miles there is nothing but the river's flood.
Black River had risen during Thursday, the 23rd, 1{three-quarters} inches, and was going up at night still.
As we progress up the river habitations become more frequent, but are yet still miles apart.
Nearly all of them are deserted, and the out-houses floated off.
To add to the gloom, almost every living thing seems to have departed, and not a whistle of a bird nor the bark of the squirrel can be heard in this solitude.
Sometimes a morose gar will throw his tail aloft and disappear in the river, but beyond this everything is quiet--the quiet of dissolution.
Down the river floats now a neatly whitewashed hen-house, then a cluster of neatly split fence-rails, or a door and a bloated carcass, solemnly guarded by a pair of buzzards, the only bird to be seen, which feast on the carcass as it bears them along.
A picture-frame in which there was a cheap lithograph of a soldier on horseback, as it floated on told of some hearth invaded by the water and despoiled of this ornament.
At dark, as it was not prudent to run, a place alongside the woods was hunted and to a tall gum-tree the boat was made fast for the night.
A pretty quarter of the moon threw a pleasant light over forest and river, making a picture that would be a delightful piece of landscape study, could an artist only hold it down to his canvas.
The motion of the engines had ceased, the puffing of the escaping steam was stilled, and the enveloping silence closed upon us, and such silence it was!
Usually in a forest at night one can hear the piping of frogs, the hum of insects, or the dropping of limbs; but here nature was dumb.
The dark recesses, those aisles into this cathedral, gave forth no sound, and even the ripplings of the current die away.
At daylight Friday morning all hands were up, and up the Black we started.
The morning was a beautiful one, and the river, which is remarkably straight, put on its loveliest garb.
The blossoms of the haw perfumed the air deliciously, and a few birds whistled blithely along the banks.
The trees were larger, and the forest seemed of older growth than below.
More fields were passed than nearer the mouth, but the same scene presented itself--smoke-houses drifting out in the pastures, negro quarters anchored in confusion against some oak, and the modest residence just showing its eaves above water.
The sun came up in a glory of carmine, and the trees were brilliant in their varied shades of green.
Not a foot of soil is to be seen anywhere, and the water is apparently growing deeper and deeper, for it reaches up to the branches of the largest trees.
All along, the bordering willows have been denuded of leaves, showing how long the people have been at work gathering this fodder for their animals.
An old man in a pirogue was asked how the willow leaves agreed with his cattle.
He stopped in his work, and with an ominous shake of his head replied: 'Well, sir, it 's enough to keep warmth in their bodies and that's all we expect, but it's hard on the hogs, particularly the small ones.
They is dropping off powerful fast.
But what can you do?
It 's all we've got.
' At thirty miles above the mouth of Black River the water extends from Natchez on the Mississippi across to the pine hills of Louisiana, a distance of seventy-three miles, and there is hardly a spot that is not ten feet under it.
The tendency of the current up the Black is toward the west.
In fact, so much is this the case, the waters of Red River have been driven down from toward the Calcasieu country, and the waters of the Black enter the Red some fifteen miles above the mouth of the former, a thing never before seen by even the oldest
The water now in sight of us is entirely from the Mississippi.
Up to Trinity, or rather Troy, which is but a short distance below, the people have nearly all moved out, those remaining having enough for their present personal needs.
Their cattle, though, are suffering and dying off quite fast, as the confinement on rafts and the food they get breeds disease.
After a short stop we started, and soon came to a section where there were many open fields and cabins thickly scattered about.
Here were seen more pictures of distress.
On the inside of the houses the inmates had built on boxes a scaffold on which they placed the furniture.
The bed-posts were sawed off on top, as the ceiling was not more than four feet from the improvised floor.
The buildings looked very insecure, and threatened every moment to float off.
Near the houses were cattle standing breast high in the water, perfectly impassive.
They did not move in their places, but stood patiently waiting for help to come.
The sight was a distressing one, and the poor creatures will be sure to die unless speedily rescued.
Cattle differ from horses in this peculiar quality.
A horse, after finding no relief comes, will swim off in search of food, whereas a beef will stand in its tracks until with exhaustion it drops in the water and drowns.
At half-past twelve o'clock a hail was given from a flat-boat inside the line of the bank.
Rounding to we ran alongside, and General York stepped aboard.
He was just then engaged in getting off stock, and welcomed the 'Times-Democrat' boat heartily, as he said there was much need for her.
He said that the distress was not exaggerated in the least.
People were in a condition it was difficult even for one to imagine.
The water was so high there was great danger of their houses being swept away.
It had already risen so high that it was approaching the eaves, and when it reaches this point there is always imminent risk of their being swept away.
If this occurs, there will be great loss of life.
The General spoke of the gallant work of many of the people in their attempts to save their stock, but thought that fully twenty-five per cent.
had perished.
Already twenty-five hundred people had received rations from Troy, on Black River, and he had towed out a great many cattle, but a very great quantity remained and were in dire need.
The water was now eighteen inches higher than in 1874, and there was no land between Vidalia and the hills of Catahoula.
At two o'clock the 'Susie' reached Troy, sixty-five miles above the mouth of Black River.
Here on the left comes in Little River; just beyond that the Ouachita, and on the right the Tensas.
These three rivers form the Black River.
Troy, or a portion of it, is situated on and around three large Indian mounds, circular in shape, which rise above the present water about twelve feet.
They are about one hundred and fifty feet in diameter, and are about two hundred yards apart.
The houses are all built between these mounds, and hence are all flooded to a depth of eighteen inches on their floors.
These elevations, built by the aborigines, hundreds of years ago, are the only points of refuge for miles.
When we arrived we found them crowded with stock, all of which was thin and hardly able to stand up.
They were mixed together, sheep, hogs, horses, mules, and cattle.
One of these mounds has been used for many years as the grave-yard, and to-day we saw attenuated cows lying against the marble tomb-stones, chewing their cud in contentment, after a meal of corn furnished by General York.
Here, as below, the remarkable skill of the women and girls in the management of the smaller pirogues was noticed.
Children were paddling about in these most ticklish crafts with all the nonchalance of adepts.
General York has put into operation a perfect system in regard to furnishing relief.
He makes a personal inspection of the place where it is asked, sees what is necessary to be done, and then, having two boats chartered, with flats, sends them promptly to the place, when the cattle are loaded and towed to the pine hills and uplands of
He has made Troy his headquarters, and to this point boats come for their supply of feed for cattle.
On the opposite side of Little River, which branches to the left out of Black, and between it and the Ouachita, is situated the town of Trinity, which is hourly threatened with destruction.
It is much lower than Troy, and the water is eight and nine feet deep in the houses.
A strong current sweeps through it, and it is remarkable that all of its houses have not gone before.
The residents of both Troy and Trinity have been cared for, yet some of their stock have to be furnished with food.
As soon as the 'Susie' reached Troy, she was turned over to General York, and placed at his disposition to carry out the work of relief more rapidly.
Nearly all her supplies were landed on one of the mounds to lighten her, and she was headed down stream to relieve those below.
At Tom Hooper's place, a few miles from Troy, a large flat, with about fifty head of stock on board, was taken in tow.
The animals were fed, and soon regained some strength.
To-day we go on Little River, where the suffering is greatest.
DOWN BLACK RIVER Saturday Evening, March 25.
We started down Black River quite early, under the direction of General York, to bring out what stock could be reached.
Going down river a flat in tow was left in a central locality, and from there men poled her back in the rear of plantations, picking up the animals wherever found.
In the loft of a gin-house there were seventeen head found, and after a gangway was built they were led down into the flat without difficulty.
Taking a skiff with the General, your reporter was pulled up to a little house of two rooms, in which the water was standing two feet on the floors.
In one of the large rooms were huddled the horses and cows of the place, while in the other the Widow Taylor and her son were seated on a scaffold raised on the floor.
One or two dug-outs were drifting about in the roam ready to be put in service at any time.
When the flat was brought up, the side of the house was cut away as the only means of getting the animals out, and the cattle were driven on board the boat.
General York, in this as in every case, inquired if the family desired to leave, informing them that Major Burke, of 'The Times-Democrat,' has sent the 'Susie' up for that purpose.
Mrs. Taylor said she thanked Major Burke, but she would try and hold out.
The remarkable tenacity of the people here to their homes is beyond all comprehension.
Just below, at a point sixteen miles from Troy, information was received that the house of Mr. Tom Ellis was in danger, and his family were all in it.
We steamed there immediately, and a sad picture was presented.
Looking out of the half of the window left above water, was Mrs. Ellis, who is in feeble health, whilst at the door were her seven children, the oldest not fourteen years.
One side of the house was given up to the work animals, some twelve head, besides hogs.
In the next room the family lived, the water coming within two inches of the bed-rail.
The stove was below water, and the cooking was done on a fire on top of it.
The house threatened to give way at any moment: one end of it was sinking, and, in fact, the building looked a mere shell.
As the boat rounded to, Mr. Ellis came out in a dug-out, and General York told him that he had come to his relief; that 'The Times-Democrat' boat was at his service, and would remove his family at once to the hills, and on Monday a flat would take out his
Notwithstanding the deplorable situation himself and family were in, Mr. Ellis did not want to leave.
He said he thought he would wait until Monday, and take the risk of his house falling.
The children around the door looked perfectly contented, seeming to care little for the danger they were in.
These are but two instances of the many.
After weeks of privation and suffering, people still cling to their houses and leave only when there is not room between the water and the ceiling to build a scaffold on which to stand.
It seemed to be incomprehensible, yet the love for the old place was stronger than that for safety.
After leaving the Ellis place, the next spot touched at was the Oswald place.
Here the flat was towed alongside the gin-house where there were fifteen head standing in water; and yet, as they stood on scaffolds, their heads were above the top of the entrance.
It was found impossible to get them out without cutting away a portion of the front; and so axes were brought into requisition and a gap made.
After much labor the horses and mules were securely placed on the flat.
At each place we stop there are always three, four, or more dug-outs arriving, bringing information of stock in other places in need.
Notwithstanding the fact that a great many had driven a part of their stock to the hills some time ago, there yet remains a large quantity, which General York, who is working with indomitable energy, will get landed in the pine hills by Tuesday.
All along Black River the 'Susie' has been visited by scores of planters, whose tales are the repetition of those already heard of suffering and loss.
An old planter, who has lived on the river since 1844, said there never was such a rise, and he was satisfied more than one quarter of the stock has been lost.
Luckily the people cared first for their work stock, and when they could find it horses and mules were housed in a place of safety.
The rise which still continues, and was two inches last night, compels them to get them out to the hills; hence it is that the work of General York is of such a great value.
From daylight to late at night he is going this way and that, cheering by his kindly words and directing with calm judgment what is to be done.
One unpleasant story, of a certain merchant in New Orleans, is told all along the river.
It appears for some years past the planters have been dealing with this individual, and many of them had balances in his hands.
When the overflow came they wrote for coffee, for meal, and, in fact, for such little necessities as were required.
No response to these letters came, and others were written, and yet these old customers, with plantations under water, were refused even what was necessary to sustain life.
It is needless to say he is not popular now on Back River.
The hills spoken of as the place of refuge for the people and stock on Black River are in Catahoula parish, twenty-four miles from Black River.
After filling the flat with cattle we took on board the family of T. S. Hooper, seven in number, who could not longer remain in their dwelling, and we are now taking them up Little River to the hills.
THE FLOOD STILL RISING Troy: March 27, 1882, noon.
The flood here is rising about three and a half inches every twenty-four hours, and rains have set in which will increase this.
General York feels now that our efforts ought to be directed towards saving life, as the increase of the water has jeopardized many houses.
We intend to go up the Tensas in a few minutes, and then we will return and go down Black River to take off families.
There is a lack of steam transportation here to meet the emergency.
The General has three boats chartered, with flats in tow, but the demand for these to tow out stock is greater than they can meet with promptness.
All are working night and day, and the 'Susie' hardly stops for more than an hour anywhere.
The rise has placed Trinity in a dangerous plight, and momentarily it is expected that some of the houses will float off.
Troy is a little higher, yet all are in the water.
Reports have come in that a woman and child have been washed away below here, and two cabins floated off.
Their occupants are the same who refused to come off day before yesterday.
One would not believe the utter passiveness of the people.
As yet no news has been received of the steamer 'Delia,' which is supposed to be the one sunk in yesterday's storm on Lake Catahoula.
She is due here now, but has not arrived.
Even the mail here is most uncertain, and this I send by skiff to Natchez to get it to you.
It is impossible to get accurate data as to past crops, etc.
, as those who know much about the matter have gone, and those who remain are not well versed in the production of this section.
General York desires me to say that the amount of rations formerly sent should be duplicated and sent at once.
It is impossible to make any estimate, for the people are fleeing to the hills, so rapid is the rise.
The residents here are in a state of commotion that can only be appreciated when seen, and complete demoralization has set in.
If rations are drawn for any particular section hereabouts, they would not be certain to be distributed, so everything should be sent to Troy as a center, and the General will have it properly disposed of.
He has sent for one hundred tents, and, if all go to the hills who are in motion now, two hundred will be required.
APPENDIX B THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER COMMISSION THE condition of this rich valley of the Lower Mississippi, immediately after and since the war, constituted one of the disastrous effects of war most to be deplored.
Fictitious property in slaves was not only righteously destroyed, but very much of the work which had depended upon the slave labor was also destroyed or greatly impaired, especially the levee system.
It might have been expected by those who have not investigated the subject, that such important improvements as the construction and maintenance of the levees would have been assumed at once by the several States.
But what can the State do where the people are under subjection to rates of interest ranging from 18 to 30 per cent.
, and are also under the necessity of pledging their crops in advance even of planting, at these rates, for the privilege of purchasing all of their supplies at 100 per cent.
profit?
It has needed but little attention to make it perfectly obvious that the control of the Mississippi River, if undertaken at all, must be undertaken by the national government, and cannot be compassed by States.
The river must be treated as a unit; its control cannot be compassed under a divided or separate system of administration.
Neither are the States especially interested competent to combine among themselves for the necessary operations.
The work must begin far up the river; at least as far as Cairo, if not beyond; and must be conducted upon a consistent general plan throughout the course of the river.
It does not need technical or scientific knowledge to comprehend the elements of the case if one will give a little time and attention to the subject, and when a Mississippi River commission has been constituted, as the existing commission is, of
It should be remembered that upon this board are General Gilmore, General Comstock, and General Suter, of the United States Engineers; Professor Henry Mitchell (the most competent authority on the question of hydrography), of the United States Coast
B. Eads, whose success with the jetties at New Orleans is a warrant of his competency, and Judge Taylor, of Indiana.
It would be presumption on the part of any single man, however skilled, to contest the judgment of such a board as this.
The method of improvement proposed by the commission is at once in accord with the results of engineering experience and with observations of nature where meeting our wants.
As in nature the growth of trees and their proneness where undermined to fall across the slope and support the bank secures at some points a fair depth of channel and some degree of permanence, so in the project of the engineer the use of timber and brush
It is proposed to reduce the width where excessive by brushwood dykes, at first low, but raised higher and higher as the mud of the river settles under their shelter, and finally slope them back at the angle upon which willows will grow freely.
In this work there are many details connected with the forms of these shelter dykes, their arrangements so as to present a series of settling basins, etc.
, a description of which would only complicate the conception.
Through the larger part of the river works of contraction will not be required, but nearly all the banks on the concave side of the beds must be held against the wear of the stream, and much of the opposite banks defended at critical points.
The works having in view this conservative object may be generally designated works of revetment; and these also will be largely of brushwood, woven in continuous carpets, or twined into wire-netting.
This veneering process has been successfully employed on the Missouri River; and in some cases they have so covered themselves with sediments, and have become so overgrown with willows, that they may be regarded as permanent.
In securing these mats rubble-stone is to be used in small quantities, and in some instances the dressed slope between high and low river will have to be more or less paved with stone.
Any one who has been on the Rhine will have observed operations not unlike those to which we have just referred; and, indeed, most of the rivers of Europe flowing among their own alluvia have required similar treatment in the interest of navigation and
The levee is the crowning work of bank revetment, although not necessarily in immediate connection.
It may be set back a short distance from the revetted bank; but it is, in effect, the requisite parapet.
The flood river and the low river cannot be brought into register, and compelled to unite in the excavation of a single permanent channel, without a complete control of all the stages; and even the abnormal rise must be provided against, because this would
Under the general principle that the local slope of a river is the result and measure of the resistance of its bed, it is evident that a narrow and deep stream should have less slope, because it has less frictional surface in proportion to capacity; i.
e.
, less perimeter in proportion to area of cross section.
The ultimate effect of levees and revetments confining the floods and bringing all the stages of the river into register is to deepen the channel and let down the slope.
The first effect of the levees is to raise the surface; but this, by inducing greater velocity of flow, inevitably causes an enlargement of section, and if this enlargement is prevented from being made at the expense of the banks, the bottom must give way
The actual experience with levees upon the Mississippi River, with no attempt to hold the banks, has been favorable, and no one can doubt, upon the evidence furnished in the reports of the commission, that if the earliest levees had been accompanied by
Of course it would be illogical to conclude that the constrained river can ever lower its flood slope so as to make levees unnecessary, but it is believed that, by this lateral constraint, the river as a conduit may be so improved in form that even those
That the actual capacity of a channel through alluvium depends upon its service during floods has been often shown, but this capacity does not include anomalous, but recurrent, floods.
It is hardly worth while to consider the projects for relieving the Mississippi River floods by creating new outlets, since these sensational propositions have commended themselves only to unthinking minds, and have no support among engineers.
Were the river bed cast-iron, a resort to openings for surplus waters might be a necessity; but as the bottom is yielding, and the best form of outlet is a single deep channel, as realizing the least ratio of perimeter to area of cross section, there could
In the foregoing statement the attempt has been made to condense in as limited a space as the importance of the subject would permit, the general elements of the problem, and the general features of the proposed method of improvement which has been adopted
The writer cannot help feeling that it is somewhat presumptuous on his part to attempt to present the facts relating to an enterprise which calls for the highest scientific skill; but it is a matter which interests every citizen of the United States, and
It is a war claim which implies no private gain, and no compensation except for one of the cases of destruction incident to war, which may well be repaired by the people of the whole country.
EDWARD ATKINSON.
Boston: April 14, 1882.
APPENDIX C RECEPTION OF CAPTAIN BASIL HALL'S BOOK IN THE UNITED STATES HAVING now arrived nearly at the end of our travels, I am induced, ere I conclude, again to mention what I consider as one of the most remarkable traits in the national character of the
Of this, perhaps, the most remarkable example I can give is the effect produced on nearly every class of readers by the appearance of Captain Basil Hall's 'Travels in North America.
' In fact, it was a sort of moral earthquake, and the vibration it occasioned through the nerves of the republic, from one corner of the Union to the other, was by no means over when I left the country in July 1831, a couple of years after the shock.
I was in Cincinnati when these volumes came out, but it was not till July 1830, that I procured a copy of them.
One bookseller to whom I applied told me that he had had a few copies before he understood the nature of the work, but that, after becoming acquainted with it, nothing should induce him to sell another.
Other persons of his profession must, however, have been less scrupulous; for the book was read in city, town, village, and hamlet, steamboat, and stage-coach, and a sort of war-whoop was sent forth perfectly unprecedented in my recollection upon any
An ardent desire for approbation, and a delicate sensitiveness under censure, have always, I believe, been considered as amiable traits of character; but the condition into which the appearance of Captain Hall's work threw the republic shows plainly that
It was perfectly astonishing to hear men who, on other subjects, were of some judgment, utter their opinions upon this.
I never heard of any instance in which the commonsense generally found in national criticism was so overthrown by passion.
I do not speak of the want of justice, and of fair and liberal interpretation: these, perhaps, were hardly to be expected.
Other nations have been called thin-skinned, but the citizens of the Union have, apparently, no skins at all; they wince if a breeze blows over them, unless it be tempered with adulation.
It was not, therefore, very surprising that the acute and forcible observations of a traveler they knew would be listened to should be received testily.
The extraordinary features of the business were, first, the excess of the rage into which they lashed themselves; and, secondly, the puerility of the inventions by which they attempted to account for the severity with which they fancied they had been
Not content with declaring that the volumes contained no word of truth, from beginning to end (which is an assertion I heard made very nearly as often as they were mentioned), the whole country set to work to discover the causes why Captain Hall had
I have heard it said with as much precision and gravity as if the statement had been conveyed by an official report, that Captain Hall had been sent out by the British Government expressly for the purpose of checking the growing admiration of England for
I do not give this as the gossip of a coterie; I am persuaded that it is the belief of a very considerable portion of the country.
So deep is the conviction of this singular people that they cannot be seen without being admired, that they will not admit the possibility that any one should honestly and sincerely find aught to disapprove in them or their country.
The American Reviews are, many of them, I believe, well known in England; I need not, therefore, quote them here, but I sometimes wondered that they, none of them, ever thought of translating Obadiah's curse into classic American; if they had done so, on
I can hardly describe the curiosity with which I sat down at length to peruse these tremendous volumes; still less can I do justice to my surprise at their contents.
To say that I found not one exaggerated statement throughout the work is by no means saying enough.
It is impossible for any one who knows the country not to see that Captain Hall earnestly sought out things to admire and commend.
When he praises, it is with evident pleasure; and when he finds fault, it is with evident reluctance and restraint, excepting where motives purely patriotic urge him to state roundly what it is for the benefit of his country should be known.
In fact, Captain Hall saw the country to the greatest possible advantage.
Furnished, of course, with letters of introduction to the most distinguished individuals, and with the still more influential recommendation of his own reputation, he was received in full drawing-room style and state from one end of the Union to the other.
He saw the country in full dress, and had little or no opportunity of judging of it unhouselled, unanointed, unannealed, with all its imperfections on its head, as I and my family too often had.
Captain Hall had certainly excellent opportunities of making himself acquainted with the form of the government and the laws; and of receiving, moreover, the best oral commentary upon them, in conversation with the most distinguished citizens.
Of these opportunities he made excellent use; nothing important met his eye which did not receive that sort of analytical attention which an experienced and philosophical traveler alone can give.
This has made his volumes highly interesting and valuable; but I am deeply persuaded, that were a man of equal penetration to visit the United States with no other means of becoming acquainted with the national character than the ordinary working-day
His rule appears to have been to state just so much of the truth as would leave on the mind of his readers a correct impression, at the least cost of pain to the sensitive folks he was writing about.
He states his own opinions and feelings, and leaves it to be inferred that he has good grounds for adopting them; but he spares the Americans the bitterness which a detail of the circumstances would have produced.
If any one chooses to say that some wicked antipathy to twelve millions of strangers is the origin of my opinion, I must bear it; and were the question one of mere idle speculation, I certainly would not court the abuse I must meet for stating it.
But it is not so.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
The candor which he expresses, and evidently feels, they mistake for irony, or totally distrust; his unwillingness to give pain to persons from whom he has received kindness, they scornfully reject as affectation, and although they must know right well, in
APPENDIX D THE UNDYING HEAD IN a remote part of the North lived a man and his sister, who had never seen a human being.
Seldom, if ever, had the man any cause to go from home; for, as his wants demanded food, he had only to go a little distance from the lodge, and there, in some particular spot, place his arrows, with their barbs in the ground.
Telling his sister where they had been placed, every morning she would go in search, and never fail of finding each stuck through the heart of a deer.
She had then only to drag them into the lodge and prepare their food.
Thus she lived till she attained womanhood, when one day her brother, whose name was Iamo, said to her: 'Sister, the time is at hand when you will be ill.
Listen to my advice.
If you do not, it will probably be the cause of my death.
Take the implements with which we kindle our fires.
Go some distance from our lodge and build a separate fire.
When you are in want of food, I will tell you where to find it.
You must cook for yourself, and I will for myself.
When you are ill, do not attempt to come near the lodge, or bring any of the utensils you use.
Be sure always to fasten to your belt the implements you need, for you do not know when the time will come.
As for myself, I must do the best I can.
' His sister promised to obey him in all he had said.
Shortly after, her brother had cause to go from home.
She was alone in her lodge, combing her hair.
She had just untied the belt to which the implements were fastened, when suddenly the event, to which her brother had alluded, occurred.
She ran out of the lodge, but in her haste forgot the belt.
Afraid to return, she stood for some time thinking.
Finally, she decided to enter the lodge and get it.
For, thought she, my brother is not at home, and I will stay but a moment to catch hold of it.
She went back.
Running in suddenly, she caught hold of it, and was coming out when her brother came in sight.
He knew what was the matter.
'Oh,' he said, 'did I not tell you to take care.
But now you have killed me.
' She was going on her way, but her brother said to her, 'What can you do there now.
The accident has happened.
Go in, and stay where you have always stayed.
And what will become of you?
You have killed me.
' He then laid aside his hunting-dress and accoutrements, and soon after both his feet began to turn black, so that he could not move.
Still he directed his sister where to place the arrows, that she might always have food.
The inflammation continued to increase, and had now reached his first rib; and he said: 'Sister, my end is near.
You must do as I tell you.
You see my medicine-sack, and my war-club tied to it.
It contains all my medicines, and my war-plumes, and my paints of all colors.
As soon as the inflammation reaches my breast, you will take my war-club.
It has a sharp point, and you will cut off my head.
When it is free from my body, take it, place its neck in the sack, which you must open at one end.
Then hang it up in its former place.
Do not forget my bow and arrows.
One of the last you will take to procure food.
The remainder, tie in my sack, and then hang it up, so that I can look towards the door.
Now and then I will speak to you, but not often.
' His sister again promised to obey.
In a little time his breast was affected.
'Now,' said he, 'take the club and strike off my head.
' She was afraid, but he told her to muster courage.
'Strike,' said he, and a smile was on his face.
Mustering all her courage, she gave the blow and cut off the head.
'Now,' said the head, 'place me where I told you.
' And fearfully she obeyed it in all its commands.
Retaining its animation, it looked around the lodge as usual, and it would command its sister to go in such places as it thought would procure for her the flesh of different animals she needed.
One day the head said: 'The time is not distant when I shall be freed from this situation, and I shall have to undergo many sore evils.
So the superior manito decrees, and I must bear all patiently.
' In this situation we must leave the head.
In a certain part of the country was a village inhabited by a numerous and warlike band of Indians.
In this village was a family of ten young men--brothers.
It was in the spring of the year that the youngest of these blackened his face and fasted.
His dreams were propitious.
Having ended his fast, he went secretly for his brothers at night, so that none in the village could overhear or find out the direction they intended to go.
Though their drum was heard, yet that was a common occurrence.
Having ended the usual formalities, he told how favorable his dreams were, and that he had called them together to know if they would accompany him in a war excursion.
They all answered they would.
The third brother from the eldest, noted for his oddities, coming up with his war-club when his brother had ceased speaking, jumped up.
'Yes,' said he, 'I will go, and this will be the way I will treat those I am going to fight;' and he struck the post in the center of the lodge, and gave a yell.
The others spoke to him, saying: 'Slow, slow, Mudjikewis, when you are in other people's lodges.
' So he sat down.
Then, in turn, they took the drum, and sang their songs, and closed with a feast.
The youngest told them not to whisper their intention to their wives, but secretly to prepare for their journey.
They all promised obedience, and Mudjikewis was the first to say so.
The time for their departure drew near.
Word was given to assemble on a certain night, when they would depart immediately.
Mudjikewis was loud in his demands for his moccasins.
Several times his wife asked him the reason.
'Besides,' said she, 'you have a good pair on.
' 'Quick, quick,' said he, 'since you must know, we are going on a war excursion; so be quick.
' He thus revealed the secret.
That night they met and started.
The snow was on the ground, and they traveled all night, lest others should follow them.
When it was daylight, the leader took snow and made a ball of it, then tossing it into the air, he said: 'It was in this way I saw snow fall in a dream, so that I could not be tracked.
' And he told them to keep close to each other for fear of losing themselves, as the snow began to fall in very large flakes.
Near as they walked, it was with difficulty they could see each other.
The snow continued falling all that day and the following night, so it was impossible to track them.
They had now walked for several days, and Mudjikewis was always in the rear.
One day, running suddenly forward, he gave the _saw-saw-quan_,{footnote [War-whoop.
]} and struck a tree with his war-club, and it broke into pieces as if struck with lightning.
'Brothers,' said he, 'this will be the way I will serve those we are going to fight.
' The leader answered, 'Slow, slow, Mudjikewis, the one I lead you to is not to be thought of so lightly.
' Again he fell back and thought to himself: 'What!
what!
who can this be he is leading us to?
' He felt fearful and was silent.
Day after day they traveled on, till they came to an extensive plain, on the borders of which human bones were bleaching in the sun.
The leader spoke: 'They are the bones of those who have gone before us.
None has ever yet returned to tell the sad tale of their fate.
' Again Mudjikewis became restless, and, running forward, gave the accustomed yell.
Advancing to a large rock which stood above the ground, he struck it, and it fell to pieces.
'See, brothers,' said he, 'thus will I treat those whom we are going to fight.
' 'Still, still,' once more said the leader; 'he to whom I am leading you is not to be compared to the rock.
' Mudjikewis fell back thoughtful, saying to himself: 'I wonder who this can be that he is going to attack;' and he was afraid.
Still they continued to see the remains of former warriors, who had been to the place where they were now going, some of whom had retreated as far back as the place where they first saw the bones, beyond which no one had ever escaped.
At last they came to a piece of rising ground, from which they plainly distinguished, sleeping on a distant mountain, a mammoth bear.
The distance between them was very great, but the size of the animal caused him to be plainly seen.
'There,' said the leader, 'it is he to whom I am leading you; here our troubles will commence, for he is a mishemokwa and a manito.
It is he who has that we prize so dearly (i.
e.
wampum), to obtain which, the warriors whose bones we saw, sacrificed their lives.
You must not be fearful: be manly.
We shall find him asleep.
' Then the leader went forward and touched the belt around the animal's neck.
'This,' said he, 'is what we must get.
It contains the wampum.
' Then they requested the eldest to try and slip the belt over the bear's head, who appeared to be fast asleep, as he was not in the least disturbed by the attempt to obtain the belt.
All their efforts were in vain, till it came to the one next the youngest.
He tried, and the belt moved nearly over the monster's head, but he could get it no farther.
Then the youngest one, and the leader, made his attempt, and succeeded.
Placing it on the back of the oldest, he said, 'Now we must run,' and off they started.
When one became fatigued with its weight, another would relieve him.
Thus they ran till they had passed the bones of all former warriors, and were some distance beyond, when looking back, they saw the monster slowly rising.
He stood some time before he missed his wampum.
Soon they heard his tremendous howl, like distant thunder, slowly filling all the sky; and then they heard him speak and say, 'Who can it be that has dared to steal my wampum?
earth is not so large but that I can find them;' and he descended from the hill in pursuit.
As if convulsed, the earth shook with every jump he made.
Very soon he approached the party.
They, however, kept the belt, exchanging it from one to another, and encouraging each other; but he gained on them fast.
'Brothers,' said the leader, 'has never any one of you, when fasting, dreamed of some friendly spirit who would aid you as a guardian?
' A dead silence followed.
'Well,' said he, 'fasting, I dreamed of being in danger of instant death, when I saw a small lodge, with smoke curling from its top.
An old man lived in it, and I dreamed he helped me; and may it be verified soon,' he said, running forward and giving the peculiar yell, and a howl as if the sounds came from the depths of his stomach, and what is called _checaudum_.
Getting upon a piece of rising ground, behold!
a lodge, with smoke curling from its top, appeared.
This gave them all new strength, and they ran forward and entered it.
The leader spoke to the old man who sat in the lodge, saying, 'Nemesho, help us; we claim your protection, for the great bear will kill us.
' 'Sit down and eat, my grandchildren,' said the old man.
'Who is a great manito?
' said he.
'There is none but me; but let me look,' and he opened the door of the lodge, when, lo!
at a little distance he saw the enraged animal coming on, with slow but powerful leaps.
He closed the door.
'Yes,' said he, 'he is indeed a great manito: my grandchildren, you will be the cause of my losing my life; you asked my protection, and I granted it; so now, come what may, I will protect you.
When the bear arrives at the door, you must run out of the other door of the lodge.
' Then putting his hand to the side of the lodge where he sat, he brought out a bag which he opened.
Taking out two small black dogs, he placed them before him.
'These are the ones I use when I fight,' said he; and he commenced patting with both hands the sides of one of them, and he began to swell out, so that he soon filled the lodge by his bulk; and he had great strong teeth.
When he attained his full size he growled, and from that moment, as from instinct, he jumped out at the door and met the bear, who in another leap would have reached the lodge.
A terrible combat ensued.
The skies rang with the howls of the fierce monsters.
The remaining dog soon took the field.
The brothers, at the onset, took the advice of the old man, and escaped through the opposite side of the lodge.
They had not proceeded far before they heard the dying cry of one of the dogs, and soon after of the other.
'Well,' said the leader, 'the old man will share their fate: so run; he will soon be after us.
' They started with fresh vigor, for they had received food from the old man: but very soon the bear came in sight, and again was fast gaining upon them.
Again the leader asked the brothers if they could do nothing for their safety.
All were silent.
The leader, running forward, did as before.
'I dreamed,' he cried, 'that, being in great trouble, an old man helped me who was a manito; we shall soon see his lodge.
' Taking courage, they still went on.
After going a short distance they saw the lodge of the old manito.
They entered immediately and claimed his protection, telling him a manito was after them.
The old man, setting meat before them, said: 'Eat!
who is a manito?
there is no manito but me; there is none whom I fear;' and the earth trembled as the monster advanced.
The old man opened the door and saw him coming.
He shut it slowly, and said: 'Yes, my grandchildren, you have brought trouble upon me.
' Procuring his medicine-sack, he took out his small war-clubs of black stone, and told the young men to run through the other side of the lodge.
As he handled the clubs, they became very large, and the old man stepped out just as the bear reached the door.
Then striking him with one of the clubs, it broke in pieces; the bear stumbled.
Renewing the attempt with the other war-club, that also was broken, but the bear fell senseless.
Each blow the old man gave him sounded like a clap of thunder, and the howls of the bear ran along till they filled the heavens.
The young men had now run some distance, when they looked back.
They could see that the bear was recovering from the blows.
First he moved his paws, and soon they saw him rise on his feet.
The old man shared the fate of the first, for they now heard his cries as he was torn in pieces.
Again the monster was in pursuit, and fast overtaking them.
Not yet discouraged, the young men kept on their way; but the bear was now so close, that the leader once more applied to his brothers, but they could do nothing.
'Well,' said he, 'my dreams will soon be exhausted; after this I have but one more.
' He advanced, invoking his guardian spirit to aid him.
'Once,' said he, 'I dreamed that, being sorely pressed, I came to a large lake, on the shore of which was a canoe, partly out of water, having ten paddles all in readiness.
Do not fear,' he cried, 'we shall soon get it.
' And so it was, even as he had said.
Coming to the lake, they saw the canoe with ten paddles, and immediately they embarked.
Scarcely had they reached the center of the lake, when they saw the bear arrive at its borders.
Lifting himself on his hind legs, he looked all around.
Then he waded into the water; then losing his footing he turned back, and commenced making the circuit of the lake.
Meantime the party remained stationary in the center to watch his movements.
He traveled all around, till at last he came to the place from whence he started.
Then he commenced drinking up the water, and they saw the current fast setting in towards his open mouth.
The leader encouraged them to paddle hard for the opposite shore.
When only a short distance from land, the current had increased so much, that they were drawn back by it, and all their efforts to reach it were in vain.
Then the leader again spoke, telling them to meet their fates manfully.
'Now is the time, Mudjikewis,' said he, 'to show your prowess.
Take courage and sit at the bow of the canoe; and when it approaches his mouth, try what effect your club will have on his head.
' He obeyed, and stood ready to give the blow; while the leader, who steered, directed the canoe for the open mouth of the monster.
Rapidly advancing, they were just about to enter his mouth, when Mudjikewis struck him a tremendous blow on the head, and gave the _saw-saw-quan_.
The bear's limbs doubled under him, and he fell, stunned by the blow.
But before Mudjikewis could renew it, the monster disgorged all the water he had drank, with a force which sent the canoe with great velocity to the opposite shore.
Instantly leaving the canoe, again they fled, and on they went till they were completely exhausted.
The earth again shook, and soon they saw the monster hard after them.
Their spirits drooped, and they felt discouraged.
The leader exerted himself, by actions and words, to cheer them up; and once more he asked them if they thought of nothing, or could do nothing for their rescue; and, as before, all were silent.
'Then,' he said, 'this is the last time I can apply to my guardian spirit.
Now, if we do not succeed, our fates are decided.
' He ran forward, invoking his spirit with great earnestness, and gave the yell.
'We shall soon arrive,' said he to his brothers, 'at the place where my last guardian spirit dwells.
In him I place great confidence.
Do not, do not be afraid, or your limbs will be fear-bound.
We shall soon reach his lodge.
Run, run,' he cried.
Returning now to Iamo, he had passed all the time in the same condition we had left him, the head directing his sister, in order to procure food, where to place the magic arrows, and speaking at long intervals.
One day the sister saw the eyes of the head brighten, as if with pleasure.
At last it spoke.
'Oh, sister,' it said, 'in what a pitiful situation you have been the cause of placing me!
Soon, very soon, a party of young men will arrive and apply to me for aid; but alas!
How can I give what I would have done with so much pleasure?
Nevertheless, take two arrows, and place them where you have been in the habit of placing the others, and have meat prepared and cooked before they arrive.
When you hear them coming and calling on my name, go out and say, "Alas!
it is long ago that an accident befell him.
I was the cause of it".
If they still come near, ask them in, and set meat before them.
And now you must follow my directions strictly.
When the bear is near, go out and meet him.
You will take my medicine-sack, bows and arrows, and my head.
You must then untie the sack, and spread out before you my paints of all colors, my war-eagle feathers, my tufts of dried hair, and whatever else it contains.
As the bear approaches, you will take all these articles, one by one, and say to him, "This is my deceased brother's paint," and so on with all the other articles, throwing each of them as far as you can.
The virtues contained in them will cause him to totter; and, to complete his destruction, you will take my head, and that too you will cast as far off as you can, crying aloud, "See, this is my deceased brother's head".
He will then fall senseless.
By this time the young men will have eaten, and you will call them to your assistance.
You must then cut the carcass into pieces, yes, into small pieces, and scatter them to the four winds; for, unless you do this, he will again revive.
' She promised that all should be done as he said.
She had only time to prepare the meat, when the voice of the leader was heard calling upon Iamo for aid.
The woman went out and said as her brother had directed.
But the war party being closely pursued, came up to the lodge.
She invited them in, and placed the meat before them.
While they were eating, they heard the bear approaching.
Untying the medicine-sack and taking the head, she had all in readiness for his approach.
When he came up she did as she had been told; and, before she had expended the paints and feathers, the bear began to totter, but, still advancing, came close to the woman.
Saying as she was commanded, she then took the head, and cast it as far from her as she could.
As it rolled along the ground, the blood, excited by the feelings of the head in this terrible scene, gushed from the nose and mouth.
The bear, tottering, soon fell with a tremendous noise.
Then she cried for help, and the young men came rushing out, having partially regained their strength and spirits.
Mudjikewis, stepping up, gave a yell and struck him a blow upon the head.
This he repeated, till it seemed like a mass of brains, while the others, as quick as possible, cut him into very small pieces, which they then scattered in every direction.
While thus employed, happening to look around where they had thrown the meat, wonderful to behold, they saw starting up and turning off in every direction small black bears, such as are seen at the present day.
The country was soon overspread with these black animals.
And it was from this monster that the present race of bears derived their origin.
Having thus overcome their pursuer, they returned to the lodge.
In the meantime, the woman, gathering the implements she had used, and the head, placed them again in the sack.
But the head did not speak again, probably from its great exertion to overcome the monster.
Having spent so much time and traversed so vast a country in their flight, the young men gave up the idea of ever returning to their own country, and game being plenty, they determined to remain where they now were.
One day they moved off some distance from the lodge for the purpose of hunting, having left the wampum with the woman.
They were very successful, and amused themselves, as all young men do when alone, by talking and jesting with each other.
One of them spoke and said, 'We have all this sport to ourselves; let us go and ask our sister if she will not let us bring the head to this place, as it is still alive.
It may be pleased to hear us talk, and be in our company.
In the meantime take food to our sister.
' They went and requested the head.
She told them to take it, and they took it to their hunting-grounds, and tried to amuse it, but only at times did they see its eyes beam with pleasure.
One day, while busy in their encampment, they were unexpectedly attacked by unknown Indians.
The skirmish was long contested and bloody; many of their foes were slain, but still they were thirty to one.
The young men fought desperately till they were all killed.
The attacking party then retreated to a height of ground, to muster their men, and to count the number of missing and slain.
One of their young men had stayed away, and, in endeavoring to overtake them, came to the place where the head was hung up.
Seeing that alone retain animation, he eyed it for some time with fear and surprise.
However, he took it down and opened the sack, and was much pleased to see the beautiful feathers, one of which he placed on his head.
Starting off, it waved gracefully over him till he reached his party, when he threw down the head and sack, and told them how he had found it, and that the sack was full of paints and feathers.
They all looked at the head and made sport of it.
Numbers of the young men took the paint and painted themselves, and one of the party took the head by the hair and said-- 'Look, you ugly thing, and see your paints on the faces of warriors.
' But the feathers were so beautiful, that numbers of them also placed them on their heads.
Then again they used all kinds of indignity to the head, for which they were in turn repaid by the death of those who had used the feathers.
Then the chief commanded them to throw away all except the head.
'We will see,' said he, 'when we get home, what we can do with it.
We will try to make it shut its eyes.
' When they reached their homes they took it to the council-lodge, and hung it up before the fire, fastening it with raw hide soaked, which would shrink and become tightened by the action of the fire.
'We will then see,' they said, 'if we cannot make it shut its eyes.
' Meantime, for several days, the sister had been waiting for the young men to bring back the head; till, at last, getting impatient, she went in search of it.
The young men she found lying within short distances of each other, dead, and covered with wounds.
Various other bodies lay scattered in different directions around them.
She searched for the head and sack, but they were nowhere to be found.
She raised her voice and wept, and blackened her face.
Then she walked in different directions, till she came to the place from whence the head had been taken.
Then she found the magic bow and arrows, where the young men, ignorant of their qualities, had left them.
She thought to herself that she would find her brother's head, and came to a piece of rising ground, and there saw some of his paints and feathers.
These she carefully put up, and hung upon the branch of a tree till her return.
At dusk she arrived at the first lodge of a very extensive village.
Here she used a charm, common among Indians when they wish to meet with a kind reception.
On applying to the old man and woman of the lodge, she was kindly received.
She made known her errand.
The old man promised to aid her, and told her the head was hung up before the council-fire, and that the chiefs of the village, with their young men, kept watch over it continually.
The former are considered as manitoes.
She said she only wished to see it, and would be satisfied if she could only get to the door of the lodge.
She knew she had not sufficient power to take it by force.
'Come with me,' said the Indian, 'I will take you there.
' They went, and they took their seats near the door.
The council-lodge was filled with warriors, amusing themselves with games, and constantly keeping up a fire to smoke the head, as they said, to make dry meat.
They saw the head move, and not knowing what to make of it, one spoke and said: 'Ha!
ha!
It is beginning to feel the effects of the smoke.
' The sister looked up from the door, and her eyes met those of her brother, and tears rolled down the cheeks of the head.
'Well,' said the chief, 'I thought we would make you do something at last.
Look!
look at it--shedding tears,' said he to those around him; and they all laughed and passed their jokes upon it.
The chief, looking around, and observing the woman, after some time said to the man who came with her: 'Who have you got there?
I have never seen that woman before in our village.
' 'Yes,' replied the man, 'you have seen her; she is a relation of mine, and seldom goes out.
She stays at my lodge, and asked me to allow her to come with me to this place.
' In the center of the lodge sat one of those young men who are always forward, and fond of boasting and displaying themselves before others.
'Why,' said he, 'I have seen her often, and it is to this lodge I go almost every night to court her.
' All the others laughed and continued their games.
The young man did not know he was telling a lie to the woman's advantage, who by that means escaped.
She returned to the man's lodge, and immediately set out for her own country.
Coming to the spot where the bodies of her adopted brothers lay, she placed them together, their feet toward the east.
Then taking an ax which she had, she cast it up into the air, crying out, 'Brothers, get up from under it, or it will fall on you.
' This she repeated three times, and the third time the brothers all arose and stood on their feet.
Mudjikewis commenced rubbing his eyes and stretching himself.
'Why,' said he, 'I have overslept myself.
' 'No, indeed,' said one of the others, 'do you not know we were all killed, and that it is our sister who has brought us to life?
' The young men took the bodies of their enemies and burned them.
Soon after, the woman went to procure wives for them, in a distant country, they knew not where; but she returned with ten young women, which she gave to the ten young men, beginning with the eldest.
Mudjikewis stepped to and fro, uneasy lest he should not get the one he liked.
But he was not disappointed, for she fell to his lot.
And they were well matched, for she was a female magician.
They then all moved into a very large lodge, and their sister told them that the women must now take turns in going to her brother's head every night, trying to untie it.
They all said they would do so with pleasure.
The eldest made the first attempt, and with a rushing noise she fled through the air.
Toward daylight she returned.
She had been unsuccessful, as she succeeded in untying only one of the knots.
All took their turns regularly, and each one succeeded in untying only one knot each time.
But when the youngest went, she commenced the work as soon as she reached the lodge; although it had always been occupied, still the Indians never could see any one.
For ten nights now, the smoke had not ascended, but filled the lodge and drove them out.
This last night they were all driven out, and the young woman carried off the head.
The young people and the sister heard the young woman coming high through the air, and they heard her saying: 'Prepare the body of our brother.
' And as soon as they heard it, they went to a small lodge where the black body of Iamo lay.
His sister commenced cutting the neck part, from which the neck had been severed.
She cut so deep as to cause it to bleed; and the others who were present, by rubbing the body and applying medicines, expelled the blackness.
In the meantime, the one who brought it, by cutting the neck of the head, caused that also to bleed.
As soon as she arrived, they placed that close to the body, and, by aid of medicines and various other means, succeeded in restoring Iamo to all his former beauty and manliness.
All rejoiced in the happy termination of their troubles, and they had spent some time joyfully together, when Iamo said: 'Now I will divide the wampum,' and getting the belt which contained it, he commenced with the eldest, giving it in equal portions.
But the youngest got the most splendid and beautiful, as the bottom of the belt held the richest and rarest.
They were told that, since they had all once died, and were restored to life, they were no longer mortal, but spirits, and they were assigned different stations in the invisible world.
Only Mudjikewis's place was, however, named.
He was to direct the west wind, hence generally called Kebeyun, there to remain for ever.
They were commanded, as they had it in their power, to do good to the inhabitants of the earth, and, forgetting their sufferings in procuring the wampum, to give all things with a liberal hand.
And they were also commanded that it should also be held by them sacred; those grains or shells of the pale hue to be emblematic of peace, while those of the darker hue would lead to evil and war.
The spirits then, amid songs and shouts, took their flight to their respective abodes on high; while Iamo, with his sister Iamoqua, descended into the depths below.Produced by David Widger THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER By Mark Twain (Samuel Langhorne Clemens) CONTENTS CHAPTER I. Y-o-u-u Tom-Aunt Polly Decides Upon her Duty--Tom Practices Music--The Challenge--A Private Entrance CHAPTER II.
Strong Temptations--Strategic Movements--The Innocents Beguiled CHAPTER III.
Tom as a General--Triumph and Reward--Dismal Felicity--Commission and Omission CHAPTER IV.
Mental Acrobatics--Attending Sunday--School--The Superintendent--"Showing off"--Tom Lionized CHAPTER V. A Useful Minister--In Church--The Climax CHAPTER VI.
Self-Examination--Dentistry--The Midnight Charm--Witches and Devils--Cautious Approaches--Happy Hours CHAPTER VII.
A Treaty Entered Into--Early Lessons--A Mistake Made CHAPTER VIII.
Tom Decides on his Course--Old Scenes Re-enacted CHAPTER IX.
A Solemn Situation--Grave Subjects Introduced--Injun Joe Explains CHAPTER X. The Solemn Oath--Terror Brings Repentance--Mental Punishment CHAPTER XI.
Muff Potter Comes Himself--Tom's Conscience at Work CHAPTER XII.
Tom Shows his Generosity--Aunt Polly Weakens CHAPTER XIII.
The Young Pirates--Going to the Rendezvous--The Camp--Fire Talk CHAPTER XIV.
Camp-Life--A Sensation--Tom Steals Away from Camp CHAPTER XV.
Tom Reconnoiters--Learns the Situation--Reports at Camp CHAPTER XVI.
A Day's Amusements--Tom Reveals a Secret--The Pirates take a Lesson--A Night Surprise--An Indian War CHAPTER XVII.
Memories of the Lost Heroes--The Point in Tom's Secret CHAPTER XVIII.
Tom's Feelings Investigated--Wonderful Dream--Becky Thatcher Overshadowed--Tom Becomes Jealous--Black Revenge CHAPTER XIX.
Tom Tells the Truth CHAPTER XX.
Becky in a Dilemma--Tom's Nobility Asserts Itself CHAPTER XXI.
Youthful Eloquence--Compositions by the Young Ladies--A Lengthy Vision--The Boy's Vengeance Satisfied CHAPTER XXII.
Tom's Confidence Betrayed--Expects Signal Punishment CHAPTER XXIII.
Old Muff's Friends--Muff Potter in Court--Muff Potter Saved CHAPTER XXIV.
Tom as the Village Hero--Days of Splendor and Nights of Horror--Pursuit of Injun Joe CHAPTER XXV.
About Kings and Diamonds--Search for the Treasure--Dead People and Ghosts CHAPTER XXVI.
The Haunted House--Sleepy Ghosts--A Box of Gold--Bitter Luck CHAPTER XXVII.
Doubts to be Settled--The Young Detectives CHAPTER XXVIII.
An Attempt at No.
Two--Huck Mounts Guard CHAPTER XXIX.
The Pic-nic--Huck on Injun Joe's Track--The "Revenge" Job--Aid for the Widow CHAPTER XXX.
The Welchman Reports--Huck Under Fire--The Story Circulated --A New Sensation--Hope Giving Way to Despair CHAPTER XXXI.
An Exploring Expedition--Trouble Commences--Lost in the Cave--Total Darkness--Found but not Saved CHAPTER XXXII.
Tom tells the Story of their Escape--Tom's Enemy in Safe Quarters CHAPTER XXXIII.
The Fate of Injun Joe--Huck and Tom Compare Notes --An Expedition to the Cave--Protection Against Ghosts--"An Awful Snug Place"--A Reception at the Widow Douglas's CHAPTER XXXIV.
Springing a Secret--Mr. Jones' Surprise a Failure CHAPTER XXXV.
A New Order of Things--Poor Huck--New Adventures Planned ILLUSTRATIONS Tom Sawyer Tom at Home Aunt Polly Beguiled A Good Opportunity Who's Afraid Late Home Jim 'Tendin' to Business Ain't that Work?
Cat and Toys Amusement Becky Thatcher Paying Off After the Battle "Showing Off" Not Amiss Mary Tom Contemplating Dampened Ardor Youth Boyhood Using the "Barlow" The Church Necessities Tom as a Sunday-School Hero The Prize At Church The Model Boy
Business The Ha'nted House Injun Joe The Greatest and Best Hidden Treasures Unearthed The Boy's Salvation Room No.
2 The Next Day's Conference Treasures Uncle Jake Buck at Home The Haunted Room "Run for Your Life" McDougal's Cave Inside the Cave Huck on Duty A Rousing Act Tail Piece The Welchman Result of a Sneeze Cornered Alarming Discoveries Tom and Becky stir up the
Tail Piece Widow Douglas Tom Backs his Statement Tail Piece Huck Transformed Comfortable Once More High up in Society Contentment PREFACE Most of the adventures recorded in this book really occurred; one or two were experiences of my own, the rest those of
Huck Finn is drawn from life; Tom Sawyer also, but not from an individual--he is a combination of the characteristics of three boys whom I knew, and therefore belongs to the composite order of architecture.
The odd superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children and slaves in the West at the period of this story--that is to say, thirty or forty years ago.
Although my book is intended mainly for the entertainment of boys and girls, I hope it will not be shunned by men and women on that account, for part of my plan has been to try to pleasantly remind adults of what they once were themselves, and of how they
THE AUTHOR.
HARTFORD, 1876.
CHAPTER I "TOM"!
No answer.
"TOM"!
No answer.
"What's gone with that boy, I wonder?
You TOM"!
No answer.
The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them about the room; then she put them up and looked out under them.
She seldom or never looked _through_ them for so small a thing as a boy; they were her state pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for "style," not service--she could have seen through a pair of stove-lids just as well.
She looked perplexed for a moment, and then said, not fiercely, but still loud enough for the furniture to hear: "Well, I lay if I get hold of you I'll--" She did not finish, for by this time she was bending down and punching under the bed with the broom,
She resurrected nothing but the cat.
"I never did see the beat of that boy"!
She went to the open door and stood in it and looked out among the tomato vines and "jimpson" weeds that constituted the garden.
No Tom.
So she lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for distance and shouted: "Y-o-u-u TOM"!
There was a slight noise behind her and she turned just in time to seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight.
"There!
I might 'a' thought of that closet.
What you been doing in there"?
"Nothing".
"Nothing!
Look at your hands.
And look at your mouth.
What _is_ that truck"?
"I don't know, aunt".
"Well, I know.
It's jam--that's what it is.
Forty times I've said if you didn't let that jam alone I'd skin you.
Hand me that switch".
The switch hovered in the air--the peril was desperate-- "My!
Look behind you, aunt"!
The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts out of danger.
The lad fled on the instant, scrambled up the high board-fence, and disappeared over it.
His aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then broke into a gentle laugh.
"Hang the boy, can't I never learn anything?
Ain't he played me tricks enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time?
But old fools is the biggest fools there is.
Can't learn an old dog new tricks, as the saying is.
But my goodness, he never plays them alike, two days, and how is a body to know what's coming?
He 'pears to know just how long he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows if he can make out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, it's all down again and I can't hit him a lick.
I ain't doing my duty by that boy, and that's the Lord's truth, goodness knows.
Spare the rod and spile the child, as the Good Book says.
I'm a laying up sin and suffering for us both, I know.
He's full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me!
he's my own dead sister's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash him, somehow.
Every time I let him off, my conscience does hurt me so, and every time I hit him my old heart most breaks.
Well-a-well, man that is born of woman is of few days and full of trouble, as the Scripture says, and I reckon it's so.
He'll play hookey this evening, * and [* Southwestern for "afternoon"] I'll just be obleeged to make him work, tomorrow, to punish him.
It's mighty hard to make him work Saturdays, when all the boys is having holiday, but he hates work more than he hates anything else, and I've _got_ to do some of my duty by him, or I'll be the ruination of the child".
Tom did play hookey, and he had a very good time.
He got back home barely in season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-day's wood and split the kindlings before supper--at least he was there in time to tell his adventures to Jim while Jim did three-fourths of the work.
Tom's younger brother (or rather half-brother) Sid was already through with his part of the work (picking up chips), for he was a quiet boy, and had no adventurous, trouble-some ways.
While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing sugar as opportunity offered, Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile, and very deep--for she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments.
Like many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she was endowed with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she loved to contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low cunning.
Said she: "Tom, it was middling warm in school, warn't it"?
"Yes'm".
"Powerful warm, warn't it"?
"Yes'm".
"Didn't you want to go in a-swimming, Tom"?
A bit of a scare shot through Tom--a touch of uncomfortable suspicion.
He searched Aunt Polly's face, but it told him nothing.
So he said: "No'm--well, not very much".
The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirt, and said: "But you ain't too warm now, though".
And it flattered her to reflect that she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing that that was what she had in her mind.
But in spite of her, Tom knew where the wind lay, now.
So he forestalled what might be the next move: "Some of us pumped on our heads--mine's damp yet.
See"?
Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of circumstantial evidence, and missed a trick.
Then she had a new inspiration: "Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it, to pump on your head, did you?
Unbutton your jacket"!
The trouble vanished out of Tom's face.
He opened his jacket.
His shirt collar was securely sewed.
"Bother!
Well, go 'long with you.
I'd made sure you'd played hookey and been a-swimming.
But I forgive ye, Tom.
I reckon you're a kind of a singed cat, as the saying is--better'n you look.
_This_ time".
She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom had stumbled into obedient conduct for once.
But Sidney said: "Well, now, if I didn't think you sewed his collar with white thread, but it's black".
"Why, I did sew it with white!
Tom"!
But Tom did not wait for the rest.
As he went out at the door he said: "Siddy, I'll lick you for that".
In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them--one needle carried white thread and the other black.
He said: "She'd never noticed if it hadn't been for Sid.
Confound it!
sometimes she sews it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black.
I wish to gee-miny she'd stick to one or t'other--I can't keep the run of 'em.
But I bet you I'll lam Sid for that.
I'll learn him"!
He was not the Model Boy of the village.
He knew the model boy very well though--and loathed him.
Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles.
Not because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him than a man's are to a man, but because a new and powerful interest bore them down and drove them out of his mind for the time--just as men's misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of
This new interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just acquired from a negro, and he was suffering to practise it un-disturbed.
It consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a sort of liquid warble, produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short intervals in the midst of the music--the reader probably remembers how to do it, if he has ever been a boy.
Diligence and attention soon gave him the knack of it, and he strode down the street with his mouth full of harmony and his soul full of gratitude.
He felt much as an astronomer feels who has discovered a new planet--no doubt, as far as strong, deep, unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage was with the boy, not the astronomer.
The summer evenings were long.
It was not dark, yet.
Presently Tom checked his whistle.
A stranger was before him--a boy a shade larger than himself.
A new-comer of any age or either sex was an im-pressive curiosity in the poor little shabby village of St. Petersburg.
This boy was well dressed, too--well dressed on a week-day.
This was simply as astounding.
His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned blue cloth roundabout was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons.
He had shoes on--and it was only Friday.
He even wore a necktie, a bright bit of ribbon.
He had a citified air about him that ate into Tom's vitals.
The more Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his nose at his finery and the shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed to him to grow.
Neither boy spoke.
If one moved, the other moved--but only sidewise, in a circle; they kept face to face and eye to eye all the time.
Finally Tom said: "I can lick you"!
"I'd like to see you try it".
"Well, I can do it".
"No you can't, either".
"Yes I can".
"No you can't".
"I can".
"You can't".
"Can"!
"Can't"!
An uncomfortable pause.
Then Tom said: "What's your name"?
"'Tisn't any of your business, maybe".
"Well I 'low I'll _make_ it my business".
"Well why don't you"?
"If you say much, I will".
"Much--much--_much_.
There now".
"Oh, you think you're mighty smart, _don't_ you?
I could lick you with one hand tied behind me, if I wanted to".
"Well why don't you _do_ it?
You _say_ you can do it".
"Well I _will_, if you fool with me".
"Oh yes--I've seen whole families in the same fix".
"Smarty!
You think you're _some_, now, _don't_ you?
Oh, what a hat"!
"You can lump that hat if you don't like it.
I dare you to knock it off--and anybody that'll take a dare will suck eggs".
"You're a liar"!
"You're another".
"You're a fighting liar and dasn't take it up".
"Aw--take a walk"!
"Say--if you give me much more of your sass I'll take and bounce a rock off'n your head".
"Oh, of _course_ you will".
"Well I _will_".
"Well why don't you _do_ it then?
What do you keep _saying_ you will for?
Why don't you _do_ it?
It's because you're afraid".
"I _ain't_ afraid".
"You are".
"I ain't".
"You are".
Another pause, and more eying and sidling around each other.
Presently they were shoulder to shoulder.
Tom said: "Get away from here"!
"Go away yourself"!
"I won't".
"I won't either".
So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace, and both shoving with might and main, and glowering at each other with hate.
But neither could get an advantage.
After struggling till both were hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution, and Tom said: "You're a coward and a pup.
I'll tell my big brother on you, and he can thrash you with his little finger, and I'll make him do it, too".
"What do I care for your big brother?
I've got a brother that's bigger than he is--and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too".
[Both brothers were imaginary.
] "That's a lie".
"_Your_ saying so don't make it so".
Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said: "I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till you can't stand up.
Anybody that'll take a dare will steal sheep".
The new boy stepped over promptly, and said: "Now you said you'd do it, now let's see you do it".
"Don't you crowd me now; you better look out".
"Well, you _said_ you'd do it--why don't you do it"?
"By jingo!
for two cents I _will_ do it".
The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out with derision.
Tom struck them to the ground.
In an instant both boys were rolling and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats; and for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each other's hair and clothes, punched and scratched each other's nose, and covered themselves with dust and
Presently the confusion took form, and through the fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the new boy, and pounding him with his fists.
"Holler 'nuff"!
said he.
The boy only struggled to free himself.
He was crying--mainly from rage.
"Holler 'nuff"!
--and the pounding went on.
At last the stranger got out a smothered "'Nuff"!
and Tom let him up and said: "Now that'll learn you.
Better look out who you're fooling with next time".
The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing, snuffling, and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and threatening what he would do to Tom the "next time he caught him out".
To which Tom responded with jeers, and started off in high feather, and as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone, threw it and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like an antelope.
Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out where he lived.
He then held a position at the gate for some time, daring the enemy to come outside, but the enemy only made faces at him through the window and declined.
At last the enemy's mother appeared, and called Tom a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away.
So he went away; but he said he "'lowed" to "lay" for that boy.
He got home pretty late that night, and when he climbed cautiously in at the window, he uncovered an ambuscade, in the person of his aunt; and when she saw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn his Saturday holiday into captivity at hard
CHAPTER II SATURDAY morning was come, and all the summer world was bright and fresh, and brimming with life.
There was a song in every heart; and if the heart was young the music issued at the lips.
There was cheer in every face and a spring in every step.
The locust-trees were in bloom and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air.
Cardiff Hill, beyond the village and above it, was green with vegetation and it lay just far enough away to seem a Delectable Land, dreamy, reposeful, and inviting.
Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash and a long-handled brush.
He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left him and a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit.
Thirty yards of board fence nine feet high.
Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a burden.
Sighing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost plank; repeated the operation; did it again; compared the insignificant whitewashed streak with the far-reaching continent of unwhitewashed fence, and sat down on a tree-box discouraged.
Jim came skipping out at the gate with a tin pail, and singing Buffalo Gals.
Bringing water from the town pump had always been hateful work in Tom's eyes, before, but now it did not strike him so.
He remembered that there was company at the pump.
White, mulatto, and negro boys and girls were always there waiting their turns, resting, trading playthings, quarrelling, fighting, skylarking.
And he remembered that although the pump was only a hundred and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of water under an hour--and even then somebody generally had to go after him.
Tom said: "Say, Jim, I'll fetch the water if you'll whitewash some".
Jim shook his head and said: "Can't, Mars Tom.
Ole missis, she tole me I got to go an' git dis water an' not stop foolin' roun' wid anybody.
She say she spec' Mars Tom gwine to ax me to whitewash, an' so she tole me go 'long an' 'tend to my own business--she 'lowed _she'd_ 'tend to de whitewashin'".
"Oh, never you mind what she said, Jim.
That's the way she always talks.
Gimme the bucket--I won't be gone only a a minute.
_She_ won't ever know".
"Oh, I dasn't, Mars Tom.
Ole missis she'd take an' tar de head off'n me.
'Deed she would".
"_She_!
She never licks anybody--whacks 'em over the head with her thimble--and who cares for that, I'd like to know.
She talks awful, but talk don't hurt--anyways it don't if she don't cry.
Jim, I'll give you a marvel.
I'll give you a white alley"!
Jim began to waver.
"White alley, Jim!
And it's a bully taw".
"My!
Dat's a mighty gay marvel, I tell you!
But Mars Tom I's powerful 'fraid ole missis--" "And besides, if you will I'll show you my sore toe".
Jim was only human--this attraction was too much for him.
He put down his pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with absorbing interest while the bandage was being unwound.
In another moment he was flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the field with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye.
But Tom's energy did not last.
He began to think of the fun he had planned for this day, and his sorrows multiplied.
Soon the free boys would come tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and they would make a world of fun of him for having to work--the very thought of it burnt him like fire.
He got out his worldly wealth and examined it--bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to buy an exchange of _work_, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an hour of pure freedom.
So he returned his straitened means to his pocket, and gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys.
At this dark and hopeless moment an inspiration burst upon him!
Nothing less than a great, magnificent inspiration.
He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work.
Ben Rogers hove in sight presently--the very boy, of all boys, whose ridicule he had been dreading.
Ben's gait was the hop-skip-and-jump--proof enough that his heart was light and his anticipations high.
He was eating an apple, and giving a long, melodious whoop, at intervals, followed by a deep-toned ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he was personating a steamboat.
As he drew near, he slackened speed, took the middle of the street, leaned far over to starboard and rounded to ponderously and with laborious pomp and circumstance--for he was personating the Big Missouri, and considered himself to be drawing nine feet of
He was boat and captain and engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself standing on his own hurricane-deck giving the orders and executing them: "Stop her, sir!
Ting-a-ling-ling"!
The headway ran almost out, and he drew up slowly toward the sidewalk.
"Ship up to back!
Ting-a-ling-ling"!
His arms straightened and stiffened down his sides.
"Set her back on the stabboard!
Ting-a-ling-ling!
Chow!
ch-chow-wow!
Chow"!
His right hand, mean-time, describing stately circles--for it was representing a forty-foot wheel.
"Let her go back on the labboard!
Ting-a-ling-ling!
Chow-ch-chow-chow"!
The left hand began to describe circles.
"Stop the stabboard!
Ting-a-ling-ling!
Stop the labboard!
Come ahead on the stabboard!
Stop her!
Let your outside turn over slow!
Ting-a-ling-ling!
Chow-ow-ow!
Get out that head-line!
_lively_ now!
Come--out with your spring-line--what're you about there!
Take a turn round that stump with the bight of it!
Stand by that stage, now--let her go!
Done with the engines, sir!
Ting-a-ling-ling!
SH'T!
S'H'T!
SH'T"!
(trying the gauge-cocks).
Tom went on whitewashing--paid no attention to the steamboat.
Ben stared a moment and then said: "_Hi-Yi!
You're_ up a stump, ain't you"!
No answer.
Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist, then he gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result, as before.
Ben ranged up alongside of him.
Tom's mouth watered for the apple, but he stuck to his work.
Ben said: "Hello, old chap, you got to work, hey"?
Tom wheeled suddenly and said: "Why, it's you, Ben!
I warn't noticing".
"Say--I'm going in a-swimming, I am.
Don't you wish you could?
But of course you'd druther _work_--wouldn't you?
Course you would"!
Tom contemplated the boy a bit, and said: "What do you call work"?
"Why, ain't _that_ work"?
Tom resumed his whitewashing, and answered carelessly: "Well, maybe it is, and maybe it ain't.
All I know, is, it suits Tom Sawyer".
"Oh come, now, you don't mean to let on that you _like_ it"?
The brush continued to move.
"Like it?
Well, I don't see why I oughtn't to like it.
Does a boy get a chance to whitewash a fence every day"?
That put the thing in a new light.
Ben stopped nibbling his apple.
Tom swept his brush daintily back and forth--stepped back to note the effect--added a touch here and there--criticised the effect again--Ben watching every move and getting more and more interested, more and more absorbed.
Presently he said: "Say, Tom, let _me_ whitewash a little".
Tom considered, was about to consent; but he altered his mind: "No--no--I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben.
You see, Aunt Polly's awful particular about this fence--right here on the street, you know--but if it was the back fence I wouldn't mind and _she_ wouldn't.
Yes, she's awful particular about this fence; it's got to be done very careful; I reckon there ain't one boy in a thousand, maybe two thousand, that can do it the way it's got to be done".
"No--is that so?
Oh come, now--lemme just try.
Only just a little--I'd let _you_, if you was me, Tom".
"Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; but Aunt Polly--well, Jim wanted to do it, but she wouldn't let him; Sid wanted to do it, and she wouldn't let Sid.
Now don't you see how I'm fixed?
If you was to tackle this fence and anything was to happen to it--" "Oh, shucks, I'll be just as careful.
Now lemme try.
Say--I'll give you the core of my apple".
"Well, here--No, Ben, now don't.
I'm afeard--" "I'll give you _all_ of it"!
Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face, but alacrity in his heart.
And while the late steamer Big Missouri worked and sweated in the sun, the retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by, dangled his legs, munched his apple, and planned the slaughter of more innocents.
There was no lack of material; boys happened along every little while; they came to jeer, but remained to whitewash.
By the time Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to Billy Fisher for a kite, in good repair; and when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in for a dead rat and a string to swing it with--and so on, and so on, hour after hour.
And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being a poor poverty-stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in wealth.
He had besides the things before mentioned, twelve marbles, part of a jews-harp, a piece of blue bottle-glass to look through, a spool cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything, a fragment of chalk, a glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple
He had had a nice, good, idle time all the while--plenty of company--and the fence had three coats of whitewash on it!
If he hadn't run out of whitewash he would have bankrupted every boy in the village.
Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world, after all.
He had discovered a great law of human action, without knowing it--namely, that in order to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only necessary to make the thing difficult to attain.
If he had been a great and wise philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have comprehended that Work consists of whatever a body is _obliged_ to do, and that Play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do.
And this would help him to understand why constructing artificial flowers or performing on a tread-mill is work, while rolling ten-pins or climbing Mont Blanc is only amusement.
There are wealthy gentlemen in England who drive four-horse passenger-coaches twenty or thirty miles on a daily line, in the summer, because the privilege costs them considerable money; but if they were offered wages for the service, that would turn it
The boy mused awhile over the substantial change which had taken place in his worldly circumstances, and then wended toward headquarters to report.
CHAPTER III TOM presented himself before Aunt Polly, who was sitting by an open window in a pleasant rearward apartment, which was bedroom, breakfast-room, dining-room, and library, combined.
The balmy summer air, the restful quiet, the odor of the flowers, and the drowsing murmur of the bees had had their effect, and she was nodding over her knitting--for she had no company but the cat, and it was asleep in her lap.
Her spectacles were propped up on her gray head for safety.
She had thought that of course Tom had deserted long ago, and she wondered at seeing him place himself in her power again in this intrepid way.
He said: "Mayn't I go and play now, aunt"?
"What, a'ready?
How much have you done"?
"It's all done, aunt".
"Tom, don't lie to me--I can't bear it".
"I ain't, aunt; it _is_ all done".
Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evidence.
She went out to see for herself; and she would have been content to find twenty per cent.
of Tom's statement true.
When she found the entire fence white-washed, and not only whitewashed but elaborately coated and recoated, and even a streak added to the ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable.
She said: "Well, I never!
There's no getting round it, you can work when you're a mind to, Tom".
And then she diluted the compliment by adding, "But it's powerful seldom you're a mind to, I'm bound to say.
Well, go 'long and play; but mind you get back some time in a week, or I'll tan you".
She was so overcome by the splendor of his achievement that she took him into the closet and selected a choice apple and delivered it to him, along with an improving lecture upon the added value and flavor a treat took to itself when it came without sin
And while she closed with a happy Scriptural flourish, he "hooked" a doughnut.
Then he skipped out, and saw Sid just starting up the outside stairway that led to the back rooms on the second floor.
Clods were handy and the air was full of them in a twinkling.
They raged around Sid like a hail-storm; and before Aunt Polly could collect her surprised faculties and sally to the rescue, six or seven clods had taken personal effect, and Tom was over the fence and gone.
There was a gate, but as a general thing he was too crowded for time to make use of it.
His soul was at peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling attention to his black thread and getting him into trouble.
Tom skirted the block, and came round into a muddy alley that led by the back of his aunt's cow-stable.
He presently got safely beyond the reach of capture and punishment, and hastened toward the public square of the village, where two "military" companies of boys had met for conflict, according to previous appointment.
Tom was General of one of these armies, Joe Harper (a bosom friend) General of the other.
These two great commanders did not condescend to fight in person--that being better suited to the still smaller fry--but sat together on an eminence and conducted the field operations by orders delivered through aides-de-camp.
Tom's army won a great victory, after a long and hard-fought battle.
Then the dead were counted, prisoners exchanged, the terms of the next disagreement agreed upon, and the day for the necessary battle appointed; after which the armies fell into line and marched away, and Tom turned homeward alone.
As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher lived, he saw a new girl in the garden--a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yellow hair plaited into two long-tails, white summer frock and embroidered pan-talettes.
The fresh-crowned hero fell without firing a shot.
A certain Amy Lawrence vanished out of his heart and left not even a memory of herself behind.
He had thought he loved her to distraction; he had regarded his passion as adoration; and behold it was only a poor little evanescent partiality.
He had been months winning her; she had confessed hardly a week ago; he had been the happiest and the proudest boy in the world only seven short days, and here in one instant of time she had gone out of his heart like a casual stranger whose visit is done.
He worshipped this new angel with furtive eye, till he saw that she had discovered him; then he pretended he did not know she was present, and began to "show off" in all sorts of absurd boyish ways, in order to win her admiration.
He kept up this grotesque foolishness for some time; but by-and-by, while he was in the midst of some dangerous gymnastic performances, he glanced aside and saw that the little girl was wending her way toward the house.
Tom came up to the fence and leaned on it, grieving, and hoping she would tarry yet awhile longer.
She halted a moment on the steps and then moved toward the door.
Tom heaved a great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold.
But his face lit up, right away, for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment before she disappeared.
The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and then shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down street as if he had discovered something of interest going on in that direction.
Presently he picked up a straw and began trying to balance it on his nose, with his head tilted far back; and as he moved from side to side, in his efforts, he edged nearer and nearer toward the pansy; finally his bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes
But only for a minute--only while he could button the flower inside his jacket, next his heart--or next his stomach, possibly, for he was not much posted in anatomy, and not hypercritical, anyway.
He returned, now, and hung about the fence till nightfall, "showing off," as before; but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom comforted himself a little with the hope that she had been near some window, meantime, and been aware of his
Finally he strode home reluctantly, with his poor head full of visions.
All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered "what had got into the child".
He took a good scolding about clodding Sid, and did not seem to mind it in the least.
He tried to steal sugar under his aunt's very nose, and got his knuckles rapped for it.
He said: "Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it".
"Well, Sid don't torment a body the way you do.
You'd be always into that sugar if I warn't watching you".
Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in his immunity, reached for the sugar-bowl--a sort of glorying over Tom which was wellnigh unbearable.
But Sid's fingers slipped and the bowl dropped and broke.
Tom was in ecstasies.
In such ecstasies that he even controlled his tongue and was silent.
He said to himself that he would not speak a word, even when his aunt came in, but would sit perfectly still till she asked who did the mischief; and then he would tell, and there would be nothing so good in the world as to see that pet model "catch it".
He was so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold himself when the old lady came back and stood above the wreck discharging lightnings of wrath from over her spectacles.
He said to himself, "Now it's coming"!
And the next instant he was sprawling on the floor!
The potent palm was uplifted to strike again when Tom cried out: "Hold on, now, what 'er you belting _me_ for?
--Sid broke it"!
Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked for healing pity.
But when she got her tongue again, she only said: "Umf!
Well, you didn't get a lick amiss, I reckon.
You been into some other audacious mischief when I wasn't around, like enough".
Then her conscience reproached her, and she yearned to say something kind and loving; but she judged that this would be construed into a confession that she had been in the wrong, and discipline forbade that.
So she kept silence, and went about her affairs with a troubled heart.
Tom sulked in a corner and exalted his woes.
He knew that in her heart his aunt was on her knees to him, and he was morosely gratified by the consciousness of it.
He would hang out no signals, he would take notice of none.
He knew that a yearning glance fell upon him, now and then, through a film of tears, but he refused recognition of it.
He pictured himself lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him beseeching one little forgiving word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and die with that word unsaid.
Ah, how would she feel then?
And he pictured himself brought home from the river, dead, with his curls all wet, and his sore heart at rest.
How she would throw herself upon him, and how her tears would fall like rain, and her lips pray God to give her back her boy and she would never, never abuse him any more!
But he would lie there cold and white and make no sign--a poor little sufferer, whose griefs were at an end.
He so worked upon his feelings with the pathos of these dreams, that he had to keep swallowing, he was so like to choke; and his eyes swam in a blur of water, which overflowed when he winked, and ran down and trickled from the end of his nose.
And such a luxury to him was this petting of his sorrows, that he could not bear to have any worldly cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon it; it was too sacred for such contact; and so, presently, when his cousin Mary danced in, all alive with
He wandered far from the accustomed haunts of boys, and sought desolate places that were in harmony with his spirit.
A log raft in the river invited him, and he seated himself on its outer edge and contemplated the dreary vastness of the stream, wishing, the while, that he could only be drowned, all at once and unconsciously, without undergoing the uncomfortable routine
Then he thought of his flower.
He got it out, rumpled and wilted, and it mightily increased his dismal felicity.
He wondered if she would pity him if she knew?
Would she cry, and wish that she had a right to put her arms around his neck and comfort him?
Or would she turn coldly away like all the hollow world?
This picture brought such an agony of pleasurable suffering that he worked it over and over again in his mind and set it up in new and varied lights, till he wore it threadbare.
At last he rose up sighing and departed in the darkness.
About half-past nine or ten o'clock he came along the deserted street to where the Adored Unknown lived; he paused a moment; no sound fell upon his listening ear; a candle was casting a dull glow upon the curtain of a second-story window.
Was the sacred presence there?
He climbed the fence, threaded his stealthy way through the plants, till he stood under that window; he looked up at it long, and with emotion; then he laid him down on the ground under it, disposing himself upon his back, with his hands clasped upon his
And thus he would die--out in the cold world, with no shelter over his homeless head, no friendly hand to wipe the death-damps from his brow, no loving face to bend pityingly over him when the great agony came.
And thus _she_ would see him when she looked out upon the glad morning, and oh!
would she drop one little tear upon his poor, lifeless form, would she heave one little sigh to see a bright young life so rudely blighted, so untimely cut down?
The window went up, a maid-servant's discordant voice profaned the holy calm, and a deluge of water drenched the prone martyr's remains!
The strangling hero sprang up with a relieving snort.
There was a whiz as of a missile in the air, mingled with the murmur of a curse, a sound as of shivering glass followed, and a small, vague form went over the fence and shot away in the gloom.
Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was surveying his drenched garments by the light of a tallow dip, Sid woke up; but if he had any dim idea of making any "references to allusions," he thought better of it and held his peace, for there was
Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and Sid made mental note of the omission.
CHAPTER IV THE sun rose upon a tranquil world, and beamed down upon the peaceful village like a benediction.
Breakfast over, Aunt Polly had family worship: it began with a prayer built from the ground up of solid courses of Scriptural quotations, welded together with a thin mortar of originality; and from the summit of this she delivered a grim chapter of the
Then Tom girded up his loins, so to speak, and went to work to "get his verses".
Sid had learned his lesson days before.
Tom bent all his energies to the memorizing of five verses, and he chose part of the Sermon on the Mount, because he could find no verses that were shorter.
At the end of half an hour Tom had a vague general idea of his lesson, but no more, for his mind was traversing the whole field of human thought, and his hands were busy with distracting recreations.
Mary took his book to hear him recite, and he tried to find his way through the fog: "Blessed are the--a--a--" "Poor"-- "Yes--poor; blessed are the poor--a--a--" "In spirit--" "In spirit; blessed are the poor in spirit, for they--they--" "_Theirs_--" "For
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they--they--" "Sh--" "For they--a--" "S, H, A--" "For they S, H--Oh, I don't know what it is"!
"_Shall_"!
"Oh, _shall_!
for they shall--for they shall--a--a--shall mourn--a--a--blessed are they that shall--they that--a--they that shall mourn, for they shall--a--shall _what_?
Why don't you tell me, Mary?
--what do you want to be so mean for"?
"Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed thing, I'm not teasing you.
I wouldn't do that.
You must go and learn it again.
Don't you be discouraged, Tom, you'll manage it--and if you do, I'll give you something ever so nice.
There, now, that's a good boy".
"All right!
What is it, Mary, tell me what it is".
"Never you mind, Tom.
You know if I say it's nice, it is nice".
"You bet you that's so, Mary.
All right, I'll tackle it again".
And he did "tackle it again"--and under the double pressure of curiosity and prospective gain he did it with such spirit that he accomplished a shining success.
Mary gave him a brand-new "Barlow" knife worth twelve and a half cents; and the convulsion of delight that swept his system shook him to his foundations.
True, the knife would not cut anything, but it was a "sure-enough" Barlow, and there was inconceivable grandeur in that--though where the Western boys ever got the idea that such a weapon could possibly be counterfeited to its injury is an imposing mystery
Tom contrived to scarify the cupboard with it, and was arranging to begin on the bureau, when he was called off to dress for Sunday-school.
Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of soap, and he went outside the door and set the basin on a little bench there; then he dipped the soap in the water and laid it down; turned up his sleeves; poured out the water on the ground, gently, and
But Mary removed the towel and said: "Now ain't you ashamed, Tom.
You mustn't be so bad.
Water won't hurt you".
Tom was a trifle disconcerted.
The basin was refilled, and this time he stood over it a little while, gathering resolution; took in a big breath and began.
When he entered the kitchen presently, with both eyes shut and groping for the towel with his hands, an honorable testimony of suds and water was dripping from his face.
But when he emerged from the towel, he was not yet satisfactory, for the clean territory stopped short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask; below and beyond this line there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that spread downward in front and backward
Mary took him in hand, and when she was done with him he was a man and a brother, without distinction of color, and his saturated hair was neatly brushed, and its short curls wrought into a dainty and symmetrical general effect.
[He privately smoothed out the curls, with labor and difficulty, and plastered his hair close down to his head; for he held curls to be effeminate, and his own filled his life with bitterness.
] Then Mary got out a suit of his clothing that had been used only on Sundays during two years--they were simply called his "other clothes"--and so by that we know the size of his wardrobe.
The girl "put him to rights" after he had dressed himself; she buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin, turned his vast shirt collar down over his shoulders, brushed him off and crowned him with his speckled straw hat.
He now looked exceedingly improved and uncomfortable.
He was fully as uncomfortable as he looked; for there was a restraint about whole clothes and cleanliness that galled him.
He hoped that Mary would forget his shoes, but the hope was blighted; she coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the custom, and brought them out.
He lost his temper and said he was always being made to do everything he didn't want to do.
But Mary said, persuasively: "Please, Tom--that's a good boy".
So he got into the shoes snarling.
Mary was soon ready, and the three children set out for Sunday-school--a place that Tom hated with his whole heart; but Sid and Mary were fond of it.
Sabbath-school hours were from nine to half-past ten; and then church service.
Two of the children always remained for the sermon voluntarily, and the other always remained too--for stronger reasons.
The church's high-backed, uncushioned pews would seat about three hundred persons; the edifice was but a small, plain affair, with a sort of pine board tree-box on top of it for a steeple.
At the door Tom dropped back a step and accosted a Sunday-dressed comrade: "Say, Billy, got a yaller ticket"?
"Yes".
"What'll you take for her"?
"What'll you give"?
"Piece of lickrish and a fish-hook".
"Less see 'em".
Tom exhibited.
They were satisfactory, and the property changed hands.
Then Tom traded a couple of white alleys for three red tickets, and some small trifle or other for a couple of blue ones.
He waylaid other boys as they came, and went on buying tickets of various colors ten or fifteen minutes longer.
He entered the church, now, with a swarm of clean and noisy boys and girls, proceeded to his seat and started a quarrel with the first boy that came handy.
The teacher, a grave, elderly man, interfered; then turned his back a moment and Tom pulled a boy's hair in the next bench, and was absorbed in his book when the boy turned around; stuck a pin in another boy, presently, in order to hear him say "Ouch"!
and got a new reprimand from his teacher.
Tom's whole class were of a pattern--restless, noisy, and troublesome.
When they came to recite their lessons, not one of them knew his verses perfectly, but had to be prompted all along.
However, they worried through, and each got his reward--in small blue tickets, each with a passage of Scripture on it; each blue ticket was pay for two verses of the recitation.
Ten blue tickets equalled a red one, and could be exchanged for it; ten red tickets equalled a yellow one; for ten yellow tickets the superintendent gave a very plainly bound Bible (worth forty cents in those easy times) to the pupil.
How many of my readers would have the industry and application to memorize two thousand verses, even for a Dore Bible?
And yet Mary had acquired two Bibles in this way--it was the patient work of two years--and a boy of German parentage had won four or five.
He once recited three thousand verses without stopping; but the strain upon his mental faculties was too great, and he was little better than an idiot from that day forth--a grievous misfortune for the school, for on great occasions, before company, the
Only the older pupils managed to keep their tickets and stick to their tedious work long enough to get a Bible, and so the delivery of one of these prizes was a rare and noteworthy circumstance; the successful pupil was so great and conspicuous for that
It is possible that Tom's mental stomach had never really hungered for one of those prizes, but unquestionably his entire being had for many a day longed for the glory and the eclat that came with it.
In due course the superintendent stood up in front of the pulpit, with a closed hymn-book in his hand and his forefinger inserted between its leaves, and commanded attention.
When a Sunday-school superintendent makes his customary little speech, a hymn-book in the hand is as necessary as is the inevitable sheet of music in the hand of a singer who stands forward on the platform and sings a solo at a concert--though why, is a
This superintendent was a slim creature of thirty-five, with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair; he wore a stiff standing-collar whose upper edge almost reached his ears and whose sharp points curved forward abreast the corners of his mouth--a fence that
Mr. Walters was very earnest of mien, and very sincere and honest at heart; and he held sacred things and places in such reverence, and so separated them from worldly matters, that unconsciously to himself his Sunday-school voice had acquired a peculiar
He began after this fashion: "Now, children, I want you all to sit up just as straight and pretty as you can and give me all your attention for a minute or two.
There--that is it.
That is the way good little boys and girls should do.
I see one little girl who is looking out of the window--I am afraid she thinks I am out there somewhere--perhaps up in one of the trees making a speech to the little birds.
[Applausive titter.
] I want to tell you how good it makes me feel to see so many bright, clean little faces assembled in a place like this, learning to do right and be good".
And so forth and so on.
It is not necessary to set down the rest of the oration.
It was of a pattern which does not vary, and so it is familiar to us all.
The latter third of the speech was marred by the resumption of fights and other recreations among certain of the bad boys, and by fidgetings and whisperings that extended far and wide, washing even to the bases of isolated and incorruptible rocks like Sid
But now every sound ceased suddenly, with the subsidence of Mr. Walters' voice, and the conclusion of the speech was received with a burst of silent gratitude.
A good part of the whispering had been occasioned by an event which was more or less rare--the entrance of visitors: lawyer Thatcher, accompanied by a very feeble and aged man; a fine, portly, middle-aged gentleman with iron-gray hair; and a dignified lady
The lady was leading a child.
Tom had been restless and full of chafings and repinings; conscience-smitten, too--he could not meet Amy Lawrence's eye, he could not brook her loving gaze.
But when he saw this small newcomer his soul was all ablaze with bliss in a moment.
The next moment he was "showing off" with all his might--cuffing boys, pulling hair, making faces--in a word, using every art that seemed likely to fascinate a girl and win her applause.
His exaltation had but one alloy--the memory of his humiliation in this angel's garden--and that record in sand was fast washing out, under the waves of happiness that were sweeping over it now.
The visitors were given the highest seat of honor, and as soon as Mr. Walters' speech was finished, he introduced them to the school.
The middle-aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage--no less a one than the county judge--altogether the most august creation these children had ever looked upon--and they wondered what kind of material he was made of--and they half wanted to hear
He was from Constantinople, twelve miles away--so he had travelled, and seen the world--these very eyes had looked upon the county court-house--which was said to have a tin roof.
The awe which these reflections inspired was attested by the impressive silence and the ranks of staring eyes.
This was the great Judge Thatcher, brother of their own lawyer.
Jeff Thatcher immediately went forward, to be familiar with the great man and be envied by the school.
It would have been music to his soul to hear the whisperings: "Look at him, Jim!
He's a going up there.
Say--look!
he's a going to shake hands with him--he _is_ shaking hands with him!
By jings, don't you wish you was Jeff"?
Mr. Walters fell to "showing off," with all sorts of official bustlings and activities, giving orders, delivering judgments, discharging directions here, there, everywhere that he could find a target.
The librarian "showed off"--running hither and thither with his arms full of books and making a deal of the splutter and fuss that insect authority delights in.
The young lady teachers "showed off"--bending sweetly over pupils that were lately being boxed, lifting pretty warning fingers at bad little boys and patting good ones lovingly.
The young gentlemen teachers "showed off" with small scoldings and other little displays of authority and fine attention to discipline--and most of the teachers, of both sexes, found business up at the library, by the pulpit; and it was business that
The little girls "showed off" in various ways, and the little boys "showed off" with such diligence that the air was thick with paper wads and the murmur of scufflings.
And above it all the great man sat and beamed a majestic judicial smile upon all the house, and warmed himself in the sun of his own grandeur--for he was "showing off," too.
There was only one thing wanting to make Mr. Walters' ecstasy complete, and that was a chance to deliver a Bible-prize and exhibit a prodigy.
Several pupils had a few yellow tickets, but none had enough--he had been around among the star pupils inquiring.
He would have given worlds, now, to have that German lad back again with a sound mind.
And now at this moment, when hope was dead, Tom Sawyer came forward with nine yellow tickets, nine red tickets, and ten blue ones, and demanded a Bible.
This was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky.
Walters was not expecting an application from this source for the next ten years.
But there was no getting around it--here were the certified checks, and they were good for their face.
Tom was therefore elevated to a place with the Judge and the other elect, and the great news was announced from headquarters.
It was the most stunning surprise of the decade, and so profound was the sensation that it lifted the new hero up to the judicial one's altitude, and the school had two marvels to gaze upon in place of one.
The boys were all eaten up with envy--but those that suffered the bitterest pangs were those who perceived too late that they themselves had contributed to this hated splendor by trading tickets to Tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling whitewashing
These despised themselves, as being the dupes of a wily fraud, a guileful snake in the grass.
The prize was delivered to Tom with as much effusion as the superintendent could pump up under the circumstances; but it lacked somewhat of the true gush, for the poor fellow's instinct taught him that there was a mystery here that could not well bear the
Amy Lawrence was proud and glad, and she tried to make Tom see it in her face--but he wouldn't look.
She wondered; then she was just a grain troubled; next a dim suspicion came and went--came again; she watched; a furtive glance told her worlds--and then her heart broke, and she was jealous, and angry, and the tears came and she hated everybody.
Tom most of all (she thought).
Tom was introduced to the Judge; but his tongue was tied, his breath would hardly come, his heart quaked--partly because of the awful greatness of the man, but mainly because he was her parent.
He would have liked to fall down and worship him, if it were in the dark.
The Judge put his hand on Tom's head and called him a fine little man, and asked him what his name was.
The boy stammered, gasped, and got it out: "Tom".
"Oh, no, not Tom--it is--" "Thomas".
"Ah, that's it.
I thought there was more to it, maybe.
That's very well.
But you've another one I daresay, and you'll tell it to me, won't you"?
"Tell the gentleman your other name, Thomas," said Walters, "and say sir.
You mustn't forget your manners".
"Thomas Sawyer--sir".
"That's it!
That's a good boy.
Fine boy.
Fine, manly little fellow.
Two thousand verses is a great many--very, very great many.
And you never can be sorry for the trouble you took to learn them; for knowledge is worth more than anything there is in the world; it's what makes great men and good men; you'll be a great man and a good man yourself, some day, Thomas, and then you'll
That is what you will say, Thomas--and you wouldn't take any money for those two thousand verses--no indeed you wouldn't.
And now you wouldn't mind telling me and this lady some of the things you've learned--no, I know you wouldn't--for we are proud of little boys that learn.
Now, no doubt you know the names of all the twelve disciples.
Won't you tell us the names of the first two that were appointed"?
Tom was tugging at a button-hole and looking sheepish.
He blushed, now, and his eyes fell.
Mr. Walters' heart sank within him.
He said to himself, it is not possible that the boy can answer the simplest question--why _did_ the Judge ask him?
Yet he felt obliged to speak up and say: "Answer the gentleman, Thomas--don't be afraid".
Tom still hung fire.
"Now I know you'll tell me," said the lady.
"The names of the first two disciples were--" "_David And Goliah!
_" Let us draw the curtain of charity over the rest of the scene.
CHAPTER V ABOUT half-past ten the cracked bell of the small church began to ring, and presently the people began to gather for the morning sermon.
The Sunday-school children distributed themselves about the house and occupied pews with their parents, so as to be under supervision.
Aunt Polly came, and Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her--Tom being placed next the aisle, in order that he might be as far away from the open window and the seductive outside summer scenes as possible.
The crowd filed up the aisles: the aged and needy postmaster, who had seen better days; the mayor and his wife--for they had a mayor there, among other unnecessaries; the justice of the peace; the widow Douglass, fair, smart, and forty, a generous,
He always brought his mother to church, and was the pride of all the matrons.
The boys all hated him, he was so good.
And besides, he had been "thrown up to them" so much.
His white handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket behind, as usual on Sundays--accidentally.
Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked upon boys who had as snobs.
The congregation being fully assembled, now, the bell rang once more, to warn laggards and stragglers, and then a solemn hush fell upon the church which was only broken by the tittering and whispering of the choir in the gallery.
The choir always tittered and whispered all through service.
There was once a church choir that was not ill-bred, but I have forgotten where it was, now.
It was a great many years ago, and I can scarcely remember anything about it, but I think it was in some foreign country.
The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through with a relish, in a peculiar style which was much admired in that part of the country.
His voice began on a medium key and climbed steadily up till it reached a certain point, where it bore with strong emphasis upon the topmost word and then plunged down as if from a spring-board: Shall I be car-ri-ed toe the skies, on flow'ry _beds_ of
He was regarded as a wonderful reader.
At church "sociables" he was always called upon to read poetry; and when he was through, the ladies would lift up their hands and let them fall helplessly in their laps, and "wall" their eyes, and shake their heads, as much as to say, "Words cannot express
After the hymn had been sung, the Rev.
Mr. Sprague turned himself into a bulletin-board, and read off "notices" of meetings and societies and things till it seemed that the list would stretch out to the crack of doom--a queer custom which is still kept up in America, even in cities, away here
Often, the less there is to justify a traditional custom, the harder it is to get rid of it.
And now the minister prayed.
A good, generous prayer it was, and went into details: it pleaded for the church, and the little children of the church; for the other churches of the village; for the village itself; for the county; for the State; for the State officers; for the United
Amen.
There was a rustling of dresses, and the standing congregation sat down.
The boy whose history this book relates did not enjoy the prayer, he only endured it--if he even did that much.
He was restive all through it; he kept tally of the details of the prayer, unconsciously--for he was not listening, but he knew the ground of old, and the clergyman's regular route over it--and when a little trifle of new matter was interlarded, his ear
In the midst of the prayer a fly had lit on the back of the pew in front of him and tortured his spirit by calmly rubbing its hands together, embracing its head with its arms, and polishing it so vigorously that it seemed to almost part company with the
As indeed it was; for as sorely as Tom's hands itched to grab for it they did not dare--he believed his soul would be instantly destroyed if he did such a thing while the prayer was going on.
But with the closing sentence his hand began to curve and steal forward; and the instant the "Amen" was out the fly was a prisoner of war.
His aunt detected the act and made him let it go.
The minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through an argument that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod--and yet it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and brimstone and thinned the predestined elect down to a
Tom counted the pages of the sermon; after church he always knew how many pages there had been, but he seldom knew anything else about the discourse.
However, this time he was really interested for a little while.
The minister made a grand and moving picture of the assembling together of the world's hosts at the millennium when the lion and the lamb should lie down together and a little child should lead them.
But the pathos, the lesson, the moral of the great spectacle were lost upon the boy; he only thought of the conspicuousness of the principal character before the on-looking nations; his face lit with the thought, and he said to himself that he wished he
Now he lapsed into suffering again, as the dry argument was resumed.
Presently he bethought him of a treasure he had and got it out.
It was a large black beetle with formidable jaws--a "pinchbug," he called it.
It was in a percussion-cap box.
The first thing the beetle did was to take him by the finger.
A natural fillip followed, the beetle went floundering into the aisle and lit on its back, and the hurt finger went into the boy's mouth.
The beetle lay there working its helpless legs, unable to turn over.
Tom eyed it, and longed for it; but it was safe out of his reach.
Other people uninterested in the sermon found relief in the beetle, and they eyed it too.
Presently a vagrant poodle dog came idling along, sad at heart, lazy with the summer softness and the quiet, weary of captivity, sighing for change.
He spied the beetle; the drooping tail lifted and wagged.
He surveyed the prize; walked around it; smelt at it from a safe distance; walked around it again; grew bolder, and took a closer smell; then lifted his lip and made a gingerly snatch at it, just missing it; made another, and another; began to enjoy the
His head nodded, and little by little his chin descended and touched the enemy, who seized it.
There was a sharp yelp, a flirt of the poodle's head, and the beetle fell a couple of yards away, and lit on its back once more.
The neighboring spectators shook with a gentle inward joy, several faces went behind fans and hand-kerchiefs, and Tom was entirely happy.
The dog looked foolish, and probably felt so; but there was resentment in his heart, too, and a craving for revenge.
So he went to the beetle and began a wary attack on it again; jumping at it from every point of a circle, lighting with his fore-paws within an inch of the creature, making even closer snatches at it with his teeth, and jerking his head till his ears
But he grew tired once more, after a while; tried to amuse himself with a fly but found no relief; followed an ant around, with his nose close to the floor, and quickly wearied of that; yawned, sighed, forgot the beetle entirely, and sat down on it.
Then there was a wild yelp of agony and the poodle went sailing up the aisle; the yelps continued, and so did the dog; he crossed the house in front of the altar; he flew down the other aisle; he crossed before the doors; he clamored up the home-stretch;
At last the frantic sufferer sheered from its course, and sprang into its master's lap; he flung it out of the window, and the voice of distress quickly thinned away and died in the distance.
By this time the whole church was red-faced and suffocating with suppressed laughter, and the sermon had come to a dead standstill.
The discourse was resumed presently, but it went lame and halting, all possibility of impressiveness being at an end; for even the gravest sentiments were constantly being received with a smothered burst of unholy mirth, under cover of some remote
It was a genuine relief to the whole congregation when the ordeal was over and the benediction pronounced.
Tom Sawyer went home quite cheerful, thinking to himself that there was some satisfaction about divine service when there was a bit of variety in it.
He had but one marring thought; he was willing that the dog should play with his pinchbug, but he did not think it was upright in him to carry it off.
CHAPTER VI MONDAY morning found Tom Sawyer miserable.
Monday morning always found him so--because it began another week's slow suffering in school.
He generally began that day with wishing he had had no intervening holiday, it made the going into captivity and fetters again so much more odious.
Tom lay thinking.
Presently it occurred to him that he wished he was sick; then he could stay home from school.
Here was a vague possibility.
He canvassed his system.
No ailment was found, and he investigated again.
This time he thought he could detect colicky symptoms, and he began to encourage them with considerable hope.
But they soon grew feeble, and presently died wholly away.
He reflected further.
Suddenly he discovered something.
One of his upper front teeth was loose.
This was lucky; he was about to begin to groan, as a "starter," as he called it, when it occurred to him that if he came into court with that argument, his aunt would pull it out, and that would hurt.
So he thought he would hold the tooth in reserve for the present, and seek further.
Nothing offered for some little time, and then he remembered hearing the doctor tell about a certain thing that laid up a patient for two or three weeks and threatened to make him lose a finger.
So the boy eagerly drew his sore toe from under the sheet and held it up for inspection.
But now he did not know the necessary symptoms.
However, it seemed well worth while to chance it, so he fell to groaning with considerable spirit.
But Sid slept on unconscious.
Tom groaned louder, and fancied that he began to feel pain in the toe.
No result from Sid.
Tom was panting with his exertions by this time.
He took a rest and then swelled himself up and fetched a succession of admirable groans.
Sid snored on.
Tom was aggravated.
He said, "Sid, Sid"!
and shook him.
This course worked well, and Tom began to groan again.
Sid yawned, stretched, then brought himself up on his elbow with a snort, and began to stare at Tom.
Tom went on groaning.
Sid said: "Tom!
Say, Tom"!
[No response.
] "Here, Tom!
TOM!
What is the matter, Tom"?
And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously.
Tom moaned out: "Oh, don't, Sid.
Don't joggle me".
"Why, what's the matter, Tom?
I must call auntie".
"No--never mind.
It'll be over by and by, maybe.
Don't call anybody".
"But I must!
_Don't_ groan so, Tom, it's awful.
How long you been this way"?
"Hours.
Ouch!
Oh, don't stir so, Sid, you'll kill me".
"Tom, why didn't you wake me sooner?
Oh, Tom, _don't!
_ It makes my flesh crawl to hear you.
Tom, what is the matter"?
"I forgive you everything, Sid.
[Groan.
] Everything you've ever done to me.
When I'm gone--" "Oh, Tom, you ain't dying, are you?
Don't, Tom--oh, don't.
Maybe--" "I forgive everybody, Sid.
[Groan.
] Tell 'em so, Sid.
And Sid, you give my window-sash and my cat with one eye to that new girl that's come to town, and tell her--" But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone.
Tom was suffering in reality, now, so handsomely was his imagination working, and so his groans had gathered quite a genuine tone.
Sid flew downstairs and said: "Oh, Aunt Polly, come!
Tom's dying"!
"Dying"!
"Yes'm.
Don't wait--come quick"!
"Rubbage!
I don't believe it"!
But she fled upstairs, nevertheless, with Sid and Mary at her heels.
And her face grew white, too, and her lip trembled.
When she reached the bedside she gasped out: "You, Tom!
Tom, what's the matter with you"?
"Oh, auntie, I'm--" "What's the matter with you--what is the matter with you, child"?
"Oh, auntie, my sore toe's mortified"!
The old lady sank down into a chair and laughed a little, then cried a little, then did both together.
This restored her and she said: "Tom, what a turn you did give me.
Now you shut up that nonsense and climb out of this".
The groans ceased and the pain vanished from the toe.
The boy felt a little foolish, and he said: "Aunt Polly, it _seemed_ mortified, and it hurt so I never minded my tooth at all".
"Your tooth, indeed!
What's the matter with your tooth"?
"One of them's loose, and it aches perfectly awful".
"There, there, now, don't begin that groaning again.
Open your mouth.
Well--your tooth _is_ loose, but you're not going to die about that.
Mary, get me a silk thread, and a chunk of fire out of the kitchen".
Tom said: "Oh, please, auntie, don't pull it out.
It don't hurt any more.
I wish I may never stir if it does.
Please don't, auntie.
I don't want to stay home from school".
"Oh, you don't, don't you?
So all this row was because you thought you'd get to stay home from school and go a-fishing?
Tom, Tom, I love you so, and you seem to try every way you can to break my old heart with your outrageousness".
By this time the dental instruments were ready.
The old lady made one end of the silk thread fast to Tom's tooth with a loop and tied the other to the bedpost.
Then she seized the chunk of fire and suddenly thrust it almost into the boy's face.
The tooth hung dangling by the bedpost, now.
But all trials bring their compensations.
As Tom wended to school after breakfast, he was the envy of every boy he met because the gap in his upper row of teeth enabled him to expectorate in a new and admirable way.
He gathered quite a following of lads interested in the exhibition; and one that had cut his finger and had been a centre of fascination and homage up to this time, now found himself suddenly without an adherent, and shorn of his glory.
His heart was heavy, and he said with a disdain which he did not feel that it wasn't anything to spit like Tom Sawyer; but another boy said, "Sour grapes"!
and he wandered away a dismantled hero.
Shortly Tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the village, Huckleberry Finn, son of the town drunkard.
Huckleberry was cordially hated and dreaded by all the mothers of the town, because he was idle and lawless and vulgar and bad--and because all their children admired him so, and delighted in his forbidden society, and wished they dared to be like him.
Tom was like the rest of the respectable boys, in that he envied Huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition, and was under strict orders not to play with him.
So he played with him every time he got a chance.
Huckleberry was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown men, and they were in perennial bloom and fluttering with rags.
His hat was a vast ruin with a wide crescent lopped out of its brim; his coat, when he wore one, hung nearly to his heels and had the rearward buttons far down the back; but one suspender supported his trousers; the seat of the trousers bagged low and
Huckleberry came and went, at his own free will.
He slept on doorsteps in fine weather and in empty hogsheads in wet; he did not have to go to school or to church, or call any being master or obey anybody; he could go fishing or swimming when and where he chose, and stay as long as it suited him; nobody
In a word, everything that goes to make life precious that boy had.
So thought every harassed, hampered, respectable boy in St. Petersburg.
Tom hailed the romantic outcast: "Hello, Huckleberry"!
"Hello yourself, and see how you like it".
"What's that you got"?
"Dead cat".
"Lemme see him, Huck.
My, he's pretty stiff.
Where'd you get him"?
"Bought him off'n a boy".
"What did you give"?
"I give a blue ticket and a bladder that I got at the slaughter-house".
"Where'd you get the blue ticket"?
"Bought it off'n Ben Rogers two weeks ago for a hoop-stick".
"Say--what is dead cats good for, Huck"?
"Good for?
Cure warts with".
"No!
Is that so?
I know something that's better".
"I bet you don't.
What is it"?
"Why, spunk-water".
"Spunk-water!
I wouldn't give a dern for spunk-water".
"You wouldn't, wouldn't you?
D'you ever try it"?
"No, I hain't.
But Bob Tanner did".
"Who told you so"!
"Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny Baker, and Johnny told Jim Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and the nigger told me.
There now"!
"Well, what of it?
They'll all lie.
Leastways all but the nigger.
I don't know _him_.
But I never see a nigger that _wouldn't_ lie.
Shucks!
Now you tell me how Bob Tanner done it, Huck".
"Why, he took and dipped his hand in a rotten stump where the rain-water was".
"In the daytime"?
"Certainly".
"With his face to the stump"?
"Yes.
Least I reckon so".
"Did he say anything"?
"I don't reckon he did.
I don't know".
"Aha!
Talk about trying to cure warts with spunk-water such a blame fool way as that!
Why, that ain't a-going to do any good.
You got to go all by yourself, to the middle of the woods, where you know there's a spunk-water stump, and just as it's midnight you back up against the stump and jam your hand in and say: 'Barley-corn, barley-corn, injun-meal shorts, Spunk-water,
Because if you speak the charm's busted".
"Well, that sounds like a good way; but that ain't the way Bob Tanner done".
"No, sir, you can bet he didn't, becuz he's the wartiest boy in this town; and he wouldn't have a wart on him if he'd knowed how to work spunk-water.
I've took off thousands of warts off of my hands that way, Huck.
I play with frogs so much that I've always got considerable many warts.
Sometimes I take 'em off with a bean".
"Yes, bean's good.
I've done that".
"Have you?
What's your way"?
"You take and split the bean, and cut the wart so as to get some blood, and then you put the blood on one piece of the bean and take and dig a hole and bury it 'bout midnight at the crossroads in the dark of the moon, and then you burn up the rest of the
You see that piece that's got the blood on it will keep drawing and drawing, trying to fetch the other piece to it, and so that helps the blood to draw the wart, and pretty soon off she comes".
"Yes, that's it, Huck--that's it; though when you're burying it if you say 'Down bean; off wart; come no more to bother me!
' it's better.
That's the way Joe Harper does, and he's been nearly to Coonville and most everywheres.
But say--how do you cure 'em with dead cats"?
"Why, you take your cat and go and get in the grave-yard 'long about midnight when somebody that was wicked has been buried; and when it's midnight a devil will come, or maybe two or three, but you can't see 'em, you can only hear something like the wind,
' That'll fetch _any_ wart".
"Sounds right.
D'you ever try it, Huck"?
"No, but old Mother Hopkins told me".
"Well, I reckon it's so, then.
Becuz they say she's a witch".
"Say!
Why, Tom, I _know_ she is.
She witched pap.
Pap says so his own self.
He come along one day, and he see she was a-witching him, so he took up a rock, and if she hadn't dodged, he'd a got her.
Well, that very night he rolled off'n a shed wher' he was a layin drunk, and broke his arm".
"Why, that's awful.
How did he know she was a-witching him"?
"Lord, pap can tell, easy.
Pap says when they keep looking at you right stiddy, they're a-witching you.
Specially if they mumble.
Becuz when they mumble they're saying the Lord's Prayer backards".
"Say, Hucky, when you going to try the cat"?
"To-night.
I reckon they'll come after old Hoss Williams to-night".
"But they buried him Saturday.
Didn't they get him Saturday night"?
"Why, how you talk!
How could their charms work till midnight?
--and _then_ it's Sunday.
Devils don't slosh around much of a Sunday, I don't reckon".
"I never thought of that.
That's so.
Lemme go with you"?
"Of course--if you ain't afeard".
"Afeard!
'Tain't likely.
Will you meow"?
"Yes--and you meow back, if you get a chance.
Last time, you kep' me a-meowing around till old Hays went to throwing rocks at me and says 'Dern that cat!
' and so I hove a brick through his window--but don't you tell".
"I won't.
I couldn't meow that night, becuz auntie was watching me, but I'll meow this time.
Say--what's that"?
"Nothing but a tick".
"Where'd you get him"?
"Out in the woods".
"What'll you take for him"?
"I don't know.
I don't want to sell him".
"All right.
It's a mighty small tick, anyway".
"Oh, anybody can run a tick down that don't belong to them.
I'm satisfied with it.
It's a good enough tick for me".
"Sho, there's ticks a plenty.
I could have a thousand of 'em if I wanted to".
"Well, why don't you?
Becuz you know mighty well you can't.
This is a pretty early tick, I reckon.
It's the first one I've seen this year".
"Say, Huck--I'll give you my tooth for him".
"Less see it".
Tom got out a bit of paper and carefully unrolled it.
Huckleberry viewed it wistfully.
The temptation was very strong.
At last he said: "Is it genuwyne"?
Tom lifted his lip and showed the vacancy.
"Well, all right," said Huckleberry, "it's a trade".
Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box that had lately been the pinchbug's prison, and the boys separated, each feeling wealthier than before.
When Tom reached the little isolated frame school-house, he strode in briskly, with the manner of one who had come with all honest speed.
He hung his hat on a peg and flung himself into his seat with business-like alacrity.
The master, throned on high in his great splint-bottom arm-chair, was dozing, lulled by the drowsy hum of study.
The interruption roused him.
"Thomas Sawyer"!
Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full, it meant trouble.
"Sir"!
"Come up here.
Now, sir, why are you late again, as usual"?
Tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he saw two long tails of yellow hair hanging down a back that he recognized by the electric sympathy of love; and by that form was _the only vacant place_ on the girls' side of the school-house.
He instantly said: "_I stopped to talk with Huckleberry Finn!
_" The master's pulse stood still, and he stared helplessly.
The buzz of study ceased.
The pupils wondered if this foolhardy boy had lost his mind.
The master said: "You--you did what"?
"Stopped to talk with Huckleberry Finn".
There was no mistaking the words.
"Thomas Sawyer, this is the most astounding confession I have ever listened to.
No mere ferule will answer for this offence.
Take off your jacket".
The master's arm performed until it was tired and the stock of switches notably diminished.
Then the order followed: "Now, sir, go and sit with the girls!
And let this be a warning to you".
The titter that rippled around the room appeared to abash the boy, but in reality that result was caused rather more by his worshipful awe of his unknown idol and the dread pleasure that lay in his high good fortune.
He sat down upon the end of the pine bench and the girl hitched herself away from him with a toss of her head.
Nudges and winks and whispers traversed the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon the long, low desk before him, and seemed to study his book.
By and by attention ceased from him, and the accustomed school murmur rose upon the dull air once more.
Presently the boy began to steal furtive glances at the girl.
She observed it, "made a mouth" at him and gave him the back of her head for the space of a minute.
When she cautiously faced around again, a peach lay before her.
She thrust it away.
Tom gently put it back.
She thrust it away again, but with less animosity.
Tom patiently returned it to its place.
Then she let it remain.
Tom scrawled on his slate, "Please take it--I got more".
The girl glanced at the words, but made no sign.
Now the boy began to draw something on the slate, hiding his work with his left hand.
For a time the girl refused to notice; but her human curiosity presently began to manifest itself by hardly perceptible signs.
The boy worked on, apparently unconscious.
The girl made a sort of non-committal attempt to see, but the boy did not betray that he was aware of it.
At last she gave in and hesitatingly whispered: "Let me see it".
Tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with two gable ends to it and a corkscrew of smoke issuing from the chimney.
Then the girl's interest began to fasten itself upon the work and she forgot everything else.
When it was finished, she gazed a moment, then whispered: "It's nice--make a man".
The artist erected a man in the front yard, that resembled a derrick.
He could have stepped over the house; but the girl was not hypercritical; she was satisfied with the monster, and whispered: "It's a beautiful man--now make me coming along".
Tom drew an hour-glass with a full moon and straw limbs to it and armed the spreading fingers with a portentous fan.
The girl said: "It's ever so nice--I wish I could draw".
"It's easy," whispered Tom, "I'll learn you".
"Oh, will you?
When"?
"At noon.
Do you go home to dinner"?
"I'll stay if you will".
"Good--that's a whack.
What's your name"?
"Becky Thatcher.
What's yours?
Oh, I know.
It's Thomas Sawyer".
"That's the name they lick me by.
I'm Tom when I'm good.
You call me Tom, will you"?
"Yes".
Now Tom began to scrawl something on the slate, hiding the words from the girl.
But she was not backward this time.
She begged to see.
Tom said: "Oh, it ain't anything".
"Yes it is".
"No it ain't.
You don't want to see".
"Yes I do, indeed I do.
Please let me".
"You'll tell".
"No I won't--deed and deed and double deed won't".
"You won't tell anybody at all?
Ever, as long as you live"?
"No, I won't ever tell _any_body.
Now let me".
"Oh, _you_ don't want to see"!
"Now that you treat me so, I _will_ see".
And she put her small hand upon his and a little scuffle ensued, Tom pretending to resist in earnest but letting his hand slip by degrees till these words were revealed: "_I love you_".
"Oh, you bad thing"!
And she hit his hand a smart rap, but reddened and looked pleased, nevertheless.
Just at this juncture the boy felt a slow, fateful grip closing on his ear, and a steady lifting impulse.
In that wise he was borne across the house and deposited in his own seat, under a peppering fire of giggles from the whole school.
Then the master stood over him during a few awful moments, and finally moved away to his throne without saying a word.
But although Tom's ear tingled, his heart was jubilant.
As the school quieted down Tom made an honest effort to study, but the turmoil within him was too great.
In turn he took his place in the reading class and made a botch of it; then in the geography class and turned lakes into mountains, mountains into rivers, and rivers into continents, till chaos was come again; then in the spelling class, and got "turned
CHAPTER VII THE harder Tom tried to fasten his mind on his book, the more his ideas wandered.
So at last, with a sigh and a yawn, he gave it up.
It seemed to him that the noon recess would never come.
The air was utterly dead.
There was not a breath stirring.
It was the sleepiest of sleepy days.
The drowsing murmur of the five and twenty studying scholars soothed the soul like the spell that is in the murmur of bees.
Away off in the flaming sunshine, Cardiff Hill lifted its soft green sides through a shimmering veil of heat, tinted with the purple of distance; a few birds floated on lazy wing high in the air; no other living thing was visible but some cows, and they
Tom's heart ached to be free, or else to have something of interest to do to pass the dreary time.
His hand wandered into his pocket and his face lit up with a glow of gratitude that was prayer, though he did not know it.
Then furtively the percussion-cap box came out.
He released the tick and put him on the long flat desk.
The creature probably glowed with a gratitude that amounted to prayer, too, at this moment, but it was premature: for when he started thankfully to travel off, Tom turned him aside with a pin and made him take a new direction.
Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suffering just as Tom had been, and now he was deeply and gratefully interested in this entertainment in an instant.
This bosom friend was Joe Harper.
The two boys were sworn friends all the week, and embattled enemies on Saturdays.
Joe took a pin out of his lapel and began to assist in exercising the prisoner.
The sport grew in interest momently.
Soon Tom said that they were interfering with each other, and neither getting the fullest benefit of the tick.
So he put Joe's slate on the desk and drew a line down the middle of it from top to bottom.
"Now," said he, "as long as he is on your side you can stir him up and I'll let him alone; but if you let him get away and get on my side, you're to leave him alone as long as I can keep him from crossing over".
"All right, go ahead; start him up".
The tick escaped from Tom, presently, and crossed the equator.
Joe harassed him awhile, and then he got away and crossed back again.
This change of base occurred often.
While one boy was worrying the tick with absorbing interest, the other would look on with interest as strong, the two heads bowed together over the slate, and the two souls dead to all things else.
At last luck seemed to settle and abide with Joe.
The tick tried this, that, and the other course, and got as excited and as anxious as the boys themselves, but time and again just as he would have victory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom's fingers would be twitching to begin, Joe's pin would
At last Tom could stand it no longer.
The temptation was too strong.
So he reached out and lent a hand with his pin.
Joe was angry in a moment.
Said he: "Tom, you let him alone".
"I only just want to stir him up a little, Joe".
"No, sir, it ain't fair; you just let him alone".
"Blame it, I ain't going to stir him much".
"Let him alone, I tell you".
"I won't"!
"You shall--he's on my side of the line".
"Look here, Joe Harper, whose is that tick"?
"I don't care whose tick he is--he's on my side of the line, and you sha'n't touch him".
"Well, I'll just bet I will, though.
He's my tick and I'll do what I blame please with him, or die"!
A tremendous whack came down on Tom's shoulders, and its duplicate on Joe's; and for the space of two minutes the dust continued to fly from the two jackets and the whole school to enjoy it.
The boys had been too absorbed to notice the hush that had stolen upon the school awhile before when the master came tiptoeing down the room and stood over them.
He had contemplated a good part of the performance before he contributed his bit of variety to it.
When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky Thatcher, and whispered in her ear: "Put on your bonnet and let on you're going home; and when you get to the corner, give the rest of 'em the slip, and turn down through the lane and come back.
I'll go the other way and come it over 'em the same way".
So the one went off with one group of scholars, and the other with another.
In a little while the two met at the bottom of the lane, and when they reached the school they had it all to themselves.
Then they sat together, with a slate before them, and Tom gave Becky the pencil and held her hand in his, guiding it, and so created another surprising house.
When the interest in art began to wane, the two fell to talking.
Tom was swimming in bliss.
He said: "Do you love rats"?
"No!
I hate them"!
"Well, I do, too--_live_ ones.
But I mean dead ones, to swing round your head with a string".
"No, I don't care for rats much, anyway.
What I like is chewing-gum".
"Oh, I should say so!
I wish I had some now".
"Do you?
I've got some.
I'll let you chew it awhile, but you must give it back to me".
That was agreeable, so they chewed it turn about, and dangled their legs against the bench in excess of contentment.
"Was you ever at a circus"?
said Tom.
"Yes, and my pa's going to take me again some time, if I'm good".
"I been to the circus three or four times--lots of times.
Church ain't shucks to a circus.
There's things going on at a circus all the time.
I'm going to be a clown in a circus when I grow up".
"Oh, are you!
That will be nice.
They're so lovely, all spotted up".
"Yes, that's so.
And they get slathers of money--most a dollar a day, Ben Rogers says.
Say, Becky, was you ever engaged"?
"What's that"?
"Why, engaged to be married".
"No".
"Would you like to"?
"I reckon so.
I don't know.
What is it like"?
"Like?
Why it ain't like anything.
You only just tell a boy you won't ever have anybody but him, ever ever ever, and then you kiss and that's all.
Anybody can do it".
"Kiss?
What do you kiss for"?
"Why, that, you know, is to--well, they always do that".
"Everybody"?
"Why, yes, everybody that's in love with each other.
Do you remember what I wrote on the slate"?
"Ye--yes".
"What was it"?
"I sha'n't tell you".
"Shall I tell _you_"?
"Ye--yes--but some other time".
"No, now".
"No, not now--to-morrow".
"Oh, no, _now_.
Please, Becky--I'll whisper it, I'll whisper it ever so easy".
Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent, and passed his arm about her waist and whispered the tale ever so softly, with his mouth close to her ear.
And then he added: "Now you whisper it to me--just the same".
She resisted, for a while, and then said: "You turn your face away so you can't see, and then I will.
But you mustn't ever tell anybody--_will_ you, Tom?
Now you won't, _will_ you"?
"No, indeed, indeed I won't.
Now, Becky".
He turned his face away.
She bent timidly around till her breath stirred his curls and whispered, "I--love--you"!
Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches, with Tom after her, and took refuge in a corner at last, with her little white apron to her face.
Tom clasped her about her neck and pleaded: "Now, Becky, it's all done--all over but the kiss.
Don't you be afraid of that--it ain't anything at all.
Please, Becky".
And he tugged at her apron and the hands.
By and by she gave up, and let her hands drop; her face, all glowing with the struggle, came up and submitted.
Tom kissed the red lips and said: "Now it's all done, Becky.
And always after this, you know, you ain't ever to love anybody but me, and you ain't ever to marry anybody but me, ever never and forever.
Will you"?
"No, I'll never love anybody but you, Tom, and I'll never marry anybody but you--and you ain't to ever marry anybody but me, either".
"Certainly.
Of course.
That's _part_ of it.
And always coming to school or when we're going home, you're to walk with me, when there ain't anybody looking--and you choose me and I choose you at parties, because that's the way you do when you're engaged".
"It's so nice.
I never heard of it before".
"Oh, it's ever so gay!
Why, me and Amy Lawrence--" The big eyes told Tom his blunder and he stopped, confused.
"Oh, Tom!
Then I ain't the first you've ever been engaged to"!
The child began to cry.
Tom said: "Oh, don't cry, Becky, I don't care for her any more".
"Yes, you do, Tom--you know you do".
Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed him away and turned her face to the wall, and went on crying.
Tom tried again, with soothing words in his mouth, and was repulsed again.
Then his pride was up, and he strode away and went outside.
He stood about, restless and uneasy, for a while, glancing at the door, every now and then, hoping she would repent and come to find him.
But she did not.
Then he began to feel badly and fear that he was in the wrong.
It was a hard struggle with him to make new advances, now, but he nerved himself to it and entered.
She was still standing back there in the corner, sobbing, with her face to the wall.
Tom's heart smote him.
He went to her and stood a moment, not knowing exactly how to proceed.
Then he said hesitatingly: "Becky, I--I don't care for anybody but you".
No reply--but sobs.
"Becky"--pleadingly.
"Becky, won't you say something"?
More sobs.
Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from the top of an andiron, and passed it around her so that she could see it, and said: "Please, Becky, won't you take it"?
She struck it to the floor.
Then Tom marched out of the house and over the hills and far away, to return to school no more that day.
Presently Becky began to suspect.
She ran to the door; he was not in sight; she flew around to the play-yard; he was not there.
Then she called: "Tom!
Come back, Tom"!
She listened intently, but there was no answer.
She had no companions but silence and loneliness.
So she sat down to cry again and upbraid herself; and by this time the scholars began to gather again, and she had to hide her griefs and still her broken heart and take up the cross of a long, dreary, aching afternoon, with none among the strangers about
CHAPTER VIII TOM dodged hither and thither through lanes until he was well out of the track of returning scholars, and then fell into a moody jog.
He crossed a small "branch" two or three times, because of a prevailing juvenile superstition that to cross water baffled pursuit.
Half an hour later he was disappearing behind the Douglas mansion on the summit of Cardiff Hill, and the school-house was hardly distinguishable away off in the valley behind him.
He entered a dense wood, picked his pathless way to the centre of it, and sat down on a mossy spot under a spreading oak.
There was not even a zephyr stirring; the dead noonday heat had even stilled the songs of the birds; nature lay in a trance that was broken by no sound but the occasional far-off hammering of a wood-pecker, and this seemed to render the pervading silence
The boy's soul was steeped in melancholy; his feelings were in happy accord with his surroundings.
He sat long with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands, meditating.
It seemed to him that life was but a trouble, at best, and he more than half envied Jimmy Hodges, so lately released; it must be very peaceful, he thought, to lie and slumber and dream forever and ever, with the wind whispering through the trees and
If he only had a clean Sunday-school record he could be willing to go, and be done with it all.
Now as to this girl.
What had he done?
Nothing.
He had meant the best in the world, and been treated like a dog--like a very dog.
She would be sorry some day--maybe when it was too late.
Ah, if he could only die _temporarily_!
But the elastic heart of youth cannot be compressed into one constrained shape long at a time.
Tom presently began to drift insensibly back into the concerns of this life again.
What if he turned his back, now, and disappeared mysteriously?
What if he went away--ever so far away, into unknown countries beyond the seas--and never came back any more!
How would she feel then!
The idea of being a clown recurred to him now, only to fill him with disgust.
For frivolity and jokes and spotted tights were an offense, when they intruded themselves upon a spirit that was exalted into the vague august realm of the romantic.
No, he would be a soldier, and return after long years, all war-worn and illustrious.
No--better still, he would join the Indians, and hunt buffaloes and go on the warpath in the mountain ranges and the trackless great plains of the Far West, and away in the future come back a great chief, bristling with feathers, hideous with paint, and
But no, there was something gaudier even than this.
He would be a pirate!
That was it!
_now_ his future lay plain before him, and glowing with unimaginable splendor.
How his name would fill the world, and make people shudder!
How gloriously he would go plowing the dancing seas, in his long, low, black-hulled racer, the Spirit of the Storm, with his grisly flag flying at the fore!
And at the zenith of his fame, how he would suddenly appear at the old village and stalk into church, brown and weather-beaten, in his black velvet doublet and trunks, his great jack-boots, his crimson sash, his belt bristling with horse-pistols, his
--the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main"!
Yes, it was settled; his career was determined.
He would run away from home and enter upon it.
He would start the very next morning.
Therefore he must now begin to get ready.
He would collect his resources together.
He went to a rotten log near at hand and began to dig under one end of it with his Barlow knife.
He soon struck wood that sounded hollow.
He put his hand there and uttered this incantation impressively: "What hasn't come here, come!
What's here, stay here"!
Then he scraped away the dirt, and exposed a pine shingle.
He took it up and disclosed a shapely little treasure-house whose bottom and sides were of shingles.
In it lay a marble.
Tom's astonishment was bound-less!
He scratched his head with a perplexed air, and said: "Well, that beats anything"!
Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and stood cogitating.
The truth was, that a superstition of his had failed, here, which he and all his comrades had always looked upon as infallible.
If you buried a marble with certain necessary incantations, and left it alone a fortnight, and then opened the place with the incantation he had just used, you would find that all the marbles you had ever lost had gathered themselves together there,
But now, this thing had actually and unquestionably failed.
Tom's whole structure of faith was shaken to its foundations.
He had many a time heard of this thing succeeding but never of its failing before.
It did not occur to him that he had tried it several times before, himself, but could never find the hiding-places afterward.
He puzzled over the matter some time, and finally decided that some witch had interfered and broken the charm.
He thought he would satisfy himself on that point; so he searched around till he found a small sandy spot with a little funnel-shaped depression in it.
He laid himself down and put his mouth close to this depression and called-- "Doodle-bug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know!
Doodle-bug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know"!
The sand began to work, and presently a small black bug appeared for a second and then darted under again in a fright.
"He dasn't tell!
So it _was_ a witch that done it.
I just knowed it".
He well knew the futility of trying to contend against witches, so he gave up discouraged.
But it occurred to him that he might as well have the marble he had just thrown away, and therefore he went and made a patient search for it.
But he could not find it.
Now he went back to his treasure-house and carefully placed himself just as he had been standing when he tossed the marble away; then he took another marble from his pocket and tossed it in the same way, saying: "Brother, go find your brother"!
He watched where it stopped, and went there and looked.
But it must have fallen short or gone too far; so he tried twice more.
The last repetition was successful.
The two marbles lay within a foot of each other.
Just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly down the green aisles of the forest.
Tom flung off his jacket and trousers, turned a suspender into a belt, raked away some brush behind the rotten log, disclosing a rude bow and arrow, a lath sword and a tin trumpet, and in a moment had seized these things and bounded away, barelegged, with
He presently halted under a great elm, blew an answering blast, and then began to tiptoe and look warily out, this way and that.
He said cautiously--to an imaginary company: "Hold, my merry men!
Keep hid till I blow".
Now appeared Joe Harper, as airily clad and elaborately armed as Tom.
Tom called: "Hold!
Who comes here into Sherwood Forest without my pass"?
"Guy of Guisborne wants no man's pass.
Who art thou that--that--" "Dares to hold such language," said Tom, prompting--for they talked "by the book," from memory.
"Who art thou that dares to hold such language"?
"I, indeed!
I am Robin Hood, as thy caitiff carcase soon shall know".
"Then art thou indeed that famous outlaw?
Right gladly will I dispute with thee the passes of the merry wood.
Have at thee"!
They took their lath swords, dumped their other traps on the ground, struck a fencing attitude, foot to foot, and began a grave, careful combat, "two up and two down".
Presently Tom said: "Now, if you've got the hang, go it lively"!
So they "went it lively," panting and perspiring with the work.
By and by Tom shouted: "Fall!
fall!
Why don't you fall"?
"I sha'n't!
Why don't you fall yourself?
You're getting the worst of it".
"Why, that ain't anything.
I can't fall; that ain't the way it is in the book.
The book says, 'Then with one back-handed stroke he slew poor Guy of Guisborne.
' You're to turn around and let me hit you in the back".
There was no getting around the authorities, so Joe turned, received the whack and fell.
"Now," said Joe, getting up, "you got to let me kill _you_.
That's fair".
"Why, I can't do that, it ain't in the book".
"Well, it's blamed mean--that's all".
"Well, say, Joe, you can be Friar Tuck or Much the miller's son, and lam me with a quarter-staff; or I'll be the Sheriff of Nottingham and you be Robin Hood a little while and kill me".
This was satisfactory, and so these adventures were carried out.
Then Tom became Robin Hood again, and was allowed by the treacherous nun to bleed his strength away through his neglected wound.
And at last Joe, representing a whole tribe of weeping outlaws, dragged him sadly forth, gave his bow into his feeble hands, and Tom said, "Where this arrow falls, there bury poor Robin Hood under the greenwood tree".
Then he shot the arrow and fell back and would have died, but he lit on a nettle and sprang up too gaily for a corpse.
The boys dressed themselves, hid their accoutrements, and went off grieving that there were no outlaws any more, and wondering what modern civilization could claim to have done to compensate for their loss.
They said they would rather be outlaws a year in Sherwood Forest than President of the United States forever.
CHAPTER IX AT half-past nine, that night, Tom and Sid were sent to bed, as usual.
They said their prayers, and Sid was soon asleep.
Tom lay awake and waited, in restless impatience.
When it seemed to him that it must be nearly daylight, he heard the clock strike ten!
This was despair.
He would have tossed and fidgeted, as his nerves demanded, but he was afraid he might wake Sid.
So he lay still, and stared up into the dark.
Everything was dismally still.
By and by, out of the stillness, little, scarcely perceptible noises began to emphasize themselves.
The ticking of the clock began to bring itself into notice.
Old beams began to crack mysteriously.
The stairs creaked faintly.
Evidently spirits were abroad.
A measured, muffled snore issued from Aunt Polly's chamber.
And now the tiresome chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity could locate, began.
Next the ghastly ticking of a death-watch in the wall at the bed's head made Tom shudder--it meant that somebody's days were numbered.
Then the howl of a far-off dog rose on the night air, and was answered by a fainter howl from a remoter distance.
Tom was in an agony.
At last he was satisfied that time had ceased and eternity begun; he began to doze, in spite of himself; the clock chimed eleven, but he did not hear it.
And then there came, mingling with his half-formed dreams, a most melancholy caterwauling.
The raising of a neighboring window disturbed him.
A cry of "Scat!
you devil"!
and the crash of an empty bottle against the back of his aunt's woodshed brought him wide awake, and a single minute later he was dressed and out of the window and creeping along the roof of the "ell" on all fours.
He "meow'd" with caution once or twice, as he went; then jumped to the roof of the woodshed and thence to the ground.
Huckleberry Finn was there, with his dead cat.
The boys moved off and disappeared in the gloom.
At the end of half an hour they were wading through the tall grass of the graveyard.
It was a graveyard of the old-fashioned Western kind.
It was on a hill, about a mile and a half from the village.
It had a crazy board fence around it, which leaned inward in places, and outward the rest of the time, but stood upright nowhere.
Grass and weeds grew rank over the whole cemetery.
All the old graves were sunken in, there was not a tombstone on the place; round-topped, worm-eaten boards staggered over the graves, leaning for support and finding none.
"Sacred to the memory of" So-and-So had been painted on them once, but it could no longer have been read, on the most of them, now, even if there had been light.
A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom feared it might be the spirits of the dead, complaining at being disturbed.
The boys talked little, and only under their breath, for the time and the place and the pervading solemnity and silence oppressed their spirits.
They found the sharp new heap they were seeking, and ensconced themselves within the protection of three great elms that grew in a bunch within a few feet of the grave.
Then they waited in silence for what seemed a long time.
The hooting of a distant owl was all the sound that troubled the dead stillness.
Tom's reflections grew oppressive.
He must force some talk.
So he said in a whisper: "Hucky, do you believe the dead people like it for us to be here"?
Huckleberry whispered: "I wisht I knowed.
It's awful solemn like, _ain't_ it"?
"I bet it is".
There was a considerable pause, while the boys canvassed this matter inwardly.
Then Tom whispered: "Say, Hucky--do you reckon Hoss Williams hears us talking"?
"O' course he does.
Least his sperrit does".
Tom, after a pause: "I wish I'd said Mister Williams.
But I never meant any harm.
Everybody calls him Hoss".
"A body can't be too partic'lar how they talk 'bout these-yer dead people, Tom".
This was a damper, and conversation died again.
Presently Tom seized his comrade's arm and said: "Sh"!
"What is it, Tom"?
And the two clung together with beating hearts.
"Sh!
There 'tis again!
Didn't you hear it"?
"I--" "There!
Now you hear it".
"Lord, Tom, they're coming!
They're coming, sure.
What'll we do"?
"I dono.
Think they'll see us"?
"Oh, Tom, they can see in the dark, same as cats.
I wisht I hadn't come".
"Oh, don't be afeard.
I don't believe they'll bother us.
We ain't doing any harm.
If we keep perfectly still, maybe they won't notice us at all".
"I'll try to, Tom, but, Lord, I'm all of a shiver".
"Listen"!
The boys bent their heads together and scarcely breathed.
A muffled sound of voices floated up from the far end of the graveyard.
"Look!
See there"!
whispered Tom.
"What is it"?
"It's devil-fire.
Oh, Tom, this is awful".
Some vague figures approached through the gloom, swinging an old-fashioned tin lantern that freckled the ground with innumerable little spangles of light.
Presently Huckleberry whispered with a shudder: "It's the devils sure enough.
Three of 'em!
Lordy, Tom, we're goners!
Can you pray"?
"I'll try, but don't you be afeard.
They ain't going to hurt us.
'Now I lay me down to sleep, I--'" "Sh"!
"What is it, Huck"?
"They're _humans_!
One of 'em is, anyway.
One of 'em's old Muff Potter's voice".
"No--'tain't so, is it"?
"I bet I know it.
Don't you stir nor budge.
He ain't sharp enough to notice us.
Drunk, the same as usual, likely--blamed old rip"!
"All right, I'll keep still.
Now they're stuck.
Can't find it.
Here they come again.
Now they're hot.
Cold again.
Hot again.
Red hot!
They're p'inted right, this time.
Say, Huck, I know another o' them voices; it's Injun Joe".
"That's so--that murderin' half-breed!
I'd druther they was devils a dern sight.
What kin they be up to"?
The whisper died wholly out, now, for the three men had reached the grave and stood within a few feet of the boys' hiding-place.
"Here it is," said the third voice; and the owner of it held the lantern up and revealed the face of young Doctor Robinson.
Potter and Injun Joe were carrying a handbarrow with a rope and a couple of shovels on it.
They cast down their load and began to open the grave.
The doctor put the lantern at the head of the grave and came and sat down with his back against one of the elm trees.
He was so close the boys could have touched him.
"Hurry, men"!
he said, in a low voice; "the moon might come out at any moment".
They growled a response and went on digging.
For some time there was no noise but the grating sound of the spades discharging their freight of mould and gravel.
It was very monotonous.
Finally a spade struck upon the coffin with a dull woody accent, and within another minute or two the men had hoisted it out on the ground.
They pried off the lid with their shovels, got out the body and dumped it rudely on the ground.
The moon drifted from behind the clouds and exposed the pallid face.
The barrow was got ready and the corpse placed on it, covered with a blanket, and bound to its place with the rope.
Potter took out a large spring-knife and cut off the dangling end of the rope and then said: "Now the cussed thing's ready, Sawbones, and you'll just out with another five, or here she stays".
"That's the talk"!
said Injun Joe.
"Look here, what does this mean"?
said the doctor.
"You required your pay in advance, and I've paid you".
"Yes, and you done more than that," said Injun Joe, approaching the doctor, who was now standing.
"Five years ago you drove me away from your father's kitchen one night, when I come to ask for something to eat, and you said I warn't there for any good; and when I swore I'd get even with you if it took a hundred years, your father had me jailed for a
Did you think I'd forget?
The Injun blood ain't in me for nothing.
And now I've _got_ you, and you got to _settle_, you know"!
He was threatening the doctor, with his fist in his face, by this time.
The doctor struck out suddenly and stretched the ruffian on the ground.
Potter dropped his knife, and exclaimed: "Here, now, don't you hit my pard"!
and the next moment he had grappled with the doctor and the two were struggling with might and main, trampling the grass and tearing the ground with their heels.
Injun Joe sprang to his feet, his eyes flaming with passion, snatched up Potter's knife, and went creeping, catlike and stooping, round and round about the combatants, seeking an opportunity.
All at once the doctor flung himself free, seized the heavy headboard of Williams' grave and felled Potter to the earth with it--and in the same instant the half-breed saw his chance and drove the knife to the hilt in the young man's breast.
He reeled and fell partly upon Potter, flooding him with his blood, and in the same moment the clouds blotted out the dreadful spectacle and the two frightened boys went speeding away in the dark.
Presently, when the moon emerged again, Injun Joe was standing over the two forms, contemplating them.
The doctor murmured inarticulately, gave a long gasp or two and was still.
The half-breed muttered: "_That_ score is settled--damn you".
Then he robbed the body.
After which he put the fatal knife in Potter's open right hand, and sat down on the dismantled coffin.
Three--four--five minutes passed, and then Potter began to stir and moan.
His hand closed upon the knife; he raised it, glanced at it, and let it fall, with a shudder.
Then he sat up, pushing the body from him, and gazed at it, and then around him, confusedly.
His eyes met Joe's.
"Lord, how is this, Joe"?
he said.
"It's a dirty business," said Joe, without moving.
"What did you do it for"?
"I!
I never done it"!
"Look here!
That kind of talk won't wash".
Potter trembled and grew white.
"I thought I'd got sober.
I'd no business to drink to-night.
But it's in my head yet--worse'n when we started here.
I'm all in a muddle; can't recollect anything of it, hardly.
Tell me, Joe--_honest_, now, old feller--did I do it?
Joe, I never meant to--'pon my soul and honor, I never meant to, Joe.
Tell me how it was, Joe.
Oh, it's awful--and him so young and promising".
"Why, you two was scuffling, and he fetched you one with the headboard and you fell flat; and then up you come, all reeling and staggering like, and snatched the knife and jammed it into him, just as he fetched you another awful clip--and here you've laid,
"Oh, I didn't know what I was a-doing.
I wish I may die this minute if I did.
It was all on account of the whiskey and the excitement, I reckon.
I never used a weepon in my life before, Joe.
I've fought, but never with weepons.
They'll all say that.
Joe, don't tell!
Say you won't tell, Joe--that's a good feller.
I always liked you, Joe, and stood up for you, too.
Don't you remember?
You _won't_ tell, _will_ you, Joe"?
And the poor creature dropped on his knees before the stolid murderer, and clasped his appealing hands.
"No, you've always been fair and square with me, Muff Potter, and I won't go back on you.
There, now, that's as fair as a man can say".
"Oh, Joe, you're an angel.
I'll bless you for this the longest day I live".
And Potter began to cry.
"Come, now, that's enough of that.
This ain't any time for blubbering.
You be off yonder way and I'll go this.
Move, now, and don't leave any tracks behind you".
Potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a run.
The half-breed stood looking after him.
He muttered: "If he's as much stunned with the lick and fuddled with the rum as he had the look of being, he won't think of the knife till he's gone so far he'll be afraid to come back after it to such a place by himself--chicken-heart"!
Two or three minutes later the murdered man, the blanketed corpse, the lidless coffin, and the open grave were under no inspection but the moon's.
The stillness was complete again, too.
CHAPTER X THE two boys flew on and on, toward the village, speechless with horror.
They glanced backward over their shoulders from time to time, apprehensively, as if they feared they might be followed.
Every stump that started up in their path seemed a man and an enemy, and made them catch their breath; and as they sped by some outlying cottages that lay near the village, the barking of the aroused watch-dogs seemed to give wings to their feet.
"If we can only get to the old tannery before we break down"!
whispered Tom, in short catches between breaths.
"I can't stand it much longer".
Huckleberry's hard pantings were his only reply, and the boys fixed their eyes on the goal of their hopes and bent to their work to win it.
They gained steadily on it, and at last, breast to breast, they burst through the open door and fell grateful and exhausted in the sheltering shadows beyond.
By and by their pulses slowed down, and Tom whispered: "Huckleberry, what do you reckon'll come of this"?
"If Doctor Robinson dies, I reckon hanging'll come of it".
"Do you though"?
"Why, I _know_ it, Tom".
Tom thought a while, then he said: "Who'll tell?
We"?
"What are you talking about?
S'pose something happened and Injun Joe _didn't_ hang?
Why, he'd kill us some time or other, just as dead sure as we're a laying here".
"That's just what I was thinking to myself, Huck".
"If anybody tells, let Muff Potter do it, if he's fool enough.
He's generally drunk enough".
Tom said nothing--went on thinking.
Presently he whispered: "Huck, Muff Potter don't know it.
How can he tell"?
"What's the reason he don't know it"?
"Because he'd just got that whack when Injun Joe done it.
D'you reckon he could see anything?
D'you reckon he knowed anything"?
"By hokey, that's so, Tom"!
"And besides, look-a-here--maybe that whack done for _him_"!
"No, 'taint likely, Tom.
He had liquor in him; I could see that; and besides, he always has.
Well, when pap's full, you might take and belt him over the head with a church and you couldn't phase him.
He says so, his own self.
So it's the same with Muff Potter, of course.
But if a man was dead sober, I reckon maybe that whack might fetch him; I dono".
After another reflective silence, Tom said: "Hucky, you sure you can keep mum"?
"Tom, we _got_ to keep mum.
You know that.
That Injun devil wouldn't make any more of drownding us than a couple of cats, if we was to squeak 'bout this and they didn't hang him.
Now, look-a-here, Tom, less take and swear to one another--that's what we got to do--swear to keep mum".
"I'm agreed.
It's the best thing.
Would you just hold hands and swear that we--" "Oh no, that wouldn't do for this.
That's good enough for little rubbishy common things--specially with gals, cuz _they_ go back on you anyway, and blab if they get in a huff--but there orter be writing 'bout a big thing like this.
And blood".
Tom's whole being applauded this idea.
It was deep, and dark, and awful; the hour, the circumstances, the surroundings, were in keeping with it.
He picked up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moon-light, took a little fragment of "red keel" out of his pocket, got the moon on his work, and painfully scrawled these lines, emphasizing each slow down-stroke by clamping his tongue between his teeth,
[See next page.
] "Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer swears they will keep mum about This and They wish They may Drop down dead in Their Tracks if They ever Tell and Rot".
Huckleberry was filled with admiration of Tom's facility in writing, and the sublimity of his language.
He at once took a pin from his lapel and was going to prick his flesh, but Tom said: "Hold on!
Don't do that.
A pin's brass.
It might have verdigrease on it".
"What's verdigrease"?
"It's p'ison.
That's what it is.
You just swaller some of it once--you'll see".
So Tom unwound the thread from one of his needles, and each boy pricked the ball of his thumb and squeezed out a drop of blood.
In time, after many squeezes, Tom managed to sign his initials, using the ball of his little finger for a pen.
Then he showed Huckleberry how to make an H and an F, and the oath was complete.
They buried the shingle close to the wall, with some dismal ceremonies and incantations, and the fetters that bound their tongues were considered to be locked and the key thrown away.
A figure crept stealthily through a break in the other end of the ruined building, now, but they did not notice it.
"Tom," whispered Huckleberry, "does this keep us from _ever_ telling--_always_"?
"Of course it does.
It don't make any difference _what_ happens, we got to keep mum.
We'd drop down dead--don't _you_ know that"?
"Yes, I reckon that's so".
They continued to whisper for some little time.
Presently a dog set up a long, lugubrious howl just outside--within ten feet of them.
The boys clasped each other suddenly, in an agony of fright.
"Which of us does he mean"?
gasped Huckleberry.
"I dono--peep through the crack.
Quick"!
"No, _you_, Tom"!
"I can't--I can't _do_ it, Huck"!
"Please, Tom.
There 'tis again"!
"Oh, lordy, I'm thankful"!
whispered Tom.
"I know his voice.
It's Bull Harbison".
* [* If Mr. Harbison owned a slave named Bull, Tom would have spoken of him as "Harbison's Bull," but a son or a dog of that name was "Bull Harbison".
] "Oh, that's good--I tell you, Tom, I was most scared to death; I'd a bet anything it was a _stray_ dog".
The dog howled again.
The boys' hearts sank once more.
"Oh, my!
that ain't no Bull Harbison"!
whispered Huckleberry.
"_Do_, Tom"!
Tom, quaking with fear, yielded, and put his eye to the crack.
His whisper was hardly audible when he said: "Oh, Huck, _its a stray dog_"!
"Quick, Tom, quick!
Who does he mean"?
"Huck, he must mean us both--we're right together".
"Oh, Tom, I reckon we're goners.
I reckon there ain't no mistake 'bout where _I'll_ go to.
I been so wicked".
"Dad fetch it!
This comes of playing hookey and doing everything a feller's told _not_ to do.
I might a been good, like Sid, if I'd a tried--but no, I wouldn't, of course.
But if ever I get off this time, I lay I'll just _waller_ in Sunday-schools"!
And Tom began to snuffle a little.
"_You_ bad"!
and Huckleberry began to snuffle too.
"Consound it, Tom Sawyer, you're just old pie, 'long-side o' what I am.
Oh, _lordy_, lordy, lordy, I wisht I only had half your chance".
Tom choked off and whispered: "Look, Hucky, look!
He's got his _back_ to us"!
Hucky looked, with joy in his heart.
"Well, he has, by jingoes!
Did he before"?
"Yes, he did.
But I, like a fool, never thought.
Oh, this is bully, you know.
_Now_ who can he mean"?
The howling stopped.
Tom pricked up his ears.
"Sh!
What's that"?
he whispered.
"Sounds like--like hogs grunting.
No--it's somebody snoring, Tom".
"That _is_ it!
Where 'bouts is it, Huck"?
"I bleeve it's down at 'tother end.
Sounds so, anyway.
Pap used to sleep there, sometimes, 'long with the hogs, but laws bless you, he just lifts things when _he_ snores.
Besides, I reckon he ain't ever coming back to this town any more".
The spirit of adventure rose in the boys' souls once more.
"Hucky, do you das't to go if I lead"?
"I don't like to, much.
Tom, s'pose it's Injun Joe"!
Tom quailed.
But presently the temptation rose up strong again and the boys agreed to try, with the understanding that they would take to their heels if the snoring stopped.
So they went tiptoeing stealthily down, the one behind the other.
When they had got to within five steps of the snorer, Tom stepped on a stick, and it broke with a sharp snap.
The man moaned, writhed a little, and his face came into the moonlight.
It was Muff Potter.
The boys' hearts had stood still, and their hopes too, when the man moved, but their fears passed away now.
They tip-toed out, through the broken weather-boarding, and stopped at a little distance to exchange a parting word.
That long, lugubrious howl rose on the night air again!
They turned and saw the strange dog standing within a few feet of where Potter was lying, and _facing_ Potter, with his nose pointing heavenward.
"Oh, geeminy, it's _him_"!
exclaimed both boys, in a breath.
"Say, Tom--they say a stray dog come howling around Johnny Miller's house, 'bout midnight, as much as two weeks ago; and a whippoorwill come in and lit on the banisters and sung, the very same evening; and there ain't anybody dead there yet".
"Well, I know that.
And suppose there ain't.
Didn't Gracie Miller fall in the kitchen fire and burn herself terrible the very next Saturday"?
"Yes, but she ain't _dead_.
And what's more, she's getting better, too".
"All right, you wait and see.
She's a goner, just as dead sure as Muff Potter's a goner.
That's what the niggers say, and they know all about these kind of things, Huck".
Then they separated, cogitating.
When Tom crept in at his bedroom window the night was almost spent.
He undressed with excessive caution, and fell asleep congratulating himself that nobody knew of his escapade.
He was not aware that the gently-snoring Sid was awake, and had been so for an hour.
When Tom awoke, Sid was dressed and gone.
There was a late look in the light, a late sense in the atmosphere.
He was startled.
Why had he not been called--persecuted till he was up, as usual?
The thought filled him with bodings.
Within five minutes he was dressed and down-stairs, feeling sore and drowsy.
The family were still at table, but they had finished breakfast.
There was no voice of rebuke; but there were averted eyes; there was a silence and an air of solemnity that struck a chill to the culprit's heart.
He sat down and tried to seem gay, but it was up-hill work; it roused no smile, no response, and he lapsed into silence and let his heart sink down to the depths.
After breakfast his aunt took him aside, and Tom almost brightened in the hope that he was going to be flogged; but it was not so.
His aunt wept over him and asked him how he could go and break her old heart so; and finally told him to go on, and ruin himself and bring her gray hairs with sorrow to the grave, for it was no use for her to try any more.
This was worse than a thousand whippings, and Tom's heart was sorer now than his body.
He cried, he pleaded for forgiveness, promised to reform over and over again, and then received his dismissal, feeling that he had won but an imperfect forgiveness and established but a feeble confidence.
He left the presence too miserable to even feel revengeful toward Sid; and so the latter's prompt retreat through the back gate was unnecessary.
He moped to school gloomy and sad, and took his flogging, along with Joe Harper, for playing hookey the day before, with the air of one whose heart was busy with heavier woes and wholly dead to trifles.
Then he betook himself to his seat, rested his elbows on his desk and his jaws in his hands, and stared at the wall with the stony stare of suffering that has reached the limit and can no further go.
His elbow was pressing against some hard substance.
After a long time he slowly and sadly changed his position, and took up this object with a sigh.
It was in a paper.
He unrolled it.
A long, lingering, colossal sigh followed, and his heart broke.
It was his brass andiron knob!
This final feather broke the camel's back.
CHAPTER XI CLOSE upon the hour of noon the whole village was suddenly electrified with the ghastly news.
No need of the as yet un-dreamed-of telegraph; the tale flew from man to man, from group to group, from house to house, with little less than telegraphic speed.
Of course the schoolmaster gave holi-day for that afternoon; the town would have thought strangely of him if he had not.
A gory knife had been found close to the murdered man, and it had been recognized by somebody as belonging to Muff Potter--so the story ran.
And it was said that a belated citizen had come upon Potter washing himself in the "branch" about one or two o'clock in the morning, and that Potter had at once sneaked off--suspicious circumstances, especially the washing which was not a habit with
It was also said that the town had been ransacked for this "murderer" (the public are not slow in the matter of sifting evidence and arriving at a verdict), but that he could not be found.
Horsemen had departed down all the roads in every direction, and the Sheriff "was confident" that he would be captured before night.
All the town was drifting toward the graveyard.
Tom's heartbreak vanished and he joined the procession, not because he would not a thousand times rather go anywhere else, but because an awful, unaccountable fascination drew him on.
Arrived at the dreadful place, he wormed his small body through the crowd and saw the dismal spectacle.
It seemed to him an age since he was there before.
Somebody pinched his arm.
He turned, and his eyes met Huckleberry's.
Then both looked elsewhere at once, and wondered if anybody had noticed anything in their mutual glance.
But everybody was talking, and intent upon the grisly spectacle before them.
"Poor fellow"!
"Poor young fellow"!
"This ought to be a lesson to grave robbers"!
"Muff Potter'll hang for this if they catch him"!
This was the drift of remark; and the minister said, "It was a judgment; His hand is here".
Now Tom shivered from head to heel; for his eye fell upon the stolid face of Injun Joe.
At this moment the crowd began to sway and struggle, and voices shouted, "It's him!
it's him!
he's coming himself"!
"Who?
Who"?
from twenty voices.
"Muff Potter"!
"Hallo, he's stopped!
--Look out, he's turning!
Don't let him get away"!
People in the branches of the trees over Tom's head said he wasn't trying to get away--he only looked doubtful and perplexed.
"Infernal impudence"!
said a bystander; "wanted to come and take a quiet look at his work, I reckon--didn't expect any company".
The crowd fell apart, now, and the Sheriff came through, ostentatiously leading Potter by the arm.
The poor fellow's face was haggard, and his eyes showed the fear that was upon him.
When he stood before the murdered man, he shook as with a palsy, and he put his face in his hands and burst into tears.
"I didn't do it, friends," he sobbed; "'pon my word and honor I never done it".
"Who's accused you"?
shouted a voice.
This shot seemed to carry home.
Potter lifted his face and looked around him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes.
He saw Injun Joe, and exclaimed: "Oh, Injun Joe, you promised me you'd never--" "Is that your knife"?
and it was thrust before him by the Sheriff.
Potter would have fallen if they had not caught him and eased him to the ground.
Then he said: "Something told me 't if I didn't come back and get--" He shuddered; then waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished gesture and said, "Tell 'em, Joe, tell 'em--it ain't any use any more".
Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and staring, and heard the stony-hearted liar reel off his serene statement, they expecting every moment that the clear sky would deliver God's lightnings upon his head, and wondering to see how long the stroke was
And when he had finished and still stood alive and whole, their wavering impulse to break their oath and save the poor betrayed prisoner's life faded and vanished away, for plainly this miscreant had sold himself to Satan and it would be fatal to meddle
"Why didn't you leave?
What did you want to come here for"?
somebody said.
"I couldn't help it--I couldn't help it," Potter moaned.
"I wanted to run away, but I couldn't seem to come anywhere but here".
And he fell to sobbing again.
Injun Joe repeated his statement, just as calmly, a few minutes afterward on the inquest, under oath; and the boys, seeing that the lightnings were still withheld, were confirmed in their belief that Joe had sold himself to the devil.
He was now become, to them, the most balefully interesting object they had ever looked upon, and they could not take their fascinated eyes from his face.
They inwardly resolved to watch him nights, when opportunity should offer, in the hope of getting a glimpse of his dread master.
Injun Joe helped to raise the body of the murdered man and put it in a wagon for removal; and it was whispered through the shuddering crowd that the wound bled a little!
The boys thought that this happy circumstance would turn suspicion in the right direction; but they were disappointed, for more than one villager remarked: "It was within three feet of Muff Potter when it done it".
Tom's fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his sleep for as much as a week after this; and at breakfast one morning Sid said: "Tom, you pitch around and talk in your sleep so much that you keep me awake half the time".
Tom blanched and dropped his eyes.
"It's a bad sign," said Aunt Polly, gravely.
"What you got on your mind, Tom"?
"Nothing.
Nothing 't I know of".
But the boy's hand shook so that he spilled his coffee.
"And you do talk such stuff," Sid said.
"Last night you said, 'It's blood, it's blood, that's what it is!
' You said that over and over.
And you said, 'Don't torment me so--I'll tell!
' Tell _what_?
What is it you'll tell"?
Everything was swimming before Tom.
There is no telling what might have happened, now, but luckily the concern passed out of Aunt Polly's face and she came to Tom's relief without knowing it.
She said: "Sho!
It's that dreadful murder.
I dream about it most every night myself.
Sometimes I dream it's me that done it".
Mary said she had been affected much the same way.
Sid seemed satisfied.
Tom got out of the presence as quick as he plausibly could, and after that he complained of toothache for a week, and tied up his jaws every night.
He never knew that Sid lay nightly watching, and frequently slipped the bandage free and then leaned on his elbow listening a good while at a time, and afterward slipped the bandage back to its place again.
Tom's distress of mind wore off gradually and the toothache grew irksome and was discarded.
If Sid really managed to make anything out of Tom's disjointed mutterings, he kept it to himself.
It seemed to Tom that his schoolmates never would get done holding inquests on dead cats, and thus keeping his trouble present to his mind.
Sid noticed that Tom never was coroner at one of these inquiries, though it had been his habit to take the lead in all new enterprises; he noticed, too, that Tom never acted as a witness--and that was strange; and Sid did not overlook the fact that Tom
Sid marvelled, but said nothing.
However, even inquests went out of vogue at last, and ceased to torture Tom's conscience.
Every day or two, during this time of sorrow, Tom watched his opportunity and went to the little grated jail-window and smuggled such small comforts through to the "murderer" as he could get hold of.
The jail was a trifling little brick den that stood in a marsh at the edge of the village, and no guards were afforded for it; indeed, it was seldom occupied.
These offerings greatly helped to ease Tom's conscience.
The villagers had a strong desire to tar-and-feather Injun Joe and ride him on a rail, for body-snatching, but so formidable was his character that nobody could be found who was willing to take the lead in the matter, so it was dropped.
He had been careful to begin both of his inquest-statements with the fight, without confessing the grave-robbery that preceded it; therefore it was deemed wisest not to try the case in the courts at present.
CHAPTER XII ONE of the reasons why Tom's mind had drifted away from its secret troubles was, that it had found a new and weighty matter to interest itself about.
Becky Thatcher had stopped coming to school.
Tom had struggled with his pride a few days, and tried to "whistle her down the wind," but failed.
He began to find himself hanging around her father's house, nights, and feeling very miserable.
She was ill.
What if she should die!
There was distraction in the thought.
He no longer took an interest in war, nor even in piracy.
The charm of life was gone; there was nothing but dreariness left.
He put his hoop away, and his bat; there was no joy in them any more.
His aunt was concerned.
She began to try all manner of remedies on him.
She was one of those people who are infatuated with patent medicines and all new-fangled methods of producing health or mending it.
She was an inveterate experimenter in these things.
When something fresh in this line came out she was in a fever, right away, to try it; not on herself, for she was never ailing, but on anybody else that came handy.
She was a subscriber for all the "Health" periodicals and phrenological frauds; and the solemn ignorance they were inflated with was breath to her nostrils.
All the "rot" they contained about ventilation, and how to go to bed, and how to get up, and what to eat, and what to drink, and how much exercise to take, and what frame of mind to keep one's self in, and what sort of clothing to wear, was all gospel to
She was as simple-hearted and honest as the day was long, and so she was an easy victim.
She gathered together her quack periodicals and her quack medicines, and thus armed with death, went about on her pale horse, metaphorically speaking, with "hell following after".
But she never suspected that she was not an angel of healing and the balm of Gilead in disguise, to the suffering neighbors.
The water treatment was new, now, and Tom's low condition was a windfall to her.
She had him out at daylight every morning, stood him up in the wood-shed and drowned him with a deluge of cold water; then she scrubbed him down with a towel like a file, and so brought him to; then she rolled him up in a wet sheet and put him away under
Yet notwithstanding all this, the boy grew more and more melancholy and pale and dejected.
She added hot baths, sitz baths, shower baths, and plunges.
The boy remained as dismal as a hearse.
She began to assist the water with a slim oatmeal diet and blister-plasters.
She calculated his capacity as she would a jug's, and filled him up every day with quack cure-alls.
Tom had become indifferent to persecution by this time.
This phase filled the old lady's heart with consternation.
This indifference must be broken up at any cost.
Now she heard of Pain-killer for the first time.
She ordered a lot at once.
She tasted it and was filled with gratitude.
It was simply fire in a liquid form.
She dropped the water treatment and everything else, and pinned her faith to Pain-killer.
She gave Tom a teaspoonful and watched with the deepest anxiety for the result.
Her troubles were instantly at rest, her soul at peace again; for the "indifference" was broken up.
The boy could not have shown a wilder, heartier interest, if she had built a fire under him.
Tom felt that it was time to wake up; this sort of life might be romantic enough, in his blighted condition, but it was getting to have too little sentiment and too much distracting variety about it.
So he thought over various plans for relief, and finally hit upon that of professing to be fond of Pain-killer.
He asked for it so often that he became a nuisance, and his aunt ended by telling him to help himself and quit bothering her.
If it had been Sid, she would have had no misgivings to alloy her delight; but since it was Tom, she watched the bottle clandestinely.
She found that the medicine did really diminish, but it did not occur to her that the boy was mending the health of a crack in the sitting-room floor with it.
One day Tom was in the act of dosing the crack when his aunt's yellow cat came along, purring, eyeing the teaspoon avariciously, and begging for a taste.
Tom said: "Don't ask for it unless you want it, Peter".
But Peter signified that he did want it.
"You better make sure".
Peter was sure.
"Now you've asked for it, and I'll give it to you, because there ain't anything mean about me; but if you find you don't like it, you mustn't blame anybody but your own self".
Peter was agreeable.
So Tom pried his mouth open and poured down the Pain-killer.
Peter sprang a couple of yards in the air, and then delivered a war-whoop and set off round and round the room, banging against furniture, upsetting flower-pots, and making general havoc.
Next he rose on his hind feet and pranced around, in a frenzy of enjoyment, with his head over his shoulder and his voice proclaiming his unappeasable happiness.
Then he went tearing around the house again spreading chaos and destruction in his path.
Aunt Polly entered in time to see him throw a few double summersets, deliver a final mighty hurrah, and sail through the open window, carrying the rest of the flower-pots with him.
The old lady stood petrified with astonishment, peering over her glasses; Tom lay on the floor expiring with laughter.
"Tom, what on earth ails that cat"?
"I don't know, aunt," gasped the boy.
"Why, I never see anything like it.
What did make him act so"?
"Deed I don't know, Aunt Polly; cats always act so when they're having a good time".
"They do, do they"?
There was something in the tone that made Tom apprehensive.
"Yes'm.
That is, I believe they do".
"You _do_"?
"Yes'm".
The old lady was bending down, Tom watching, with interest emphasized by anxiety.
Too late he divined her "drift".
The handle of the telltale tea-spoon was visible under the bed-valance.
Aunt Polly took it, held it up.
Tom winced, and dropped his eyes.
Aunt Polly raised him by the usual handle--his ear--and cracked his head soundly with her thimble.
"Now, sir, what did you want to treat that poor dumb beast so, for"?
"I done it out of pity for him--because he hadn't any aunt".
"Hadn't any aunt!
--you numskull.
What has that got to do with it"?
"Heaps.
Because if he'd had one she'd a burnt him out herself!
She'd a roasted his bowels out of him 'thout any more feeling than if he was a human"!
Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse.
This was putting the thing in a new light; what was cruelty to a cat _might_ be cruelty to a boy, too.
She began to soften; she felt sorry.
Her eyes watered a little, and she put her hand on Tom's head and said gently: "I was meaning for the best, Tom.
And, Tom, it _did_ do you good".
Tom looked up in her face with just a perceptible twinkle peeping through his gravity.
"I know you was meaning for the best, aunty, and so was I with Peter.
It done _him_ good, too.
I never see him get around so since--" "Oh, go 'long with you, Tom, before you aggravate me again.
And you try and see if you can't be a good boy, for once, and you needn't take any more medicine".
Tom reached school ahead of time.
It was noticed that this strange thing had been occurring every day latterly.
And now, as usual of late, he hung about the gate of the schoolyard instead of playing with his comrades.
He was sick, he said, and he looked it.
He tried to seem to be looking everywhere but whither he really was looking--down the road.
Presently Jeff Thatcher hove in sight, and Tom's face lighted; he gazed a moment, and then turned sorrowfully away.
When Jeff arrived, Tom accosted him; and "led up" warily to opportunities for remark about Becky, but the giddy lad never could see the bait.
Tom watched and watched, hoping whenever a frisking frock came in sight, and hating the owner of it as soon as he saw she was not the right one.
At last frocks ceased to appear, and he dropped hopelessly into the dumps; he entered the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer.
Then one more frock passed in at the gate, and Tom's heart gave a great bound.
The next instant he was out, and "going on" like an Indian; yelling, laughing, chasing boys, jumping over the fence at risk of life and limb, throwing handsprings, standing on his head--doing all the heroic things he could conceive of, and keeping a
But she seemed to be unconscious of it all; she never looked.
Could it be possible that she was not aware that he was there?
He carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity; came war-whooping around, snatched a boy's cap, hurled it to the roof of the schoolhouse, broke through a group of boys, tumbling them in every direction, and fell sprawling, himself, under Becky's nose,
some people think they're mighty smart--always showing off"!
Tom's cheeks burned.
He gathered himself up and sneaked off, crushed and crestfallen.
CHAPTER XIII TOM'S mind was made up now.
He was gloomy and desperate.
He was a forsaken, friendless boy, he said; nobody loved him; when they found out what they had driven him to, perhaps they would be sorry; he had tried to do right and get along, but they would not let him; since nothing would do them but to be rid of
What right had the friendless to complain?
Yes, they had forced him to it at last: he would lead a life of crime.
There was no choice.
By this time he was far down Meadow Lane, and the bell for school to "take up" tinkled faintly upon his ear.
He sobbed, now, to think he should never, never hear that old familiar sound any more--it was very hard, but it was forced on him; since he was driven out into the cold world, he must submit--but he forgave them.
Then the sobs came thick and fast.
Just at this point he met his soul's sworn comrade, Joe Harper--hard-eyed, and with evidently a great and dismal purpose in his heart.
Plainly here were "two souls with but a single thought".
Tom, wiping his eyes with his sleeve, began to blubber out something about a resolution to escape from hard usage and lack of sympathy at home by roaming abroad into the great world never to return; and ended by hoping that Joe would not forget him.
But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just been going to make of Tom, and had come to hunt him up for that purpose.
His mother had whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never tasted and knew nothing about; it was plain that she was tired of him and wished him to go; if she felt that way, there was nothing for him to do but succumb; he hoped she would be
As the two boys walked sorrowing along, they made a new compact to stand by each other and be brothers and never separate till death relieved them of their troubles.
Then they began to lay their plans.
Joe was for being a hermit, and living on crusts in a remote cave, and dying, some time, of cold and want and grief; but after listening to Tom, he conceded that there were some conspicuous advantages about a life of crime, and so he consented to be a
Three miles below St. Petersburg, at a point where the Mississippi River was a trifle over a mile wide, there was a long, narrow, wooded island, with a shallow bar at the head of it, and this offered well as a rendezvous.
It was not inhabited; it lay far over toward the further shore, abreast a dense and almost wholly unpeopled forest.
So Jackson's Island was chosen.
Who were to be the subjects of their piracies was a matter that did not occur to them.
Then they hunted up Huckleberry Finn, and he joined them promptly, for all careers were one to him; he was indifferent.
They presently separated to meet at a lonely spot on the river-bank two miles above the village at the favorite hour--which was midnight.
There was a small log raft there which they meant to capture.
Each would bring hooks and lines, and such provision as he could steal in the most dark and mysterious way--as became outlaws.
And before the afternoon was done, they had all managed to enjoy the sweet glory of spreading the fact that pretty soon the town would "hear something".
All who got this vague hint were cautioned to "be mum and wait".
About midnight Tom arrived with a boiled ham and a few trifles, and stopped in a dense undergrowth on a small bluff overlooking the meeting-place.
It was starlight, and very still.
The mighty river lay like an ocean at rest.
Tom listened a moment, but no sound disturbed the quiet.
Then he gave a low, distinct whistle.
It was answered from under the bluff.
Tom whistled twice more; these signals were answered in the same way.
Then a guarded voice said: "Who goes there"?
"Tom Sawyer, the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main.
Name your names".
"Huck Finn the Red-Handed, and Joe Harper the Terror of the Seas".
Tom had furnished these titles, from his favorite literature.
"'Tis well.
Give the countersign".
Two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word simultaneously to the brooding night: "_Blood_"!
Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let himself down after it, tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort.
There was an easy, comfortable path along the shore under the bluff, but it lacked the advantages of difficulty and danger so valued by a pirate.
The Terror of the Seas had brought a side of bacon, and had about worn himself out with getting it there.
Finn the Red-Handed had stolen a skillet and a quantity of half-cured leaf tobacco, and had also brought a few corn-cobs to make pipes with.
But none of the pirates smoked or "chewed" but himself.
The Black Avenger of the Spanish Main said it would never do to start without some fire.
That was a wise thought; matches were hardly known there in that day.
They saw a fire smouldering upon a great raft a hundred yards above, and they went stealthily thither and helped themselves to a chunk.
They made an imposing adventure of it, saying, "Hist"!
every now and then, and suddenly halting with finger on lip; moving with hands on imaginary dagger-hilts; and giving orders in dismal whispers that if "the foe" stirred, to "let him have it to the hilt," because "dead men tell no tales".
They knew well enough that the raftsmen were all down at the village laying in stores or having a spree, but still that was no excuse for their conducting this thing in an unpiratical way.
They shoved off, presently, Tom in command, Huck at the after oar and Joe at the forward.
Tom stood amidships, gloomy-browed, and with folded arms, and gave his orders in a low, stern whisper: "Luff, and bring her to the wind"!
"Aye-aye, sir"!
"Steady, steady-y-y-y"!
"Steady it is, sir"!
"Let her go off a point"!
"Point it is, sir"!
As the boys steadily and monotonously drove the raft toward mid-stream it was no doubt understood that these orders were given only for "style," and were not intended to mean anything in particular.
"What sail's she carrying"?
"Courses, tops'ls, and flying-jib, sir".
"Send the r'yals up!
Lay out aloft, there, half a dozen of ye--foretopmaststuns'l!
Lively, now"!
"Aye-aye, sir"!
"Shake out that maintogalans'l!
Sheets and braces!
_now_ my hearties"!
"Aye-aye, sir"!
"Hellum-a-lee--hard a port!
Stand by to meet her when she comes!
Port, port!
_Now_, men!
With a will!
Stead-y-y-y"!
"Steady it is, sir"!
The raft drew beyond the middle of the river; the boys pointed her head right, and then lay on their oars.
The river was not high, so there was not more than a two or three mile current.
Hardly a word was said during the next three-quarters of an hour.
Now the raft was passing before the distant town.
Two or three glimmering lights showed where it lay, peacefully sleeping, beyond the vague vast sweep of star-gemmed water, unconscious of the tremendous event that was happening.
The Black Avenger stood still with folded arms, "looking his last" upon the scene of his former joys and his later sufferings, and wishing "she" could see him now, abroad on the wild sea, facing peril and death with dauntless heart, going to his doom with
It was but a small strain on his imagination to remove Jackson's Island beyond eye-shot of the village, and so he "looked his last" with a broken and satisfied heart.
The other pirates were looking their last, too; and they all looked so long that they came near letting the current drift them out of the range of the island.
But they discovered the danger in time, and made shift to avert it.
About two o'clock in the morning the raft grounded on the bar two hundred yards above the head of the island, and they waded back and forth until they had landed their freight.
Part of the little raft's belongings consisted of an old sail, and this they spread over a nook in the bushes for a tent to shelter their provisions; but they themselves would sleep in the open air in good weather, as became outlaws.
They built a fire against the side of a great log twenty or thirty steps within the sombre depths of the forest, and then cooked some bacon in the frying-pan for supper, and used up half of the corn "pone" stock they had brought.
It seemed glorious sport to be feasting in that wild, free way in the virgin forest of an unexplored and uninhabited island, far from the haunts of men, and they said they never would return to civilization.
The climbing fire lit up their faces and threw its ruddy glare upon the pillared tree-trunks of their forest temple, and upon the varnished foliage and festooning vines.
When the last crisp slice of bacon was gone, and the last allowance of corn pone devoured, the boys stretched themselves out on the grass, filled with contentment.
They could have found a cooler place, but they would not deny themselves such a romantic feature as the roasting campfire.
"_Ain't_ it gay"?
said Joe.
"It's _nuts_"!
said Tom.
"What would the boys say if they could see us"?
"Say?
Well, they'd just die to be here--hey, Hucky"!
"I reckon so," said Huckleberry; "anyways, I'm suited.
I don't want nothing better'n this.
I don't ever get enough to eat, gen'ally--and here they can't come and pick at a feller and bullyrag him so".
"It's just the life for me," said Tom.
"You don't have to get up, mornings, and you don't have to go to school, and wash, and all that blame foolishness.
You see a pirate don't have to do _anything_, Joe, when he's ashore, but a hermit _he_ has to be praying considerable, and then he don't have any fun, anyway, all by himself that way".
"Oh yes, that's so," said Joe, "but I hadn't thought much about it, you know.
I'd a good deal rather be a pirate, now that I've tried it".
"You see," said Tom, "people don't go much on hermits, nowadays, like they used to in old times, but a pirate's always respected.
And a hermit's got to sleep on the hardest place he can find, and put sackcloth and ashes on his head, and stand out in the rain, and--" "What does he put sackcloth and ashes on his head for"?
inquired Huck.
"I dono.
But they've _got_ to do it.
Hermits always do.
You'd have to do that if you was a hermit".
"Dern'd if I would," said Huck.
"Well, what would you do"?
"I dono.
But I wouldn't do that".
"Why, Huck, you'd _have_ to.
How'd you get around it"?
"Why, I just wouldn't stand it.
I'd run away".
"Run away!
Well, you _would_ be a nice old slouch of a hermit.
You'd be a disgrace".
The Red-Handed made no response, being better employed.
He had finished gouging out a cob, and now he fitted a weed stem to it, loaded it with tobacco, and was pressing a coal to the charge and blowing a cloud of fragrant smoke--he was in the full bloom of luxurious contentment.
The other pirates envied him this majestic vice, and secretly resolved to acquire it shortly.
Presently Huck said: "What does pirates have to do"?
Tom said: "Oh, they have just a bully time--take ships and burn them, and get the money and bury it in awful places in their island where there's ghosts and things to watch it, and kill everybody in the ships--make 'em walk a plank".
"And they carry the women to the island," said Joe; "they don't kill the women".
"No," assented Tom, "they don't kill the women--they're too noble.
And the women's always beautiful, too.
"And don't they wear the bulliest clothes!
Oh no!
All gold and silver and di'monds," said Joe, with enthusiasm.
"Who"?
said Huck.
"Why, the pirates".
Huck scanned his own clothing forlornly.
"I reckon I ain't dressed fitten for a pirate," said he, with a regretful pathos in his voice; "but I ain't got none but these".
But the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough, after they should have begun their adventures.
They made him understand that his poor rags would do to begin with, though it was customary for wealthy pirates to start with a proper wardrobe.
Gradually their talk died out and drowsiness began to steal upon the eyelids of the little waifs.
The pipe dropped from the fingers of the Red-Handed, and he slept the sleep of the conscience-free and the weary.
The Terror of the Seas and the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main had more difficulty in getting to sleep.
They said their prayers inwardly, and lying down, since there was nobody there with authority to make them kneel and recite aloud; in truth, they had a mind not to say them at all, but they were afraid to proceed to such lengths as that, lest they might
Then at once they reached and hovered upon the imminent verge of sleep--but an intruder came, now, that would not "down".
It was conscience.
They began to feel a vague fear that they had been doing wrong to run away; and next they thought of the stolen meat, and then the real torture came.
They tried to argue it away by reminding conscience that they had purloined sweetmeats and apples scores of times; but conscience was not to be appeased by such thin plausibilities; it seemed to them, in the end, that there was no getting around the
So they inwardly resolved that so long as they remained in the business, their piracies should not again be sullied with the crime of stealing.
Then conscience granted a truce, and these curiously inconsistent pirates fell peacefully to sleep.
CHAPTER XIV WHEN Tom awoke in the morning, he wondered where he was.
He sat up and rubbed his eyes and looked around.
Then he comprehended.
It was the cool gray dawn, and there was a delicious sense of repose and peace in the deep pervading calm and silence of the woods.
Not a leaf stirred; not a sound obtruded upon great Nature's meditation.
Beaded dewdrops stood upon the leaves and grasses.
A white layer of ashes covered the fire, and a thin blue breath of smoke rose straight into the air.
Joe and Huck still slept.
Now, far away in the woods a bird called; another answered; presently the hammering of a woodpecker was heard.
Gradually the cool dim gray of the morning whitened, and as gradually sounds multiplied and life manifested itself.
The marvel of Nature shaking off sleep and going to work unfolded itself to the musing boy.
A little green worm came crawling over a dewy leaf, lifting two-thirds of his body into the air from time to time and "sniffing around," then proceeding again--for he was measuring, Tom said; and when the worm approached him, of its own accord, he sat as
Now a procession of ants appeared, from nowhere in particular, and went about their labors; one struggled manfully by with a dead spider five times as big as itself in its arms, and lugged it straight up a tree-trunk.
A brown spotted lady-bug climbed the dizzy height of a grass blade, and Tom bent down close to it and said, "Lady-bug, lady-bug, fly away home, your house is on fire, your children's alone," and she took wing and went off to see about it--which did not
A tumblebug came next, heaving sturdily at its ball, and Tom touched the creature, to see it shut its legs against its body and pretend to be dead.
The birds were fairly rioting by this time.
A catbird, the Northern mocker, lit in a tree over Tom's head, and trilled out her imitations of her neighbors in a rapture of enjoyment; then a shrill jay swept down, a flash of blue flame, and stopped on a twig almost within the boy's reach, cocked his
All Nature was wide awake and stirring, now; long lances of sunlight pierced down through the dense foliage far and near, and a few butterflies came fluttering upon the scene.
Tom stirred up the other pirates and they all clattered away with a shout, and in a minute or two were stripped and chasing after and tumbling over each other in the shallow limpid water of the white sandbar.
They felt no longing for the little village sleeping in the distance beyond the majestic waste of water.
A vagrant current or a slight rise in the river had carried off their raft, but this only gratified them, since its going was something like burning the bridge between them and civilization.
They came back to camp wonderfully refreshed, glad-hearted, and ravenous; and they soon had the camp-fire blazing up again.
Huck found a spring of clear cold water close by, and the boys made cups of broad oak or hickory leaves, and felt that water, sweetened with such a wildwood charm as that, would be a good enough substitute for coffee.
While Joe was slicing bacon for breakfast, Tom and Huck asked him to hold on a minute; they stepped to a promising nook in the river-bank and threw in their lines; almost immediately they had reward.
Joe had not had time to get impatient before they were back again with some handsome bass, a couple of sun-perch and a small catfish--provisions enough for quite a family.
They fried the fish with the bacon, and were astonished; for no fish had ever seemed so delicious before.
They did not know that the quicker a fresh-water fish is on the fire after he is caught the better he is; and they reflected little upon what a sauce open-air sleeping, open-air exercise, bathing, and a large ingredient of hunger make, too.
They lay around in the shade, after breakfast, while Huck had a smoke, and then went off through the woods on an exploring expedition.
They tramped gayly along, over decaying logs, through tangled underbrush, among solemn monarchs of the forest, hung from their crowns to the ground with a drooping regalia of grape-vines.
Now and then they came upon snug nooks carpeted with grass and jeweled with flowers.
They found plenty of things to be delighted with, but nothing to be astonished at.
They discovered that the island was about three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide, and that the shore it lay closest to was only separated from it by a narrow channel hardly two hundred yards wide.
They took a swim about every hour, so it was close upon the middle of the afternoon when they got back to camp.
They were too hungry to stop to fish, but they fared sumptuously upon cold ham, and then threw themselves down in the shade to talk.
But the talk soon began to drag, and then died.
The stillness, the solemnity that brooded in the woods, and the sense of loneliness, began to tell upon the spirits of the boys.
They fell to thinking.
A sort of undefined longing crept upon them.
This took dim shape, presently--it was budding homesickness.
Even Finn the Red-Handed was dreaming of his doorsteps and empty hogsheads.
But they were all ashamed of their weakness, and none was brave enough to speak his thought.
For some time, now, the boys had been dully conscious of a peculiar sound in the distance, just as one sometimes is of the ticking of a clock which he takes no distinct note of.
But now this mysterious sound became more pronounced, and forced a recognition.
The boys started, glanced at each other, and then each assumed a listening attitude.
There was a long silence, profound and unbroken; then a deep, sullen boom came floating down out of the distance.
"What is it"!
exclaimed Joe, under his breath.
"I wonder," said Tom in a whisper.
"'Tain't thunder," said Huckleberry, in an awed tone, "becuz thunder--" "Hark"!
said Tom.
"Listen--don't talk".
They waited a time that seemed an age, and then the same muffled boom troubled the solemn hush.
"Let's go and see".
They sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore toward the town.
They parted the bushes on the bank and peered out over the water.
The little steam ferry-boat was about a mile below the village, drifting with the current.
Her broad deck seemed crowded with people.
There were a great many skiffs rowing about or floating with the stream in the neighborhood of the ferryboat, but the boys could not determine what the men in them were doing.
Presently a great jet of white smoke burst from the ferryboat's side, and as it expanded and rose in a lazy cloud, that same dull throb of sound was borne to the listeners again.
"I know now"!
exclaimed Tom; "somebody's drownded"!
"That's it"!
said Huck; "they done that last summer, when Bill Turner got drownded; they shoot a cannon over the water, and that makes him come up to the top.
Yes, and they take loaves of bread and put quicksilver in 'em and set 'em afloat, and wherever there's anybody that's drownded, they'll float right there and stop".
"Yes, I've heard about that," said Joe.
"I wonder what makes the bread do that".
"Oh, it ain't the bread, so much," said Tom; "I reckon it's mostly what they _say_ over it before they start it out".
"But they don't say anything over it," said Huck.
"I've seen 'em and they don't".
"Well, that's funny," said Tom.
"But maybe they say it to themselves.
Of _course_ they do.
Anybody might know that".
The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom said, because an ignorant lump of bread, uninstructed by an incantation, could not be expected to act very intelligently when set upon an errand of such gravity.
"By jings, I wish I was over there, now," said Joe.
"I do too" said Huck "I'd give heaps to know who it is".
The boys still listened and watched.
Presently a revealing thought flashed through Tom's mind, and he exclaimed: "Boys, I know who's drownded--it's us"!
They felt like heroes in an instant.
Here was a gorgeous triumph; they were missed; they were mourned; hearts were breaking on their account; tears were being shed; accusing memories of unkindness to these poor lost lads were rising up, and unavailing regrets and remorse were being indulged;
This was fine.
It was worth while to be a pirate, after all.
As twilight drew on, the ferryboat went back to her accustomed business and the skiffs disappeared.
The pirates returned to camp.
They were jubilant with vanity over their new grandeur and the illustrious trouble they were making.
They caught fish, cooked supper and ate it, and then fell to guessing at what the village was thinking and saying about them; and the pictures they drew of the public distress on their account were gratifying to look upon--from their point of view.
But when the shadows of night closed them in, they gradually ceased to talk, and sat gazing into the fire, with their minds evidently wandering elsewhere.
The excitement was gone, now, and Tom and Joe could not keep back thoughts of certain persons at home who were not enjoying this fine frolic as much as they were.
Misgivings came; they grew troubled and unhappy; a sigh or two escaped, unawares.
By and by Joe timidly ventured upon a roundabout "feeler" as to how the others might look upon a return to civilization--not right now, but-- Tom withered him with derision!
Huck, being uncommitted as yet, joined in with Tom, and the waverer quickly "explained," and was glad to get out of the scrape with as little taint of chicken-hearted home-sickness clinging to his garments as he could.
Mutiny was effectually laid to rest for the moment.
As the night deepened, Huck began to nod, and presently to snore.
Joe followed next.
Tom lay upon his elbow motionless, for some time, watching the two intently.
At last he got up cautiously, on his knees, and went searching among the grass and the flickering reflections flung by the campfire.
He picked up and inspected several large semi-cylinders of the thin white bark of a sycamore, and finally chose two which seemed to suit him.
Then he knelt by the fire and painfully wrote something upon each of these with his "red keel"; one he rolled up and put in his jacket pocket, and the other he put in Joe's hat and removed it to a little distance from the owner.
And he also put into the hat certain schoolboy treasures of almost inestimable value--among them a lump of chalk, an India-rubber ball, three fishhooks, and one of that kind of marbles known as a "sure 'nough crystal".
Then he tiptoed his way cautiously among the trees till he felt that he was out of hearing, and straightway broke into a keen run in the direction of the sandbar.
CHAPTER XV A few minutes later Tom was in the shoal water of the bar, wading toward the Illinois shore.
Before the depth reached his middle he was halfway over; the current would permit no more wading, now, so he struck out confidently to swim the remaining hundred yards.
He swam quartering upstream, but still was swept downward rather faster than he had expected.
However, he reached the shore finally, and drifted along till he found a low place and drew himself out.
He put his hand on his jacket pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck through the woods, following the shore, with streaming garments.
Shortly before ten o'clock he came out into an open place opposite the village, and saw the ferryboat lying in the shadow of the trees and the high bank.
Everything was quiet under the blinking stars.
He crept down the bank, watching with all his eyes, slipped into the water, swam three or four strokes and climbed into the skiff that did "yawl" duty at the boat's stern.
He laid himself down under the thwarts and waited, panting.
Presently the cracked bell tapped and a voice gave the order to "cast off".
A minute or two later the skiff's head was standing high up, against the boat's swell, and the voyage was begun.
Tom felt happy in his success, for he knew it was the boat's last trip for the night.
At the end of a long twelve or fifteen minutes the wheels stopped, and Tom slipped overboard and swam ashore in the dusk, landing fifty yards downstream, out of danger of possible stragglers.
He flew along unfrequented alleys, and shortly found himself at his aunt's back fence.
He climbed over, approached the "ell," and looked in at the sitting-room window, for a light was burning there.
There sat Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, and Joe Harper's mother, grouped together, talking.
They were by the bed, and the bed was between them and the door.
Tom went to the door and began to softly lift the latch; then he pressed gently and the door yielded a crack; he continued pushing cautiously, and quaking every time it creaked, till he judged he might squeeze through on his knees; so he put his head
"What makes the candle blow so"?
said Aunt Polly.
Tom hurried up.
"Why, that door's open, I believe.
Why, of course it is.
No end of strange things now.
Go 'long and shut it, Sid".
Tom disappeared under the bed just in time.
He lay and "breathed" himself for a time, and then crept to where he could almost touch his aunt's foot.
"But as I was saying," said Aunt Polly, "he warn't _bad_, so to say--only misch_ee_vous.
Only just giddy, and harum-scarum, you know.
He warn't any more responsible than a colt.
_He_ never meant any harm, and he was the best-hearted boy that ever was"--and she began to cry.
"It was just so with my Joe--always full of his devilment, and up to every kind of mischief, but he was just as unselfish and kind as he could be--and laws bless me, to think I went and whipped him for taking that cream, never once recollecting that I
And Mrs. Harper sobbed as if her heart would break.
"I hope Tom's better off where he is," said Sid, "but if he'd been better in some ways--" "_Sid!
_" Tom felt the glare of the old lady's eye, though he could not see it.
"Not a word against my Tom, now that he's gone!
God'll take care of _him_--never you trouble _your_self, sir!
Oh, Mrs. Harper, I don't know how to give him up!
I don't know how to give him up!
He was such a comfort to me, although he tormented my old heart out of me, 'most".
"The Lord giveth and the Lord hath taken away--Blessed be the name of the Lord!
But it's so hard--Oh, it's so hard!
Only last Saturday my Joe busted a firecracker right under my nose and I knocked him sprawling.
Little did I know then, how soon--Oh, if it was to do over again I'd hug him and bless him for it".
"Yes, yes, yes, I know just how you feel, Mrs. Harper, I know just exactly how you feel.
No longer ago than yesterday noon, my Tom took and filled the cat full of Pain-killer, and I did think the cretur would tear the house down.
And God forgive me, I cracked Tom's head with my thimble, poor boy, poor dead boy.
But he's out of all his troubles now.
And the last words I ever heard him say was to reproach--" But this memory was too much for the old lady, and she broke entirely down.
Tom was snuffling, now, himself--and more in pity of himself than anybody else.
He could hear Mary crying, and putting in a kindly word for him from time to time.
He began to have a nobler opinion of himself than ever before.
Still, he was sufficiently touched by his aunt's grief to long to rush out from under the bed and overwhelm her with joy--and the theatrical gorgeousness of the thing appealed strongly to his nature, too, but he resisted and lay still.
He went on listening, and gathered by odds and ends that it was conjectured at first that the boys had got drowned while taking a swim; then the small raft had been missed; next, certain boys said the missing lads had promised that the village should "hear
It was believed that the search for the bodies had been a fruitless effort merely because the drowning must have occurred in mid-channel, since the boys, being good swimmers, would otherwise have escaped to shore.
This was Wednesday night.
If the bodies continued missing until Sunday, all hope would be given over, and the funerals would be preached on that morning.
Tom shuddered.
Mrs. Harper gave a sobbing goodnight and turned to go.
Then with a mutual impulse the two bereaved women flung themselves into each other's arms and had a good, consoling cry, and then parted.
Aunt Polly was tender far beyond her wont, in her goodnight to Sid and Mary.
Sid snuffled a bit and Mary went off crying with all her heart.
Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly, so appealingly, and with such measureless love in her words and her old trembling voice, that he was weltering in tears again, long before she was through.
He had to keep still long after she went to bed, for she kept making broken-hearted ejaculations from time to time, tossing unrestfully, and turning over.
But at last she was still, only moaning a little in her sleep.
Now the boy stole out, rose gradually by the bedside, shaded the candle-light with his hand, and stood regarding her.
His heart was full of pity for her.
He took out his sycamore scroll and placed it by the candle.
But something occurred to him, and he lingered considering.
His face lighted with a happy solution of his thought; he put the bark hastily in his pocket.
Then he bent over and kissed the faded lips, and straightway made his stealthy exit, latching the door behind him.
He threaded his way back to the ferry landing, found nobody at large there, and walked boldly on board the boat, for he knew she was tenantless except that there was a watchman, who always turned in and slept like a graven image.
He untied the skiff at the stern, slipped into it, and was soon rowing cautiously upstream.
When he had pulled a mile above the village, he started quartering across and bent himself stoutly to his work.
He hit the landing on the other side neatly, for this was a familiar bit of work to him.
He was moved to capture the skiff, arguing that it might be considered a ship and therefore legitimate prey for a pirate, but he knew a thorough search would be made for it and that might end in revelations.
So he stepped ashore and entered the woods.
He sat down and took a long rest, torturing himself meanwhile to keep awake, and then started warily down the home-stretch.
The night was far spent.
It was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the island bar.
He rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the great river with its splendor, and then he plunged into the stream.
A little later he paused, dripping, upon the threshold of the camp, and heard Joe say: "No, Tom's true-blue, Huck, and he'll come back.
He won't desert.
He knows that would be a disgrace to a pirate, and Tom's too proud for that sort of thing.
He's up to something or other.
Now I wonder what"?
"Well, the things is ours, anyway, ain't they"?
"Pretty near, but not yet, Huck.
The writing says they are if he ain't back here to breakfast".
"Which he is"!
exclaimed Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping grandly into camp.
A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was shortly provided, and as the boys set to work upon it, Tom recounted (and adorned) his adventures.
They were a vain and boastful company of heroes when the tale was done.
Then Tom hid himself away in a shady nook to sleep till noon, and the other pirates got ready to fish and explore.
CHAPTER XVI AFTER dinner all the gang turned out to hunt for turtle eggs on the bar.
They went about poking sticks into the sand, and when they found a soft place they went down on their knees and dug with their hands.
Sometimes they would take fifty or sixty eggs out of one hole.
They were perfectly round white things a trifle smaller than an English walnut.
They had a famous fried-egg feast that night, and another on Friday morning.
After breakfast they went whooping and prancing out on the bar, and chased each other round and round, shedding clothes as they went, until they were naked, and then continued the frolic far away up the shoal water of the bar, against the stiff current,
And now and then they stooped in a group and splashed water in each other's faces with their palms, gradually approaching each other, with averted faces to avoid the strangling sprays, and finally gripping and struggling till the best man ducked his
When they were well exhausted, they would run out and sprawl on the dry, hot sand, and lie there and cover themselves up with it, and by and by break for the water again and go through the original performance once more.
Finally it occurred to them that their naked skin represented flesh-colored "tights" very fairly; so they drew a ring in the sand and had a circus--with three clowns in it, for none would yield this proudest post to his neighbor.
Next they got their marbles and played "knucks" and "ringtaw" and "keeps" till that amusement grew stale.
Then Joe and Huck had another swim, but Tom would not venture, because he found that in kicking off his trousers he had kicked his string of rattlesnake rattles off his ankle, and he wondered how he had escaped cramp so long without the protection of this
He did not venture again until he had found it, and by that time the other boys were tired and ready to rest.
They gradually wandered apart, dropped into the "dumps," and fell to gazing longingly across the wide river to where the village lay drowsing in the sun.
Tom found himself writing "BECKY" in the sand with his big toe; he scratched it out, and was angry with himself for his weakness.
But he wrote it again, nevertheless; he could not help it.
He erased it once more and then took himself out of temptation by driving the other boys together and joining them.
But Joe's spirits had gone down almost beyond resurrection.
He was so homesick that he could hardly endure the misery of it.
The tears lay very near the surface.
Huck was melancholy, too.
Tom was downhearted, but tried hard not to show it.
He had a secret which he was not ready to tell, yet, but if this mutinous depression was not broken up soon, he would have to bring it out.
He said, with a great show of cheerfulness: "I bet there's been pirates on this island before, boys.
We'll explore it again.
They've hid treasures here somewhere.
How'd you feel to light on a rotten chest full of gold and silver--hey"?
But it roused only faint enthusiasm, which faded out, with no reply.
Tom tried one or two other seductions; but they failed, too.
It was discouraging work.
Joe sat poking up the sand with a stick and looking very gloomy.
Finally he said: "Oh, boys, let's give it up.
I want to go home.
It's so lonesome".
"Oh no, Joe, you'll feel better by and by," said Tom.
"Just think of the fishing that's here".
"I don't care for fishing.
I want to go home".
"But, Joe, there ain't such another swimming-place anywhere".
"Swimming's no good.
I don't seem to care for it, somehow, when there ain't anybody to say I sha'n't go in.
I mean to go home".
"Oh, shucks!
Baby!
You want to see your mother, I reckon".
"Yes, I _do_ want to see my mother--and you would, too, if you had one.
I ain't any more baby than you are".
And Joe snuffled a little.
"Well, we'll let the crybaby go home to his mother, won't we, Huck?
Poor thing--does it want to see its mother?
And so it shall.
You like it here, don't you, Huck?
We'll stay, won't we"?
Huck said, "Y-e-s"--without any heart in it.
"I'll never speak to you again as long as I live," said Joe, rising.
"There now"!
And he moved moodily away and began to dress himself.
"Who cares"!
said Tom.
"Nobody wants you to.
Go 'long home and get laughed at.
Oh, you're a nice pirate.
Huck and me ain't crybabies.
We'll stay, won't we, Huck?
Let him go if he wants to.
I reckon we can get along without him, per'aps".
But Tom was uneasy, nevertheless, and was alarmed to see Joe go sullenly on with his dressing.
And then it was discomforting to see Huck eying Joe's preparations so wistfully, and keeping up such an ominous silence.
Presently, without a parting word, Joe began to wade off toward the Illinois shore.
Tom's heart began to sink.
He glanced at Huck.
Huck could not bear the look, and dropped his eyes.
Then he said: "I want to go, too, Tom.
It was getting so lonesome anyway, and now it'll be worse.
Let's us go, too, Tom".
"I won't!
You can all go, if you want to.
I mean to stay".
"Tom, I better go".
"Well, go 'long--who's hendering you".
Huck began to pick up his scattered clothes.
He said: "Tom, I wisht you'd come, too.
Now you think it over.
We'll wait for you when we get to shore".
"Well, you'll wait a blame long time, that's all".
Huck started sorrowfully away, and Tom stood looking after him, with a strong desire tugging at his heart to yield his pride and go along too.
He hoped the boys would stop, but they still waded slowly on.
It suddenly dawned on Tom that it was become very lonely and still.
He made one final struggle with his pride, and then darted after his comrades, yelling: "Wait!
Wait!
I want to tell you something"!
They presently stopped and turned around.
When he got to where they were, he began unfolding his secret, and they listened moodily till at last they saw the "point" he was driving at, and then they set up a warwhoop of applause and said it was "splendid"!
and said if he had told them at first, they wouldn't have started away.
He made a plausible excuse; but his real reason had been the fear that not even the secret would keep them with him any very great length of time, and so he had meant to hold it in reserve as a last seduction.
The lads came gayly back and went at their sports again with a will, chattering all the time about Tom's stupendous plan and admiring the genius of it.
After a dainty egg and fish dinner, Tom said he wanted to learn to smoke, now.
Joe caught at the idea and said he would like to try, too.
So Huck made pipes and filled them.
These novices had never smoked anything before but cigars made of grapevine, and they "bit" the tongue, and were not considered manly anyway.
Now they stretched themselves out on their elbows and began to puff, charily, and with slender confidence.
The smoke had an unpleasant taste, and they gagged a little, but Tom said: "Why, it's just as easy!
If I'd a knowed this was all, I'd a learnt long ago".
"So would I," said Joe.
"It's just nothing".
"Why, many a time I've looked at people smoking, and thought well I wish I could do that; but I never thought I could," said Tom.
"That's just the way with me, hain't it, Huck?
You've heard me talk just that way--haven't you, Huck?
I'll leave it to Huck if I haven't".
"Yes--heaps of times," said Huck.
"Well, I have too," said Tom; "oh, hundreds of times.
Once down by the slaughter-house.
Don't you remember, Huck?
Bob Tanner was there, and Johnny Miller, and Jeff Thatcher, when I said it.
Don't you remember, Huck, 'bout me saying that"?
"Yes, that's so," said Huck.
"That was the day after I lost a white alley.
No, 'twas the day before".
"There--I told you so," said Tom.
"Huck recollects it".
"I bleeve I could smoke this pipe all day," said Joe.
"I don't feel sick".
"Neither do I," said Tom.
"I could smoke it all day.
But I bet you Jeff Thatcher couldn't".
"Jeff Thatcher!
Why, he'd keel over just with two draws.
Just let him try it once.
_He'd_ see"!
"I bet he would.
And Johnny Miller--I wish could see Johnny Miller tackle it once".
"Oh, don't I"!
said Joe.
"Why, I bet you Johnny Miller couldn't any more do this than nothing.
Just one little snifter would fetch _him_".
"'Deed it would, Joe.
Say--I wish the boys could see us now".
"So do I." "Say--boys, don't say anything about it, and some time when they're around, I'll come up to you and say, 'Joe, got a pipe?
I want a smoke.
' And you'll say, kind of careless like, as if it warn't anything, you'll say, 'Yes, I got my _old_ pipe, and another one, but my tobacker ain't very good.
' And I'll say, 'Oh, that's all right, if it's _strong_ enough.
' And then you'll out with the pipes, and we'll light up just as ca'm, and then just see 'em look"!
"By jings, that'll be gay, Tom!
I wish it was _now_"!
"So do I!
And when we tell 'em we learned when we was off pirating, won't they wish they'd been along"?
"Oh, I reckon not!
I'll just _bet_ they will"!
So the talk ran on.
But presently it began to flag a trifle, and grow disjointed.
The silences widened; the expectoration marvellously increased.
Every pore inside the boys' cheeks became a spouting fountain; they could scarcely bail out the cellars under their tongues fast enough to prevent an inundation; little overflowings down their throats occurred in spite of all they could do, and sudden
Both boys were looking very pale and miserable, now.
Joe's pipe dropped from his nerveless fingers.
Tom's followed.
Both fountains were going furiously and both pumps bailing with might and main.
Joe said feebly: "I've lost my knife.
I reckon I better go and find it".
Tom said, with quivering lips and halting utterance: "I'll help you.
You go over that way and I'll hunt around by the spring.
No, you needn't come, Huck--we can find it".
So Huck sat down again, and waited an hour.
Then he found it lonesome, and went to find his comrades.
They were wide apart in the woods, both very pale, both fast asleep.
But something informed him that if they had had any trouble they had got rid of it.
They were not talkative at supper that night.
They had a humble look, and when Huck prepared his pipe after the meal and was going to prepare theirs, they said no, they were not feeling very well--something they ate at dinner had disagreed with them.
About midnight Joe awoke, and called the boys.
There was a brooding oppressiveness in the air that seemed to bode something.
The boys huddled themselves together and sought the friendly companionship of the fire, though the dull dead heat of the breathless atmosphere was stifling.
They sat still, intent and waiting.
The solemn hush continued.
Beyond the light of the fire everything was swallowed up in the blackness of darkness.
Presently there came a quivering glow that vaguely revealed the foliage for a moment and then vanished.
By and by another came, a little stronger.
Then another.
Then a faint moan came sighing through the branches of the forest and the boys felt a fleeting breath upon their cheeks, and shuddered with the fancy that the Spirit of the Night had gone by.
There was a pause.
Now a weird flash turned night into day and showed every little grassblade, separate and distinct, that grew about their feet.
And it showed three white, startled faces, too.
A deep peal of thunder went rolling and tumbling down the heavens and lost itself in sullen rumblings in the distance.
A sweep of chilly air passed by, rustling all the leaves and snowing the flaky ashes broadcast about the fire.
Another fierce glare lit up the forest and an instant crash followed that seemed to rend the treetops right over the boys' heads.
They clung together in terror, in the thick gloom that followed.
A few big raindrops fell pattering upon the leaves.
"Quick!
boys, go for the tent"!
exclaimed Tom.
They sprang away, stumbling over roots and among vines in the dark, no two plunging in the same direction.
A furious blast roared through the trees, making everything sing as it went.
One blinding flash after another came, and peal on peal of deafening thunder.
And now a drenching rain poured down and the rising hurricane drove it in sheets along the ground.
The boys cried out to each other, but the roaring wind and the booming thunderblasts drowned their voices utterly.
However, one by one they straggled in at last and took shelter under the tent, cold, scared, and streaming with water; but to have company in misery seemed something to be grateful for.
They could not talk, the old sail flapped so furiously, even if the other noises would have allowed them.
The tempest rose higher and higher, and presently the sail tore loose from its fastenings and went winging away on the blast.
The boys seized each others' hands and fled, with many tumblings and bruises, to the shelter of a great oak that stood upon the riverbank.
Now the battle was at its highest.
Under the ceaseless conflagration of lightning that flamed in the skies, everything below stood out in cleancut and shadowless distinctness: the bending trees, the billowy river, white with foam, the driving spray of spumeflakes, the dim outlines of the
Every little while some giant tree yielded the fight and fell crashing through the younger growth; and the unflagging thunderpeals came now in ear-splitting explosive bursts, keen and sharp, and unspeakably appalling.
The storm culminated in one matchless effort that seemed likely to tear the island to pieces, burn it up, drown it to the treetops, blow it away, and deafen every creature in it, all at one and the same moment.
It was a wild night for homeless young heads to be out in.
But at last the battle was done, and the forces retired with weaker and weaker threatenings and grumblings, and peace resumed her sway.
The boys went back to camp, a good deal awed; but they found there was still something to be thankful for, because the great sycamore, the shelter of their beds, was a ruin, now, blasted by the lightnings, and they were not under it when the catastrophe
Everything in camp was drenched, the campfire as well; for they were but heedless lads, like their generation, and had made no provision against rain.
Here was matter for dismay, for they were soaked through and chilled.
They were eloquent in their distress; but they presently discovered that the fire had eaten so far up under the great log it had been built against (where it curved upward and separated itself from the ground), that a handbreadth or so of it had escaped
Then they piled on great dead boughs till they had a roaring furnace, and were gladhearted once more.
They dried their boiled ham and had a feast, and after that they sat by the fire and expanded and glorified their midnight adventure until morning, for there was not a dry spot to sleep on, anywhere around.
As the sun began to steal in upon the boys, drowsiness came over them, and they went out on the sandbar and lay down to sleep.
They got scorched out by and by, and drearily set about getting breakfast.
After the meal they felt rusty, and stiff-jointed, and a little homesick once more.
Tom saw the signs, and fell to cheering up the pirates as well as he could.
But they cared nothing for marbles, or circus, or swimming, or anything.
He reminded them of the imposing secret, and raised a ray of cheer.
While it lasted, he got them interested in a new device.
This was to knock off being pirates, for a while, and be Indians for a change.
They were attracted by this idea; so it was not long before they were stripped, and striped from head to heel with black mud, like so many zebras--all of them chiefs, of course--and then they went tearing through the woods to attack an English settlement.
By and by they separated into three hostile tribes, and darted upon each other from ambush with dreadful warwhoops, and killed and scalped each other by thousands.
It was a gory day.
Consequently it was an extremely satisfactory one.
They assembled in camp toward suppertime, hungry and happy; but now a difficulty arose--hostile Indians could not break the bread of hospitality together without first making peace, and this was a simple impossibility without smoking a pipe of peace.
There was no other process that ever they had heard of.
Two of the savages almost wished they had remained pirates.
However, there was no other way; so with such show of cheerfulness as they could muster they called for the pipe and took their whiff as it passed, in due form.
And behold, they were glad they had gone into savagery, for they had gained something; they found that they could now smoke a little without having to go and hunt for a lost knife; they did not get sick enough to be seriously uncomfortable.
They were not likely to fool away this high promise for lack of effort.
No, they practised cautiously, after supper, with right fair success, and so they spent a jubilant evening.
They were prouder and happier in their new acquirement than they would have been in the scalping and skinning of the Six Nations.
We will leave them to smoke and chatter and brag, since we have no further use for them at present.
CHAPTER XVII BUT there was no hilarity in the little town that same tranquil Saturday afternoon.
The Harpers, and Aunt Polly's family, were being put into mourning, with great grief and many tears.
An unusual quiet possessed the village, although it was ordinarily quiet enough, in all conscience.
The villagers conducted their concerns with an absent air, and talked little; but they sighed often.
The Saturday holiday seemed a burden to the children.
They had no heart in their sports, and gradually gave them up.
In the afternoon Becky Thatcher found herself moping about the deserted schoolhouse yard, and feeling very melancholy.
But she found nothing there to comfort her.
She soliloquized: "Oh, if I only had a brass andiron-knob again!
But I haven't got anything now to remember him by".
And she choked back a little sob.
Presently she stopped, and said to herself: "It was right here.
Oh, if it was to do over again, I wouldn't say that--I wouldn't say it for the whole world.
But he's gone now; I'll never, never, never see him any more".
This thought broke her down, and she wandered away, with tears rolling down her cheeks.
Then quite a group of boys and girls--playmates of Tom's and Joe's--came by, and stood looking over the paling fence and talking in reverent tones of how Tom did so-and-so the last time they saw him, and how Joe said this and that small trifle (pregnant
)--and each speaker pointed out the exact spot where the lost lads stood at the time, and then added something like "and I was a-standing just so--just as I am now, and as if you was him--I was as close as that--and he smiled, just this way--and then
Then there was a dispute about who saw the dead boys last in life, and many claimed that dismal distinction, and offered evidences, more or less tampered with by the witness; and when it was ultimately decided who _did_ see the departed last, and exchanged
One poor chap, who had no other grandeur to offer, said with tolerably manifest pride in the remembrance: "Well, Tom Sawyer he licked me once".
But that bid for glory was a failure.
Most of the boys could say that, and so that cheapened the distinction too much.
The group loitered away, still recalling memories of the lost heroes, in awed voices.
When the Sunday-school hour was finished, the next morning, the bell began to toll, instead of ringing in the usual way.
It was a very still Sabbath, and the mournful sound seemed in keeping with the musing hush that lay upon nature.
The villagers began to gather, loitering a moment in the vestibule to converse in whispers about the sad event.
But there was no whispering in the house; only the funereal rustling of dresses as the women gathered to their seats disturbed the silence there.
None could remember when the little church had been so full before.
There was finally a waiting pause, an expectant dumbness, and then Aunt Polly entered, followed by Sid and Mary, and they by the Harper family, all in deep black, and the whole congregation, the old minister as well, rose reverently and stood until the
There was another communing silence, broken at intervals by muffled sobs, and then the minister spread his hands abroad and prayed.
A moving hymn was sung, and the text followed: "I am the Resurrection and the Life".
As the service proceeded, the clergyman drew such pictures of the graces, the winning ways, and the rare promise of the lost lads that every soul there, thinking he recognized these pictures, felt a pang in remembering that he had persistently blinded
The minister related many a touching incident in the lives of the departed, too, which illustrated their sweet, generous natures, and the people could easily see, now, how noble and beautiful those episodes were, and remembered with grief that at the time
The congregation became more and more moved, as the pathetic tale went on, till at last the whole company broke down and joined the weeping mourners in a chorus of anguished sobs, the preacher himself giving way to his feelings, and crying in the pulpit.
There was a rustle in the gallery, which nobody noticed; a moment later the church door creaked; the minister raised his streaming eyes above his handkerchief, and stood transfixed!
First one and then another pair of eyes followed the minister's, and then almost with one impulse the congregation rose and stared while the three dead boys came marching up the aisle, Tom in the lead, Joe next, and Huck, a ruin of drooping rags, sneaking
They had been hid in the unused gallery listening to their own funeral sermon!
Aunt Polly, Mary, and the Harpers threw themselves upon their restored ones, smothered them with kisses and poured out thanksgivings, while poor Huck stood abashed and uncomfortable, not knowing exactly what to do or where to hide from so many unwelcoming
He wavered, and started to slink away, but Tom seized him and said: "Aunt Polly, it ain't fair.
Somebody's got to be glad to see Huck".
"And so they shall.
I'm glad to see him, poor motherless thing"!
And the loving attentions Aunt Polly lavished upon him were the one thing capable of making him more uncomfortable than he was before.
Suddenly the minister shouted at the top of his voice: "Praise God from whom all blessings flow--_sing_!
--and put your hearts in it"!
And they did.
Old Hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst, and while it shook the rafters Tom Sawyer the Pirate looked around upon the envying juveniles about him and confessed in his heart that this was the proudest moment of his life.
As the "sold" congregation trooped out they said they would almost be willing to be made ridiculous again to hear Old Hundred sung like that once more.
Tom got more cuffs and kisses that day--according to Aunt Polly's varying moods--than he had earned before in a year; and he hardly knew which expressed the most gratefulness to God and affection for himself.
CHAPTER XVIII THAT was Tom's great secret--the scheme to return home with his brother pirates and attend their own funerals.
They had paddled over to the Missouri shore on a log, at dusk on Saturday, landing five or six miles below the village; they had slept in the woods at the edge of the town till nearly daylight, and had then crept through back lanes and alleys and finished
At breakfast, Monday morning, Aunt Polly and Mary were very loving to Tom, and very attentive to his wants.
There was an unusual amount of talk.
In the course of it Aunt Polly said: "Well, I don't say it wasn't a fine joke, Tom, to keep everybody suffering 'most a week so you boys had a good time, but it is a pity you could be so hard-hearted as to let me suffer so.
If you could come over on a log to go to your funeral, you could have come over and give me a hint some way that you warn't dead, but only run off".
"Yes, you could have done that, Tom," said Mary; "and I believe you would if you had thought of it".
"Would you, Tom"?
said Aunt Polly, her face lighting wistfully.
"Say, now, would you, if you'd thought of it"?
"I--well, I don't know.
'Twould 'a' spoiled everything".
"Tom, I hoped you loved me that much," said Aunt Polly, with a grieved tone that discomforted the boy.
"It would have been something if you'd cared enough to _think_ of it, even if you didn't _do_ it".
"Now, auntie, that ain't any harm," pleaded Mary; "it's only Tom's giddy way--he is always in such a rush that he never thinks of anything".
"More's the pity.
Sid would have thought.
And Sid would have come and _done_ it, too.
Tom, you'll look back, some day, when it's too late, and wish you'd cared a little more for me when it would have cost you so little".
"Now, auntie, you know I do care for you," said Tom.
"I'd know it better if you acted more like it".
"I wish now I'd thought," said Tom, with a repentant tone; "but I dreamt about you, anyway.
That's something, ain't it"?
"It ain't much--a cat does that much--but it's better than nothing.
What did you dream"?
"Why, Wednesday night I dreamt that you was sitting over there by the bed, and Sid was sitting by the woodbox, and Mary next to him".
"Well, so we did.
So we always do.
I'm glad your dreams could take even that much trouble about us".
"And I dreamt that Joe Harper's mother was here".
"Why, she was here!
Did you dream any more"?
"Oh, lots.
But it's so dim, now".
"Well, try to recollect--can't you"?
"Somehow it seems to me that the wind--the wind blowed the--the--" "Try harder, Tom!
The wind did blow something.
Come"!
Tom pressed his fingers on his forehead an anxious minute, and then said: "I've got it now!
I've got it now!
It blowed the candle"!
"Mercy on us!
Go on, Tom--go on"!
"And it seems to me that you said, 'Why, I believe that that door--'" "Go _on_, Tom"!
"Just let me study a moment--just a moment.
Oh, yes--you said you believed the door was open".
"As I'm sitting here, I did!
Didn't I, Mary!
Go on"!
"And then--and then--well I won't be certain, but it seems like as if you made Sid go and--and--" "Well?
Well?
What did I make him do, Tom?
What did I make him do"?
"You made him--you--Oh, you made him shut it".
"Well, for the land's sake!
I never heard the beat of that in all my days!
Don't tell _me_ there ain't anything in dreams, any more.
Sereny Harper shall know of this before I'm an hour older.
I'd like to see her get around _this_ with her rubbage 'bout superstition.
Go on, Tom"!
"Oh, it's all getting just as bright as day, now.
Next you said I warn't _bad_, only mischeevous and harum-scarum, and not any more responsible than--than--I think it was a colt, or something".
"And so it was!
Well, goodness gracious!
Go on, Tom"!
"And then you began to cry".
"So I did.
So I did.
Not the first time, neither.
And then--" "Then Mrs. Harper she began to cry, and said Joe was just the same, and she wished she hadn't whipped him for taking cream when she'd throwed it out her own self--" "Tom!
The sperrit was upon you!
You was a prophesying--that's what you was doing!
Land alive, go on, Tom"!
"Then Sid he said--he said--" "I don't think I said anything," said Sid.
"Yes you did, Sid," said Mary.
"Shut your heads and let Tom go on!
What did he say, Tom"?
"He said--I _think_ he said he hoped I was better off where I was gone to, but if I'd been better sometimes--" "_There_, d'you hear that!
It was his very words"!
"And you shut him up sharp".
"I lay I did!
There must 'a' been an angel there.
There _was_ an angel there, somewheres"!
"And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scaring her with a firecracker, and you told about Peter and the Pain-killer--" "Just as true as I live"!
"And then there was a whole lot of talk 'bout dragging the river for us, and 'bout having the funeral Sunday, and then you and old Miss Harper hugged and cried, and she went".
"It happened just so!
It happened just so, as sure as I'm a-sitting in these very tracks.
Tom, you couldn't told it more like if you'd 'a' seen it!
And then what?
Go on, Tom"!
"Then I thought you prayed for me--and I could see you and hear every word you said.
And you went to bed, and I was so sorry that I took and wrote on a piece of sycamore bark, 'We ain't dead--we are only off being pirates,' and put it on the table by the candle; and then you looked so good, laying there asleep, that I thought I went and
"Did you, Tom, _did_ you!
I just forgive you everything for that"!
And she seized the boy in a crushing embrace that made him feel like the guiltiest of villains.
"It was very kind, even though it was only a--dream," Sid soliloquized just audibly.
"Shut up, Sid!
A body does just the same in a dream as he'd do if he was awake.
Here's a big Milum apple I've been saving for you, Tom, if you was ever found again--now go 'long to school.
I'm thankful to the good God and Father of us all I've got you back, that's long-suffering and merciful to them that believe on Him and keep His word, though goodness knows I'm unworthy of it, but if only the worthy ones got His blessings and had His hand
Go 'long Sid, Mary, Tom--take yourselves off--you've hendered me long enough".
The children left for school, and the old lady to call on Mrs. Harper and vanquish her realism with Tom's marvellous dream.
Sid had better judgment than to utter the thought that was in his mind as he left the house.
It was this: "Pretty thin--as long a dream as that, without any mistakes in it"!
What a hero Tom was become, now!
He did not go skipping and prancing, but moved with a dignified swagger as became a pirate who felt that the public eye was on him.
And indeed it was; he tried not to seem to see the looks or hear the remarks as he passed along, but they were food and drink to him.
Smaller boys than himself flocked at his heels, as proud to be seen with him, and tolerated by him, as if he had been the drummer at the head of a procession or the elephant leading a menagerie into town.
Boys of his own size pretended not to know he had been away at all; but they were consuming with envy, nevertheless.
They would have given anything to have that swarthy sun-tanned skin of his, and his glittering notoriety; and Tom would not have parted with either for a circus.
At school the children made so much of him and of Joe, and delivered such eloquent admiration from their eyes, that the two heroes were not long in becoming insufferably "stuck-up".
They began to tell their adventures to hungry listeners--but they only began; it was not a thing likely to have an end, with imaginations like theirs to furnish material.
And finally, when they got out their pipes and went serenely puffing around, the very summit of glory was reached.
Tom decided that he could be independent of Becky Thatcher now.
Glory was sufficient.
He would live for glory.
Now that he was distinguished, maybe she would be wanting to "make up".
Well, let her--she should see that he could be as indifferent as some other people.
Presently she arrived.
Tom pretended not to see her.
He moved away and joined a group of boys and girls and began to talk.
Soon he observed that she was tripping gayly back and forth with flushed face and dancing eyes, pretending to be busy chasing schoolmates, and screaming with laughter when she made a capture; but he noticed that she always made her captures in his
It gratified all the vicious vanity that was in him; and so, instead of winning him, it only "set him up" the more and made him the more diligent to avoid betraying that he knew she was about.
Presently she gave over skylarking, and moved irresolutely about, sighing once or twice and glancing furtively and wistfully toward Tom.
Then she observed that now Tom was talking more particularly to Amy Lawrence than to any one else.
She felt a sharp pang and grew disturbed and uneasy at once.
She tried to go away, but her feet were treacherous, and carried her to the group instead.
She said to a girl almost at Tom's elbow--with sham vivacity: "Why, Mary Austin!
you bad girl, why didn't you come to Sunday-school"?
"I did come--didn't you see me"?
"Why, no!
Did you?
Where did you sit"?
"I was in Miss Peters' class, where I always go.
I saw _you_".
"Did you?
Why, it's funny I didn't see you.
I wanted to tell you about the picnic".
"Oh, that's jolly.
Who's going to give it"?
"My ma's going to let me have one".
"Oh, goody; I hope she'll let _me_ come".
"Well, she will.
The picnic's for me.
She'll let anybody come that I want, and I want you".
"That's ever so nice.
When is it going to be"?
"By and by.
Maybe about vacation".
"Oh, won't it be fun!
You going to have all the girls and boys"?
"Yes, every one that's friends to me--or wants to be"; and she glanced ever so furtively at Tom, but he talked right along to Amy Lawrence about the terrible storm on the island, and how the lightning tore the great sycamore tree "all to flinders" while he
"Oh, may I come"?
said Grace Miller.
"Yes".
"And me"?
said Sally Rogers.
"Yes".
"And me, too"?
said Susy Harper.
"And Joe"?
"Yes".
And so on, with clapping of joyful hands till all the group had begged for invitations but Tom and Amy.
Then Tom turned coolly away, still talking, and took Amy with him.
Becky's lips trembled and the tears came to her eyes; she hid these signs with a forced gayety and went on chattering, but the life had gone out of the picnic, now, and out of everything else; she got away as soon as she could and hid herself and had what
Then she sat moody, with wounded pride, till the bell rang.
She roused up, now, with a vindictive cast in her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake and said she knew what _she'd_ do.
At recess Tom continued his flirtation with Amy with jubilant self-satisfaction.
And he kept drifting about to find Becky and lacerate her with the performance.
At last he spied her, but there was a sudden falling of his mercury.
She was sitting cosily on a little bench behind the schoolhouse looking at a picture-book with Alfred Temple--and so absorbed were they, and their heads so close together over the book, that they did not seem to be conscious of anything in the world
Jealousy ran red-hot through Tom's veins.
He began to hate himself for throwing away the chance Becky had offered for a reconciliation.
He called himself a fool, and all the hard names he could think of.
He wanted to cry with vexation.
Amy chatted happily along, as they walked, for her heart was singing, but Tom's tongue had lost its function.
He did not hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly he could only stammer an awkward assent, which was as often misplaced as otherwise.
He kept drifting to the rear of the schoolhouse, again and again, to sear his eyeballs with the hateful spectacle there.
He could not help it.
And it maddened him to see, as he thought he saw, that Becky Thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of the living.
But she did see, nevertheless; and she knew she was winning her fight, too, and was glad to see him suffer as she had suffered.
Amy's happy prattle became intolerable.
Tom hinted at things he had to attend to; things that must be done; and time was fleeting.
But in vain--the girl chirped on.
Tom thought, "Oh, hang her, ain't I ever going to get rid of her"?
At last he must be attending to those things--and she said artlessly that she would be "around" when school let out.
And he hastened away, hating her for it.
"Any other boy"!
Tom thought, grating his teeth.
"Any boy in the whole town but that Saint Louis smarty that thinks he dresses so fine and is aristocracy!
Oh, all right, I licked you the first day you ever saw this town, mister, and I'll lick you again!
You just wait till I catch you out!
I'll just take and--" And he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary boy--pummelling the air, and kicking and gouging.
"Oh, you do, do you?
You holler 'nough, do you?
Now, then, let that learn you"!
And so the imaginary flogging was finished to his satisfaction.
Tom fled home at noon.
His conscience could not endure any more of Amy's grateful happiness, and his jealousy could bear no more of the other distress.
Becky resumed her picture inspections with Alfred, but as the minutes dragged along and no Tom came to suffer, her triumph began to cloud and she lost interest; gravity and absentmindedness followed, and then melancholy; two or three times she pricked up
At last she grew entirely miserable and wished she hadn't carried it so far.
When poor Alfred, seeing that he was losing her, he did not know how, kept exclaiming: "Oh, here's a jolly one!
look at this"!
she lost patience at last, and said, "Oh, don't bother me!
I don't care for them"!
and burst into tears, and got up and walked away.
Alfred dropped alongside and was going to try to comfort her, but she said: "Go away and leave me alone, can't you!
I hate you"!
So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done--for she had said she would look at pictures all through the nooning--and she walked on, crying.
Then Alfred went musing into the deserted schoolhouse.
He was humiliated and angry.
He easily guessed his way to the truth--the girl had simply made a convenience of him to vent her spite upon Tom Sawyer.
He was far from hating Tom the less when this thought occurred to him.
He wished there was some way to get that boy into trouble without much risk to himself.
Tom's spelling-book fell under his eye.
Here was his opportunity.
He gratefully opened to the lesson for the afternoon and poured ink upon the page.
Becky, glancing in at a window behind him at the moment, saw the act, and moved on, without discovering herself.
She started homeward, now, intending to find Tom and tell him; Tom would be thankful and their troubles would be healed.
Before she was half way home, however, she had changed her mind.
The thought of Tom's treatment of her when she was talking about her picnic came scorching back and filled her with shame.
She resolved to let him get whipped on the damaged spelling-book's account, and to hate him forever, into the bargain.
CHAPTER XIX TOM arrived at home in a dreary mood, and the first thing his aunt said to him showed him that he had brought his sorrows to an unpromising market: "Tom, I've a notion to skin you alive"!
"Auntie, what have I done"?
"Well, you've done enough.
Here I go over to Sereny Harper, like an old softy, expecting I'm going to make her believe all that rubbage about that dream, when lo and behold you she'd found out from Joe that you was over here and heard all the talk we had that night.
Tom, I don't know what is to become of a boy that will act like that.
It makes me feel so bad to think you could let me go to Sereny Harper and make such a fool of myself and never say a word".
This was a new aspect of the thing.
His smartness of the morning had seemed to Tom a good joke before, and very ingenious.
It merely looked mean and shabby now.
He hung his head and could not think of anything to say for a moment.
Then he said: "Auntie, I wish I hadn't done it--but I didn't think".
"Oh, child, you never think.
You never think of anything but your own selfishness.
You could think to come all the way over here from Jackson's Island in the night to laugh at our troubles, and you could think to fool me with a lie about a dream; but you couldn't ever think to pity us and save us from sorrow".
"Auntie, I know now it was mean, but I didn't mean to be mean.
I didn't, honest.
And besides, I didn't come over here to laugh at you that night".
"What did you come for, then"?
"It was to tell you not to be uneasy about us, because we hadn't got drownded".
"Tom, Tom, I would be the thankfullest soul in this world if I could believe you ever had as good a thought as that, but you know you never did--and I know it, Tom".
"Indeed and 'deed I did, auntie--I wish I may never stir if I didn't".
"Oh, Tom, don't lie--don't do it.
It only makes things a hundred times worse".
"It ain't a lie, auntie; it's the truth.
I wanted to keep you from grieving--that was all that made me come".
"I'd give the whole world to believe that--it would cover up a power of sins, Tom.
I'd 'most be glad you'd run off and acted so bad.
But it ain't reasonable; because, why didn't you tell me, child"?
"Why, you see, when you got to talking about the funeral, I just got all full of the idea of our coming and hiding in the church, and I couldn't somehow bear to spoil it.
So I just put the bark back in my pocket and kept mum".
"What bark"?
"The bark I had wrote on to tell you we'd gone pirating.
I wish, now, you'd waked up when I kissed you--I do, honest".
The hard lines in his aunt's face relaxed and a sudden tenderness dawned in her eyes.
"_Did_ you kiss me, Tom"?
"Why, yes, I did".
"Are you sure you did, Tom"?
"Why, yes, I did, auntie--certain sure".
"What did you kiss me for, Tom"?
"Because I loved you so, and you laid there moaning and I was so sorry".
The words sounded like truth.
The old lady could not hide a tremor in her voice when she said: "Kiss me again, Tom!
--and be off with you to school, now, and don't bother me any more".
The moment he was gone, she ran to a closet and got out the ruin of a jacket which Tom had gone pirating in.
Then she stopped, with it in her hand, and said to herself: "No, I don't dare.
Poor boy, I reckon he's lied about it--but it's a blessed, blessed lie, there's such a comfort come from it.
I hope the Lord--I _know_ the Lord will forgive him, because it was such good-heartedness in him to tell it.
But I don't want to find out it's a lie.
I won't look".
She put the jacket away, and stood by musing a minute.
Twice she put out her hand to take the garment again, and twice she refrained.
Once more she ventured, and this time she fortified herself with the thought: "It's a good lie--it's a good lie--I won't let it grieve me".
So she sought the jacket pocket.
A moment later she was reading Tom's piece of bark through flowing tears and saying: "I could forgive the boy, now, if he'd committed a million sins"!
CHAPTER XX THERE was something about Aunt Polly's manner, when she kissed Tom, that swept away his low spirits and made him lighthearted and happy again.
He started to school and had the luck of coming upon Becky Thatcher at the head of Meadow Lane.
His mood always determined his manner.
Without a moment's hesitation he ran to her and said: "I acted mighty mean today, Becky, and I'm so sorry.
I won't ever, ever do that way again, as long as ever I live--please make up, won't you"?
The girl stopped and looked him scornfully in the face: "I'll thank you to keep yourself _to_ yourself, Mr. Thomas Sawyer.
I'll never speak to you again".
She tossed her head and passed on.
Tom was so stunned that he had not even presence of mind enough to say "Who cares, Miss Smarty"?
until the right time to say it had gone by.
So he said nothing.
But he was in a fine rage, nevertheless.
He moped into the schoolyard wishing she were a boy, and imagining how he would trounce her if she were.
He presently encountered her and delivered a stinging remark as he passed.
She hurled one in return, and the angry breach was complete.
It seemed to Becky, in her hot resentment, that she could hardly wait for school to "take in," she was so impatient to see Tom flogged for the injured spelling-book.
If she had had any lingering notion of exposing Alfred Temple, Tom's offensive fling had driven it entirely away.
Poor girl, she did not know how fast she was nearing trouble herself.
The master, Mr. Dobbins, had reached middle age with an unsatisfied ambition.
The darling of his desires was, to be a doctor, but poverty had decreed that he should be nothing higher than a village schoolmaster.
Every day he took a mysterious book out of his desk and absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were reciting.
He kept that book under lock and key.
There was not an urchin in school but was perishing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never came.
Every boy and girl had a theory about the nature of that book; but no two theories were alike, and there was no way of getting at the facts in the case.
Now, as Becky was passing by the desk, which stood near the door, she noticed that the key was in the lock!
It was a precious moment.
She glanced around; found herself alone, and the next instant she had the book in her hands.
The titlepage--Professor Somebody's _Anatomy_--carried no information to her mind; so she began to turn the leaves.
She came at once upon a handsomely engraved and colored frontispiece--a human figure, stark naked.
At that moment a shadow fell on the page and Tom Sawyer stepped in at the door and caught a glimpse of the picture.
Becky snatched at the book to close it, and had the hard luck to tear the pictured page half down the middle.
She thrust the volume into the desk, turned the key, and burst out crying with shame and vexation.
"Tom Sawyer, you are just as mean as you can be, to sneak up on a person and look at what they're looking at".
"How could I know you was looking at anything"?
"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Tom Sawyer; you know you're going to tell on me, and oh, what shall I do, what shall I do!
I'll be whipped, and I never was whipped in school".
Then she stamped her little foot and said: "_Be_ so mean if you want to!
I know something that's going to happen.
You just wait and you'll see!
Hateful, hateful, hateful"!
--and she flung out of the house with a new explosion of crying.
Tom stood still, rather flustered by this onslaught.
Presently he said to himself: "What a curious kind of a fool a girl is!
Never been licked in school!
Shucks!
What's a licking!
That's just like a girl--they're so thin-skinned and chicken-hearted.
Well, of course I ain't going to tell old Dobbins on this little fool, because there's other ways of getting even on her, that ain't so mean; but what of it?
Old Dobbins will ask who it was tore his book.
Nobody'll answer.
Then he'll do just the way he always does--ask first one and then t'other, and when he comes to the right girl he'll know it, without any telling.
Girls' faces always tell on them.
They ain't got any backbone.
She'll get licked.
Well, it's a kind of a tight place for Becky Thatcher, because there ain't any way out of it".
Tom conned the thing a moment longer, and then added: "All right, though; she'd like to see me in just such a fix--let her sweat it out"!
Tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside.
In a few moments the master arrived and school "took in".
Tom did not feel a strong interest in his studies.
Every time he stole a glance at the girls' side of the room Becky's face troubled him.
Considering all things, he did not want to pity her, and yet it was all he could do to help it.
He could get up no exultation that was really worthy the name.
Presently the spelling-book discovery was made, and Tom's mind was entirely full of his own matters for a while after that.
Becky roused up from her lethargy of distress and showed good interest in the proceedings.
She did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble by denying that he spilt the ink on the book himself; and she was right.
The denial only seemed to make the thing worse for Tom.
Becky supposed she would be glad of that, and she tried to believe she was glad of it, but she found she was not certain.
When the worst came to the worst, she had an impulse to get up and tell on Alfred Temple, but she made an effort and forced herself to keep still--because, said she to herself, "he'll tell about me tearing the picture sure.
I wouldn't say a word, not to save his life"!
Tom took his whipping and went back to his seat not at all broken-hearted, for he thought it was possible that he had unknowingly upset the ink on the spelling-book himself, in some skylarking bout--he had denied it for form's sake and because it was
A whole hour drifted by, the master sat nodding in his throne, the air was drowsy with the hum of study.
By and by, Mr. Dobbins straightened himself up, yawned, then unlocked his desk, and reached for his book, but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it.
Most of the pupils glanced up languidly, but there were two among them that watched his movements with intent eyes.
Mr. Dobbins fingered his book absently for a while, then took it out and settled himself in his chair to read!
Tom shot a glance at Becky.
He had seen a hunted and helpless rabbit look as she did, with a gun levelled at its head.
Instantly he forgot his quarrel with her.
Quick--something must be done!
done in a flash, too!
But the very imminence of the emergency paralyzed his invention.
Good!
--he had an inspiration!
He would run and snatch the book, spring through the door and fly.
But his resolution shook for one little instant, and the chance was lost--the master opened the volume.
If Tom only had the wasted opportunity back again!
Too late.
There was no help for Becky now, he said.
The next moment the master faced the school.
Every eye sank under his gaze.
There was that in it which smote even the innocent with fear.
There was silence while one might count ten--the master was gathering his wrath.
Then he spoke: "Who tore this book"?
There was not a sound.
One could have heard a pin drop.
The stillness continued; the master searched face after face for signs of guilt.
"Benjamin Rogers, did you tear this book"?
A denial.
Another pause.
"Joseph Harper, did you"?
Another denial.
Tom's uneasiness grew more and more intense under the slow torture of these proceedings.
The master scanned the ranks of boys--considered a while, then turned to the girls: "Amy Lawrence"?
A shake of the head.
"Gracie Miller"?
The same sign.
"Susan Harper, did you do this"?
Another negative.
The next girl was Becky Thatcher.
Tom was trembling from head to foot with excitement and a sense of the hopelessness of the situation.
"Rebecca Thatcher" [Tom glanced at her face--it was white with terror]--"did you tear--no, look me in the face" [her hands rose in appeal]--"did you tear this book"?
A thought shot like lightning through Tom's brain.
He sprang to his feet and shouted--"I done it"!
The school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly.
Tom stood a moment, to gather his dismembered faculties; and when he stepped forward to go to his punishment the surprise, the gratitude, the adoration that shone upon him out of poor Becky's eyes seemed pay enough for a hundred floggings.
Inspired by the splendor of his own act, he took without an outcry the most merciless flaying that even Mr. Dobbins had ever administered; and also received with indifference the added cruelty of a command to remain two hours after school should be
Tom went to bed that night planning vengeance against Alfred Temple; for with shame and repentance Becky had told him all, not forgetting her own treachery; but even the longing for vengeance had to give way, soon, to pleasanter musings, and he fell asleep
CHAPTER XXI VACATION was approaching.
The schoolmaster, always severe, grew severer and more exacting than ever, for he wanted the school to make a good showing on "Examination" day.
His rod and his ferule were seldom idle now--at least among the smaller pupils.
Only the biggest boys, and young ladies of eighteen and twenty, escaped lashing.
Mr. Dobbins' lashings were very vigorous ones, too; for although he carried, under his wig, a perfectly bald and shiny head, he had only reached middle age, and there was no sign of feebleness in his muscle.
As the great day approached, all the tyranny that was in him came to the surface; he seemed to take a vindictive pleasure in punishing the least shortcomings.
The consequence was, that the smaller boys spent their days in terror and suffering and their nights in plotting revenge.
They threw away no opportunity to do the master a mischief.
But he kept ahead all the time.
The retribution that followed every vengeful success was so sweeping and majestic that the boys always retired from the field badly worsted.
At last they conspired together and hit upon a plan that promised a dazzling victory.
They swore in the signpainter's boy, told him the scheme, and asked his help.
He had his own reasons for being delighted, for the master boarded in his father's family and had given the boy ample cause to hate him.
The master's wife would go on a visit to the country in a few days, and there would be nothing to interfere with the plan; the master always prepared himself for great occasions by getting pretty well fuddled, and the signpainter's boy said that when the
In the fulness of time the interesting occasion arrived.
At eight in the evening the schoolhouse was brilliantly lighted, and adorned with wreaths and festoons of foliage and flowers.
The master sat throned in his great chair upon a raised platform, with his blackboard behind him.
He was looking tolerably mellow.
Three rows of benches on each side and six rows in front of him were occupied by the dignitaries of the town and by the parents of the pupils.
To his left, back of the rows of citizens, was a spacious temporary platform upon which were seated the scholars who were to take part in the exercises of the evening; rows of small boys, washed and dressed to an intolerable state of discomfort; rows of
All the rest of the house was filled with non-participating scholars.
The exercises began.
A very little boy stood up and sheepishly recited, "You'd scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the stage," etc.
--accompanying himself with the painfully exact and spasmodic gestures which a machine might have used--supposing the machine to be a trifle out of order.
But he got through safely, though cruelly scared, and got a fine round of applause when he made his manufactured bow and retired.
A little shamefaced girl lisped, "Mary had a little lamb," etc.
, performed a compassion-inspiring curtsy, got her meed of applause, and sat down flushed and happy.
Tom Sawyer stepped forward with conceited confidence and soared into the unquenchable and indestructible "Give me liberty or give me death" speech, with fine fury and frantic gesticulation, and broke down in the middle of it.
A ghastly stage-fright seized him, his legs quaked under him and he was like to choke.
True, he had the manifest sympathy of the house but he had the house's silence, too, which was even worse than its sympathy.
The master frowned, and this completed the disaster.
Tom struggled awhile and then retired, utterly defeated.
There was a weak attempt at applause, but it died early.
"The Boy Stood on the Burning Deck" followed; also "The Assyrian Came Down," and other declamatory gems.
Then there were reading exercises, and a spelling fight.
The meagre Latin class recited with honor.
The prime feature of the evening was in order, now--original "compositions" by the young ladies.
Each in her turn stepped forward to the edge of the platform, cleared her throat, held up her manuscript (tied with dainty ribbon), and proceeded to read, with labored attention to "expression" and punctuation.
The themes were the same that had been illuminated upon similar occasions by their mothers before them, their grandmothers, and doubtless all their ancestors in the female line clear back to the Crusades.
"Friendship" was one; "Memories of Other Days"; "Religion in History"; "Dream Land"; "The Advantages of Culture"; "Forms of Political Government Compared and Contrasted"; "Melancholy"; "Filial Love"; "Heart Longings," etc.
, etc.
A prevalent feature in these compositions was a nursed and petted melancholy; another was a wasteful and opulent gush of "fine language"; another was a tendency to lug in by the ears particularly prized words and phrases until they were worn entirely out;
No matter what the subject might be, a brainracking effort was made to squirm it into some aspect or other that the moral and religious mind could contemplate with edification.
The glaring insincerity of these sermons was not sufficient to compass the banishment of the fashion from the schools, and it is not sufficient today; it never will be sufficient while the world stands, perhaps.
There is no school in all our land where the young ladies do not feel obliged to close their compositions with a sermon; and you will find that the sermon of the most frivolous and the least religious girl in the school is always the longest and the most
But enough of this.
Homely truth is unpalatable.
Let us return to the "Examination".
The first composition that was read was one entitled "Is this, then, Life"?
Perhaps the reader can endure an extract from it: "In the common walks of life, with what delightful emotions does the youthful mind look forward to some anticipated scene of festivity!
Imagination is busy sketching rose-tinted pictures of joy.
In fancy, the voluptuous votary of fashion sees herself amid the festive throng, 'the observed of all observers.
' Her graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes, is whirling through the mazes of the joyous dance; her eye is brightest, her step is lightest in the gay assembly.
"In such delicious fancies time quickly glides by, and the welcome hour arrives for her entrance into the Elysian world, of which she has had such bright dreams.
How fairy-like does everything appear to her enchanted vision!
Each new scene is more charming than the last.
But after a while she finds that beneath this goodly exterior, all is vanity, the flattery which once charmed her soul, now grates harshly upon her ear; the ballroom has lost its charms; and with wasted health and imbittered heart, she turns away with the
And so forth and so on.
There was a buzz of gratification from time to time during the reading, accompanied by whispered ejaculations of "How sweet"!
"How eloquent"!
"So true"!
etc.
, and after the thing had closed with a peculiarly afflicting sermon the applause was enthusiastic.
Then arose a slim, melancholy girl, whose face had the "interesting" paleness that comes of pills and indigestion, and read a "poem".
Two stanzas of it will do: "A MISSOURI MAIDEN'S FAREWELL TO ALABAMA "Alabama, goodbye!
I love thee well!
But yet for a while do I leave thee now!
Sad, yes, sad thoughts of thee my heart doth swell, And burning recollections throng my brow!
For I have wandered through thy flowery woods; Have roamed and read near Tallapoosa's stream; Have listened to Tallassee's warring floods, And wooed on Coosa's side Aurora's beam.
"Yet shame I not to bear an o'erfull heart, Nor blush to turn behind my tearful eyes; 'Tis from no stranger land I now must part, 'Tis to no strangers left I yield these sighs.
Welcome and home were mine within this State, Whose vales I leave--whose spires fade fast from me And cold must be mine eyes, and heart, and tete, When, dear Alabama!
they turn cold on thee"!
There were very few there who knew what "tete" meant, but the poem was very satisfactory, nevertheless.
Next appeared a dark-complexioned, black-eyed, black-haired young lady, who paused an impressive moment, assumed a tragic expression, and began to read in a measured, solemn tone: "A VISION "Dark and tempestuous was night.
Around the throne on high not a single star quivered; but the deep intonations of the heavy thunder constantly vibrated upon the ear; whilst the terrific lightning revelled in angry mood through the cloudy chambers of heaven, seeming to scorn the power
Even the boisterous winds unanimously came forth from their mystic homes, and blustered about as if to enhance by their aid the wildness of the scene.
"At such a time, so dark, so dreary, for human sympathy my very spirit sighed; but instead thereof, "'My dearest friend, my counsellor, my comforter and guide--My joy in grief, my second bliss in joy,' came to my side.
She moved like one of those bright beings pictured in the sunny walks of fancy's Eden by the romantic and young, a queen of beauty unadorned save by her own transcendent loveliness.
So soft was her step, it failed to make even a sound, and but for the magical thrill imparted by her genial touch, as other unobtrusive beauties, she would have glided away unperceived--unsought.
A strange sadness rested upon her features, like icy tears upon the robe of December, as she pointed to the contending elements without, and bade me contemplate the two beings presented".
This nightmare occupied some ten pages of manuscript and wound up with a sermon so destructive of all hope to non-Presbyterians that it took the first prize.
This composition was considered to be the very finest effort of the evening.
The mayor of the village, in delivering the prize to the author of it, made a warm speech in which he said that it was by far the most "eloquent" thing he had ever listened to, and that Daniel Webster himself might well be proud of it.
It may be remarked, in passing, that the number of compositions in which the word "beauteous" was over-fondled, and human experience referred to as "life's page," was up to the usual average.
Now the master, mellow almost to the verge of geniality, put his chair aside, turned his back to the audience, and began to draw a map of America on the blackboard, to exercise the geography class upon.
But he made a sad business of it with his unsteady hand, and a smothered titter rippled over the house.
He knew what the matter was, and set himself to right it.
He sponged out lines and remade them; but he only distorted them more than ever, and the tittering was more pronounced.
He threw his entire attention upon his work, now, as if determined not to be put down by the mirth.
He felt that all eyes were fastened upon him; he imagined he was succeeding, and yet the tittering continued; it even manifestly increased.
And well it might.
There was a garret above, pierced with a scuttle over his head; and down through this scuttle came a cat, suspended around the haunches by a string; she had a rag tied about her head and jaws to keep her from mewing; as she slowly descended she curved
The tittering rose higher and higher--the cat was within six inches of the absorbed teacher's head--down, down, a little lower, and she grabbed his wig with her desperate claws, clung to it, and was snatched up into the garret in an instant with her trophy
And how the light did blaze abroad from the master's bald pate--for the signpainter's boy had _gilded_ it!
That broke up the meeting.
The boys were avenged.
Vacation had come.
NOTE:--The pretended "compositions" quoted in this chapter are taken without alteration from a volume entitled "Prose and Poetry, by a Western Lady"--but they are exactly and precisely after the schoolgirl pattern, and hence are much happier than any mere
CHAPTER XXII TOM joined the new order of Cadets of Temperance, being attracted by the showy character of their "regalia".
He promised to abstain from smoking, chewing, and profanity as long as he remained a member.
Now he found out a new thing--namely, that to promise not to do a thing is the surest way in the world to make a body want to go and do that very thing.
Tom soon found himself tormented with a desire to drink and swear; the desire grew to be so intense that nothing but the hope of a chance to display himself in his red sash kept him from withdrawing from the order.
Fourth of July was coming; but he soon gave that up--gave it up before he had worn his shackles over forty-eight hours--and fixed his hopes upon old Judge Frazer, justice of the peace, who was apparently on his deathbed and would have a big public funeral,
During three days Tom was deeply concerned about the Judge's condition and hungry for news of it.
Sometimes his hopes ran high--so high that he would venture to get out his regalia and practise before the looking-glass.
But the Judge had a most discouraging way of fluctuating.
At last he was pronounced upon the mend--and then convalescent.
Tom was disgusted; and felt a sense of injury, too.
He handed in his resignation at once--and that night the Judge suffered a relapse and died.
Tom resolved that he would never trust a man like that again.
The funeral was a fine thing.
The Cadets paraded in a style calculated to kill the late member with envy.
Tom was a free boy again, however--there was something in that.
He could drink and swear, now--but found to his surprise that he did not want to.
The simple fact that he could, took the desire away, and the charm of it.
Tom presently wondered to find that his coveted vacation was beginning to hang a little heavily on his hands.
He attempted a diary--but nothing happened during three days, and so he abandoned it.
The first of all the negro minstrel shows came to town, and made a sensation.
Tom and Joe Harper got up a band of performers and were happy for two days.
Even the Glorious Fourth was in some sense a failure, for it rained hard, there was no procession in consequence, and the greatest man in the world (as Tom supposed), Mr. Benton, an actual United States Senator, proved an overwhelming disappointment--for
A circus came.
The boys played circus for three days afterward in tents made of rag carpeting--admission, three pins for boys, two for girls--and then circusing was abandoned.
A phrenologist and a mesmerizer came--and went again and left the village duller and drearier than ever.
There were some boys-and-girls' parties, but they were so few and so delightful that they only made the aching voids between ache the harder.
Becky Thatcher was gone to her Constantinople home to stay with her parents during vacation--so there was no bright side to life anywhere.
The dreadful secret of the murder was a chronic misery.
It was a very cancer for permanency and pain.
Then came the measles.
During two long weeks Tom lay a prisoner, dead to the world and its happenings.
He was very ill, he was interested in nothing.
When he got upon his feet at last and moved feebly downtown, a melancholy change had come over everything and every creature.
There had been a "revival," and everybody had "got religion," not only the adults, but even the boys and girls.
Tom went about, hoping against hope for the sight of one blessed sinful face, but disappointment crossed him everywhere.
He found Joe Harper studying a Testament, and turned sadly away from the depressing spectacle.
He sought Ben Rogers, and found him visiting the poor with a basket of tracts.
He hunted up Jim Hollis, who called his attention to the precious blessing of his late measles as a warning.
Every boy he encountered added another ton to his depression; and when, in desperation, he flew for refuge at last to the bosom of Huckleberry Finn and was received with a Scriptural quotation, his heart broke and he crept home and to bed realizing that he
And that night there came on a terrific storm, with driving rain, awful claps of thunder and blinding sheets of lightning.
He covered his head with the bedclothes and waited in a horror of suspense for his doom; for he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was about him.
He believed he had taxed the forbearance of the powers above to the extremity of endurance and that this was the result.
It might have seemed to him a waste of pomp and ammunition to kill a bug with a battery of artillery, but there seemed nothing incongruous about the getting up such an expensive thunderstorm as this to knock the turf from under an insect like himself.
By and by the tempest spent itself and died without accomplishing its object.
The boy's first impulse was to be grateful, and reform.
His second was to wait--for there might not be any more storms.
The next day the doctors were back; Tom had relapsed.
The three weeks he spent on his back this time seemed an entire age.
When he got abroad at last he was hardly grateful that he had been spared, remembering how lonely was his estate, how companionless and forlorn he was.
He drifted listlessly down the street and found Jim Hollis acting as judge in a juvenile court that was trying a cat for murder, in the presence of her victim, a bird.
He found Joe Harper and Huck Finn up an alley eating a stolen melon.
Poor lads!
they--like Tom--had suffered a relapse.
CHAPTER XXIII AT last the sleepy atmosphere was stirred--and vigorously: the murder trial came on in the court.
It became the absorbing topic of village talk immediately.
Tom could not get away from it.
Every reference to the murder sent a shudder to his heart, for his troubled conscience and fears almost persuaded him that these remarks were put forth in his hearing as "feelers"; he did not see how he could be suspected of knowing anything about the
It kept him in a cold shiver all the time.
He took Huck to a lonely place to have a talk with him.
It would be some relief to unseal his tongue for a little while; to divide his burden of distress with another sufferer.
Moreover, he wanted to assure himself that Huck had remained discreet.
"Huck, have you ever told anybody about--that"?
"'Bout what"?
"You know what".
"Oh--'course I haven't".
"Never a word"?
"Never a solitary word, so help me.
What makes you ask"?
"Well, I was afeard".
"Why, Tom Sawyer, we wouldn't be alive two days if that got found out.
_You_ know that".
Tom felt more comfortable.
After a pause: "Huck, they couldn't anybody get you to tell, could they"?
"Get me to tell?
Why, if I wanted that halfbreed devil to drownd me they could get me to tell.
They ain't no different way".
"Well, that's all right, then.
I reckon we're safe as long as we keep mum.
But let's swear again, anyway.
It's more surer".
"I'm agreed".
So they swore again with dread solemnities.
"What is the talk around, Huck?
I've heard a power of it".
"Talk?
Well, it's just Muff Potter, Muff Potter, Muff Potter all the time.
It keeps me in a sweat, constant, so's I want to hide som'ers".
"That's just the same way they go on round me.
I reckon he's a goner.
Don't you feel sorry for him, sometimes"?
"Most always--most always.
He ain't no account; but then he hain't ever done anything to hurt anybody.
Just fishes a little, to get money to get drunk on--and loafs around considerable; but lord, we all do that--leastways most of us--preachers and such like.
But he's kind of good--he give me half a fish, once, when there warn't enough for two; and lots of times he's kind of stood by me when I was out of luck".
"Well, he's mended kites for me, Huck, and knitted hooks on to my line.
I wish we could get him out of there".
"My!
we couldn't get him out, Tom.
And besides, 'twouldn't do any good; they'd ketch him again".
"Yes--so they would.
But I hate to hear 'em abuse him so like the dickens when he never done--that".
"I do too, Tom.
Lord, I hear 'em say he's the bloodiest looking villain in this country, and they wonder he wasn't ever hung before".
"Yes, they talk like that, all the time.
I've heard 'em say that if he was to get free they'd lynch him".
"And they'd do it, too".
The boys had a long talk, but it brought them little comfort.
As the twilight drew on, they found themselves hanging about the neighborhood of the little isolated jail, perhaps with an undefined hope that something would happen that might clear away their difficulties.
But nothing happened; there seemed to be no angels or fairies interested in this luckless captive.
The boys did as they had often done before--went to the cell grating and gave Potter some tobacco and matches.
He was on the ground floor and there were no guards.
His gratitude for their gifts had always smote their consciences before--it cut deeper than ever, this time.
They felt cowardly and treacherous to the last degree when Potter said: "You've been mighty good to me, boys--better'n anybody else in this town.
And I don't forget it, I don't.
Often I says to myself, says I, 'I used to mend all the boys' kites and things, and show 'em where the good fishin' places was, and befriend 'em what I could, and now they've all forgot old Muff when he's in trouble; but Tom don't, and Huck don't--_they_
' Well, boys, I done an awful thing--drunk and crazy at the time--that's the only way I account for it--and now I got to swing for it, and it's right.
Right, and _best_, too, I reckon--hope so, anyway.
Well, we won't talk about that.
I don't want to make _you_ feel bad; you've befriended me.
But what I want to say, is, don't _you_ ever get drunk--then you won't ever get here.
Stand a litter furder west--so--that's it; it's a prime comfort to see faces that's friendly when a body's in such a muck of trouble, and there don't none come here but yourn.
Good friendly faces--good friendly faces.
Git up on one another's backs and let me touch 'em.
That's it.
Shake hands--yourn'll come through the bars, but mine's too big.
Little hands, and weak--but they've helped Muff Potter a power, and they'd help him more if they could".
Tom went home miserable, and his dreams that night were full of horrors.
The next day and the day after, he hung about the courtroom, drawn by an almost irresistible impulse to go in, but forcing himself to stay out.
Huck was having the same experience.
They studiously avoided each other.
Each wandered away, from time to time, but the same dismal fascination always brought them back presently.
Tom kept his ears open when idlers sauntered out of the courtroom, but invariably heard distressing news--the toils were closing more and more relentlessly around poor Potter.
At the end of the second day the village talk was to the effect that Injun Joe's evidence stood firm and unshaken, and that there was not the slightest question as to what the jury's verdict would be.
Tom was out late, that night, and came to bed through the window.
He was in a tremendous state of excitement.
It was hours before he got to sleep.
All the village flocked to the courthouse the next morning, for this was to be the great day.
Both sexes were about equally represented in the packed audience.
After a long wait the jury filed in and took their places; shortly afterward, Potter, pale and haggard, timid and hopeless, was brought in, with chains upon him, and seated where all the curious eyes could stare at him; no less conspicuous was Injun Joe,
There was another pause, and then the judge arrived and the sheriff proclaimed the opening of the court.
The usual whisperings among the lawyers and gathering together of papers followed.
These details and accompanying delays worked up an atmosphere of preparation that was as impressive as it was fascinating.
Now a witness was called who testified that he found Muff Potter washing in the brook, at an early hour of the morning that the murder was discovered, and that he immediately sneaked away.
After some further questioning, counsel for the prosecution said: "Take the witness".
The prisoner raised his eyes for a moment, but dropped them again when his own counsel said: "I have no questions to ask him".
The next witness proved the finding of the knife near the corpse.
Counsel for the prosecution said: "Take the witness".
"I have no questions to ask him," Potter's lawyer replied.
A third witness swore he had often seen the knife in Potter's possession.
"Take the witness".
Counsel for Potter declined to question him.
The faces of the audience began to betray annoyance.
Did this attorney mean to throw away his client's life without an effort?
Several witnesses deposed concerning Potter's guilty behavior when brought to the scene of the murder.
They were allowed to leave the stand without being cross-questioned.
Every detail of the damaging circumstances that occurred in the graveyard upon that morning which all present remembered so well was brought out by credible witnesses, but none of them were cross-examined by Potter's lawyer.
The perplexity and dissatisfaction of the house expressed itself in murmurs and provoked a reproof from the bench.
Counsel for the prosecution now said: "By the oaths of citizens whose simple word is above suspicion, we have fastened this awful crime, beyond all possibility of question, upon the unhappy prisoner at the bar.
We rest our case here".
A groan escaped from poor Potter, and he put his face in his hands and rocked his body softly to and fro, while a painful silence reigned in the courtroom.
Many men were moved, and many women's compassion testified itself in tears.
Counsel for the defence rose and said: "Your honor, in our remarks at the opening of this trial, we foreshadowed our purpose to prove that our client did this fearful deed while under the influence of a blind and irresponsible delirium produced by drink.
We have changed our mind.
We shall not offer that plea".
[Then to the clerk:] "Call Thomas Sawyer"!
A puzzled amazement awoke in every face in the house, not even excepting Potter's.
Every eye fastened itself with wondering interest upon Tom as he rose and took his place upon the stand.
The boy looked wild enough, for he was badly scared.
The oath was administered.
"Thomas Sawyer, where were you on the seventeenth of June, about the hour of midnight"?
Tom glanced at Injun Joe's iron face and his tongue failed him.
The audience listened breathless, but the words refused to come.
After a few moments, however, the boy got a little of his strength back, and managed to put enough of it into his voice to make part of the house hear: "In the graveyard"!
"A little bit louder, please.
Don't be afraid.
You were--" "In the graveyard".
A contemptuous smile flitted across Injun Joe's face.
"Were you anywhere near Horse Williams' grave"?
"Yes, sir".
"Speak up--just a trifle louder.
How near were you"?
"Near as I am to you".
"Were you hidden, or not"?
"I was hid".
"Where"?
"Behind the elms that's on the edge of the grave".
Injun Joe gave a barely perceptible start.
"Any one with you"?
"Yes, sir.
I went there with--" "Wait--wait a moment.
Never mind mentioning your companion's name.
We will produce him at the proper time.
Did you carry anything there with you".
Tom hesitated and looked confused.
"Speak out, my boy--don't be diffident.
The truth is always respectable.
What did you take there"?
"Only a--a--dead cat".
There was a ripple of mirth, which the court checked.
"We will produce the skeleton of that cat.
Now, my boy, tell us everything that occurred--tell it in your own way--don't skip anything, and don't be afraid".
Tom began--hesitatingly at first, but as he warmed to his subject his words flowed more and more easily; in a little while every sound ceased but his own voice; every eye fixed itself upon him; with parted lips and bated breath the audience hung upon his
The strain upon pent emotion reached its climax when the boy said: "--and as the doctor fetched the board around and Muff Potter fell, Injun Joe jumped with the knife and--" Crash!
Quick as lightning the halfbreed sprang for a window, tore his way through all opposers, and was gone!
CHAPTER XXIV TOM was a glittering hero once more--the pet of the old, the envy of the young.
His name even went into immortal print, for the village paper magnified him.
There were some that believed he would be President, yet, if he escaped hanging.
As usual, the fickle, unreasoning world took Muff Potter to its bosom and fondled him as lavishly as it had abused him before.
But that sort of conduct is to the world's credit; therefore it is not well to find fault with it.
Tom's days were days of splendor and exultation to him, but his nights were seasons of horror.
Injun Joe infested all his dreams, and always with doom in his eye.
Hardly any temptation could persuade the boy to stir abroad after nightfall.
Poor Huck was in the same state of wretchedness and terror, for Tom had told the whole story to the lawyer the night before the great day of the trial, and Huck was sore afraid that his share in the business might leak out, yet, notwithstanding Injun Joe's
The poor fellow had got the attorney to promise secrecy, but what of that?
Since Tom's harassed conscience had managed to drive him to the lawyer's house by night and wring a dread tale from lips that had been sealed with the dismalest and most formidable of oaths, Huck's confidence in the human race was wellnigh obliterated.
Daily Muff Potter's gratitude made Tom glad he had spoken; but nightly he wished he had sealed up his tongue.
Half the time Tom was afraid Injun Joe would never be captured; the other half he was afraid he would be.
He felt sure he never could draw a safe breath again until that man was dead and he had seen the corpse.
Rewards had been offered, the country had been scoured, but no Injun Joe was found.
One of those omniscient and aweinspiring marvels, a detective, came up from St. Louis, moused around, shook his head, looked wise, and made that sort of astounding success which members of that craft usually achieve.
That is to say, he "found a clew".
But you can't hang a "clew" for murder, and so after that detective had got through and gone home, Tom felt just as insecure as he was before.
The slow days drifted on, and each left behind it a slightly lightened weight of apprehension.
CHAPTER XXV THERE comes a time in every rightly-constructed boy's life when he has a raging desire to go somewhere and dig for hidden treasure.
This desire suddenly came upon Tom one day.
He sallied out to find Joe Harper, but failed of success.
Next he sought Ben Rogers; he had gone fishing.
Presently he stumbled upon Huck Finn the Red-Handed.
Huck would answer.
Tom took him to a private place and opened the matter to him confidentially.
Huck was willing.
Huck was always willing to take a hand in any enterprise that offered entertainment and required no capital, for he had a troublesome superabundance of that sort of time which is not money.
"Where'll we dig"?
said Huck.
"Oh, most anywhere".
"Why, is it hid all around"?
"No, indeed it ain't.
It's hid in mighty particular places, Huck--sometimes on islands, sometimes in rotten chests under the end of a limb of an old dead tree, just where the shadow falls at midnight; but mostly under the floor in ha'nted houses".
"Who hides it"?
"Why, robbers, of course--who'd you reckon?
Sunday-school sup'rintendents"?
"I don't know.
If 'twas mine I wouldn't hide it; I'd spend it and have a good time".
"So would I. But robbers don't do that way.
They always hide it and leave it there".
"Don't they come after it any more"?
"No, they think they will, but they generally forget the marks, or else they die.
Anyway, it lays there a long time and gets rusty; and by and by somebody finds an old yellow paper that tells how to find the marks--a paper that's got to be ciphered over about a week because it's mostly signs and hy'roglyphics".
"Hyro--which"?
"Hy'roglyphics--pictures and things, you know, that don't seem to mean anything".
"Have you got one of them papers, Tom"?
"No".
"Well then, how you going to find the marks"?
"I don't want any marks.
They always bury it under a ha'nted house or on an island, or under a dead tree that's got one limb sticking out.
Well, we've tried Jackson's Island a little, and we can try it again some time; and there's the old ha'nted house up the Still-House branch, and there's lots of dead-limb trees--dead loads of 'em".
"Is it under all of them"?
"How you talk!
No"!
"Then how you going to know which one to go for"?
"Go for all of 'em"!
"Why, Tom, it'll take all summer".
"Well, what of that?
Suppose you find a brass pot with a hundred dollars in it, all rusty and gray, or rotten chest full of di'monds.
How's that"?
Huck's eyes glowed.
"That's bully.
Plenty bully enough for me.
Just you gimme the hundred dollars and I don't want no di'monds".
"All right.
But I bet you I ain't going to throw off on di'monds.
Some of 'em's worth twenty dollars apiece--there ain't any, hardly, but's worth six bits or a dollar".
"No!
Is that so"?
"Cert'nly--anybody'll tell you so.
Hain't you ever seen one, Huck"?
"Not as I remember".
"Oh, kings have slathers of them".
"Well, I don' know no kings, Tom".
"I reckon you don't.
But if you was to go to Europe you'd see a raft of 'em hopping around".
"Do they hop"?
"Hop?
--your granny!
No"!
"Well, what did you say they did, for"?
"Shucks, I only meant you'd _see_ 'em--not hopping, of course--what do they want to hop for?
--but I mean you'd just see 'em--scattered around, you know, in a kind of a general way.
Like that old humpbacked Richard".
"Richard?
What's his other name"?
"He didn't have any other name.
Kings don't have any but a given name".
"No"?
"But they don't".
"Well, if they like it, Tom, all right; but I don't want to be a king and have only just a given name, like a nigger.
But say--where you going to dig first"?
"Well, I don't know.
S'pose we tackle that old dead-limb tree on the hill t'other side of Still-House branch"?
"I'm agreed".
So they got a crippled pick and a shovel, and set out on their three-mile tramp.
They arrived hot and panting, and threw themselves down in the shade of a neighboring elm to rest and have a smoke.
"I like this," said Tom.
"So do I." "Say, Huck, if we find a treasure here, what you going to do with your share"?
"Well, I'll have pie and a glass of soda every day, and I'll go to every circus that comes along.
I bet I'll have a gay time".
"Well, ain't you going to save any of it"?
"Save it?
What for"?
"Why, so as to have something to live on, by and by".
"Oh, that ain't any use.
Pap would come back to thish-yer town some day and get his claws on it if I didn't hurry up, and I tell you he'd clean it out pretty quick.
What you going to do with yourn, Tom"?
"I'm going to buy a new drum, and a sure'nough sword, and a red necktie and a bull pup, and get married".
"Married"!
"That's it".
"Tom, you--why, you ain't in your right mind".
"Wait--you'll see".
"Well, that's the foolishest thing you could do.
Look at pap and my mother.
Fight!
Why, they used to fight all the time.
I remember, mighty well".
"That ain't anything.
The girl I'm going to marry won't fight".
"Tom, I reckon they're all alike.
They'll all comb a body.
Now you better think 'bout this awhile.
I tell you you better.
What's the name of the gal"?
"It ain't a gal at all--it's a girl".
"It's all the same, I reckon; some says gal, some says girl--both's right, like enough.
Anyway, what's her name, Tom"?
"I'll tell you some time--not now".
"All right--that'll do.
Only if you get married I'll be more lonesomer than ever".
"No you won't.
You'll come and live with me.
Now stir out of this and we'll go to digging".
They worked and sweated for half an hour.
No result.
They toiled another halfhour.
Still no result.
Huck said: "Do they always bury it as deep as this"?
"Sometimes--not always.
Not generally.
I reckon we haven't got the right place".
So they chose a new spot and began again.
The labor dragged a little, but still they made progress.
They pegged away in silence for some time.
Finally Huck leaned on his shovel, swabbed the beaded drops from his brow with his sleeve, and said: "Where you going to dig next, after we get this one"?
"I reckon maybe we'll tackle the old tree that's over yonder on Cardiff Hill back of the widow's".
"I reckon that'll be a good one.
But won't the widow take it away from us, Tom?
It's on her land".
"_She_ take it away!
Maybe she'd like to try it once.
Whoever finds one of these hid treasures, it belongs to him.
It don't make any difference whose land it's on".
That was satisfactory.
The work went on.
By and by Huck said: "Blame it, we must be in the wrong place again.
What do you think"?
"It is mighty curious, Huck.
I don't understand it.
Sometimes witches interfere.
I reckon maybe that's what's the trouble now".
"Shucks!
Witches ain't got no power in the daytime".
"Well, that's so.
I didn't think of that.
Oh, I know what the matter is!
What a blamed lot of fools we are!
You got to find out where the shadow of the limb falls at midnight, and that's where you dig"!
"Then consound it, we've fooled away all this work for nothing.
Now hang it all, we got to come back in the night.
It's an awful long way.
Can you get out"?
"I bet I will.
We've got to do it tonight, too, because if somebody sees these holes they'll know in a minute what's here and they'll go for it".
"Well, I'll come around and maow tonight".
"All right.
Let's hide the tools in the bushes".
The boys were there that night, about the appointed time.
They sat in the shadow waiting.
It was a lonely place, and an hour made solemn by old traditions.
Spirits whispered in the rustling leaves, ghosts lurked in the murky nooks, the deep baying of a hound floated up out of the distance, an owl answered with his sepulchral note.
The boys were subdued by these solemnities, and talked little.
By and by they judged that twelve had come; they marked where the shadow fell, and began to dig.
Their hopes commenced to rise.
Their interest grew stronger, and their industry kept pace with it.
The hole deepened and still deepened, but every time their hearts jumped to hear the pick strike upon something, they only suffered a new disappointment.
It was only a stone or a chunk.
At last Tom said: "It ain't any use, Huck, we're wrong again".
"Well, but we _can't_ be wrong.
We spotted the shadder to a dot".
"I know it, but then there's another thing".
"What's that"?
.
"Why, we only guessed at the time.
Like enough it was too late or too early".
Huck dropped his shovel.
"That's it," said he.
"That's the very trouble.
We got to give this one up.
We can't ever tell the right time, and besides this kind of thing's too awful, here this time of night with witches and ghosts a-fluttering around so.
I feel as if something's behind me all the time; and I'm afeard to turn around, becuz maybe there's others in front a-waiting for a chance.
I been creeping all over, ever since I got here".
"Well, I've been pretty much so, too, Huck.
They most always put in a dead man when they bury a treasure under a tree, to look out for it".
"Lordy"!
"Yes, they do.
I've always heard that".
"Tom, I don't like to fool around much where there's dead people.
A body's bound to get into trouble with 'em, sure".
"I don't like to stir 'em up, either.
S'pose this one here was to stick his skull out and say something"!
"Don't Tom!
It's awful".
"Well, it just is.
Huck, I don't feel comfortable a bit".
"Say, Tom, let's give this place up, and try somewheres else".
"All right, I reckon we better".
"What'll it be"?
Tom considered awhile; and then said: "The ha'nted house.
That's it"!
"Blame it, I don't like ha'nted houses, Tom.
Why, they're a dern sight worse'n dead people.
Dead people might talk, maybe, but they don't come sliding around in a shroud, when you ain't noticing, and peep over your shoulder all of a sudden and grit their teeth, the way a ghost does.
I couldn't stand such a thing as that, Tom--nobody could".
"Yes, but, Huck, ghosts don't travel around only at night.
They won't hender us from digging there in the daytime".
"Well, that's so.
But you know mighty well people don't go about that ha'nted house in the day nor the night".
"Well, that's mostly because they don't like to go where a man's been murdered, anyway--but nothing's ever been seen around that house except in the night--just some blue lights slipping by the windows--no regular ghosts".
"Well, where you see one of them blue lights flickering around, Tom, you can bet there's a ghost mighty close behind it.
It stands to reason.
Becuz you know that they don't anybody but ghosts use 'em".
"Yes, that's so.
But anyway they don't come around in the daytime, so what's the use of our being afeard"?
"Well, all right.
We'll tackle the ha'nted house if you say so--but I reckon it's taking chances".
They had started down the hill by this time.
There in the middle of the moonlit valley below them stood the "ha'nted" house, utterly isolated, its fences gone long ago, rank weeds smothering the very doorsteps, the chimney crumbled to ruin, the window-sashes vacant, a corner of the roof caved in.
The boys gazed awhile, half expecting to see a blue light flit past a window; then talking in a low tone, as befitted the time and the circumstances, they struck far off to the right, to give the haunted house a wide berth, and took their way homeward
CHAPTER XVI ABOUT noon the next day the boys arrived at the dead tree; they had come for their tools.
Tom was impatient to go to the haunted house; Huck was measurably so, also--but suddenly said: "Lookyhere, Tom, do you know what day it is"?
Tom mentally ran over the days of the week, and then quickly lifted his eyes with a startled look in them-- "My!
I never once thought of it, Huck"!
"Well, I didn't neither, but all at once it popped onto me that it was Friday".
"Blame it, a body can't be too careful, Huck.
We might 'a' got into an awful scrape, tackling such a thing on a Friday".
"_Might_!
Better say we _would_!
There's some lucky days, maybe, but Friday ain't".
"Any fool knows that.
I don't reckon _you_ was the first that found it out, Huck".
"Well, I never said I was, did I?
And Friday ain't all, neither.
I had a rotten bad dream last night--dreampt about rats".
"No!
Sure sign of trouble.
Did they fight"?
"No".
"Well, that's good, Huck.
When they don't fight it's only a sign that there's trouble around, you know.
All we got to do is to look mighty sharp and keep out of it.
We'll drop this thing for today, and play.
Do you know Robin Hood, Huck"?
"No.
Who's Robin Hood"?
"Why, he was one of the greatest men that was ever in England--and the best.
He was a robber".
"Cracky, I wisht I was.
Who did he rob"?
"Only sheriffs and bishops and rich people and kings, and such like.
But he never bothered the poor.
He loved 'em.
He always divided up with 'em perfectly square".
"Well, he must 'a' been a brick".
"I bet you he was, Huck.
Oh, he was the noblest man that ever was.
They ain't any such men now, I can tell you.
He could lick any man in England, with one hand tied behind him; and he could take his yew bow and plug a ten-cent piece every time, a mile and a half".
"What's a _yew_ bow"?
"I don't know.
It's some kind of a bow, of course.
And if he hit that dime only on the edge he would set down and cry--and curse.
But we'll play Robin Hood--it's nobby fun.
I'll learn you".
"I'm agreed".
So they played Robin Hood all the afternoon, now and then casting a yearning eye down upon the haunted house and passing a remark about the morrow's prospects and possibilities there.
As the sun began to sink into the west they took their way homeward athwart the long shadows of the trees and soon were buried from sight in the forests of Cardiff Hill.
On Saturday, shortly after noon, the boys were at the dead tree again.
They had a smoke and a chat in the shade, and then dug a little in their last hole, not with great hope, but merely because Tom said there were so many cases where people had given up a treasure after getting down within six inches of it, and then somebody
The thing failed this time, however, so the boys shouldered their tools and went away feeling that they had not trifled with fortune, but had fulfilled all the requirements that belong to the business of treasure-hunting.
When they reached the haunted house there was something so weird and grisly about the dead silence that reigned there under the baking sun, and something so depressing about the loneliness and desolation of the place, that they were afraid, for a moment,
Then they crept to the door and took a trembling peep.
They saw a weedgrown, floorless room, unplastered, an ancient fireplace, vacant windows, a ruinous staircase; and here, there, and everywhere hung ragged and abandoned cobwebs.
They presently entered, softly, with quickened pulses, talking in whispers, ears alert to catch the slightest sound, and muscles tense and ready for instant retreat.
In a little while familiarity modified their fears and they gave the place a critical and interested examination, rather admiring their own boldness, and wondering at it, too.
Next they wanted to look upstairs.
This was something like cutting off retreat, but they got to daring each other, and of course there could be but one result--they threw their tools into a corner and made the ascent.
Up there were the same signs of decay.
In one corner they found a closet that promised mystery, but the promise was a fraud--there was nothing in it.
Their courage was up now and well in hand.
They were about to go down and begin work when-- "Sh"!
said Tom.
"What is it"?
whispered Huck, blanching with fright.
"Sh!
...
There!
...
Hear it"?
"Yes!
...
Oh, my!
Let's run"!
"Keep still!
Don't you budge!
They're coming right toward the door".
The boys stretched themselves upon the floor with their eyes to knotholes in the planking, and lay waiting, in a misery of fear.
"They've stopped...
.
No--coming...
.
Here they are.
Don't whisper another word, Huck.
My goodness, I wish I was out of this"!
Two men entered.
Each boy said to himself: "There's the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that's been about town once or twice lately--never saw t'other man before".
"T'other" was a ragged, unkempt creature, with nothing very pleasant in his face.
The Spaniard was wrapped in a serape; he had bushy white whiskers; long white hair flowed from under his sombrero, and he wore green goggles.
When they came in, "t'other" was talking in a low voice; they sat down on the ground, facing the door, with their backs to the wall, and the speaker continued his remarks.
His manner became less guarded and his words more distinct as he proceeded: "No," said he, "I've thought it all over, and I don't like it.
It's dangerous".
"Dangerous"!
grunted the "deaf and dumb" Spaniard--to the vast surprise of the boys.
"Milksop"!
This voice made the boys gasp and quake.
It was Injun Joe's!
There was silence for some time.
Then Joe said: "What's any more dangerous than that job up yonder--but nothing's come of it".
"That's different.
Away up the river so, and not another house about.
'Twon't ever be known that we tried, anyway, long as we didn't succeed".
"Well, what's more dangerous than coming here in the daytime!
--anybody would suspicion us that saw us".
"I know that.
But there warn't any other place as handy after that fool of a job.
I want to quit this shanty.
I wanted to yesterday, only it warn't any use trying to stir out of here, with those infernal boys playing over there on the hill right in full view".
"Those infernal boys" quaked again under the inspiration of this remark, and thought how lucky it was that they had remembered it was Friday and concluded to wait a day.
They wished in their hearts they had waited a year.
The two men got out some food and made a luncheon.
After a long and thoughtful silence, Injun Joe said: "Look here, lad--you go back up the river where you belong.
Wait there till you hear from me.
I'll take the chances on dropping into this town just once more, for a look.
We'll do that 'dangerous' job after I've spied around a little and think things look well for it.
Then for Texas!
We'll leg it together"!
This was satisfactory.
Both men presently fell to yawning, and Injun Joe said: "I'm dead for sleep!
It's your turn to watch".
He curled down in the weeds and soon began to snore.
His comrade stirred him once or twice and he became quiet.
Presently the watcher began to nod; his head drooped lower and lower, both men began to snore now.
The boys drew a long, grateful breath.
Tom whispered: "Now's our chance--come"!
Huck said: "I can't--I'd die if they was to wake".
Tom urged--Huck held back.
At last Tom rose slowly and softly, and started alone.
But the first step he made wrung such a hideous creak from the crazy floor that he sank down almost dead with fright.
He never made a second attempt.
The boys lay there counting the dragging moments till it seemed to them that time must be done and eternity growing gray; and then they were grateful to note that at last the sun was setting.
Now one snore ceased.
Injun Joe sat up, stared around--smiled grimly upon his comrade, whose head was drooping upon his knees--stirred him up with his foot and said: "Here!
_You're_ a watchman, ain't you!
All right, though--nothing's happened".
"My!
have I been asleep"?
"Oh, partly, partly.
Nearly time for us to be moving, pard.
What'll we do with what little swag we've got left"?
"I don't know--leave it here as we've always done, I reckon.
No use to take it away till we start south.
Six hundred and fifty in silver's something to carry".
"Well--all right--it won't matter to come here once more".
"No--but I'd say come in the night as we used to do--it's better".
"Yes: but look here; it may be a good while before I get the right chance at that job; accidents might happen; 'tain't in such a very good place; we'll just regularly bury it--and bury it deep".
"Good idea," said the comrade, who walked across the room, knelt down, raised one of the rearward hearth-stones and took out a bag that jingled pleasantly.
He subtracted from it twenty or thirty dollars for himself and as much for Injun Joe, and passed the bag to the latter, who was on his knees in the corner, now, digging with his bowie-knife.
The boys forgot all their fears, all their miseries in an instant.
With gloating eyes they watched every movement.
Luck!
--the splendor of it was beyond all imagination!
Six hundred dollars was money enough to make half a dozen boys rich!
Here was treasure-hunting under the happiest auspices--there would not be any bothersome uncertainty as to where to dig.
They nudged each other every moment--eloquent nudges and easily understood, for they simply meant--"Oh, but ain't you glad _now_ we're here"!
Joe's knife struck upon something.
"Hello"!
said he.
"What is it"?
said his comrade.
"Half-rotten plank--no, it's a box, I believe.
Here--bear a hand and we'll see what it's here for.
Never mind, I've broke a hole".
He reached his hand in and drew it out-- "Man, it's money"!
The two men examined the handful of coins.
They were gold.
The boys above were as excited as themselves, and as delighted.
Joe's comrade said: "We'll make quick work of this.
There's an old rusty pick over amongst the weeds in the corner the other side of the fireplace--I saw it a minute ago".
He ran and brought the boys' pick and shovel.
Injun Joe took the pick, looked it over critically, shook his head, muttered something to himself, and then began to use it.
The box was soon unearthed.
It was not very large; it was iron bound and had been very strong before the slow years had injured it.
The men contemplated the treasure awhile in blissful silence.
"Pard, there's thousands of dollars here," said Injun Joe.
"'Twas always said that Murrel's gang used to be around here one summer," the stranger observed.
"I know it," said Injun Joe; "and this looks like it, I should say".
"Now you won't need to do that job".
The halfbreed frowned.
Said he: "You don't know me.
Least you don't know all about that thing.
'Tain't robbery altogether--it's _revenge_"!
and a wicked light flamed in his eyes.
"I'll need your help in it.
When it's finished--then Texas.
Go home to your Nance and your kids, and stand by till you hear from me".
"Well--if you say so; what'll we do with this--bury it again"?
"Yes.
[Ravishing delight overhead.
] _No_!
by the great Sachem, no!
[Profound distress overhead.
] I'd nearly forgot.
That pick had fresh earth on it!
[The boys were sick with terror in a moment.
] What business has a pick and a shovel here?
What business with fresh earth on them?
Who brought them here--and where are they gone?
Have you heard anybody?
--seen anybody?
What!
bury it again and leave them to come and see the ground disturbed?
Not exactly--not exactly.
We'll take it to my den".
"Why, of course!
Might have thought of that before.
You mean Number One"?
"No--Number Two--under the cross.
The other place is bad--too common".
"All right.
It's nearly dark enough to start".
Injun Joe got up and went about from window to window cautiously peeping out.
Presently he said: "Who could have brought those tools here?
Do you reckon they can be upstairs"?
The boys' breath forsook them.
Injun Joe put his hand on his knife, halted a moment, undecided, and then turned toward the stairway.
The boys thought of the closet, but their strength was gone.
The steps came creaking up the stairs--the intolerable distress of the situation woke the stricken resolution of the lads--they were about to spring for the closet, when there was a crash of rotten timbers and Injun Joe landed on the ground amid the debris
He gathered himself up cursing, and his comrade said: "Now what's the use of all that?
If it's anybody, and they're up there, let them _stay_ there--who cares?
If they want to jump down, now, and get into trouble, who objects?
It will be dark in fifteen minutes--and then let them follow us if they want to.
I'm willing.
In my opinion, whoever hove those things in here caught a sight of us and took us for ghosts or devils or something.
I'll bet they're running yet".
Joe grumbled awhile; then he agreed with his friend that what daylight was left ought to be economized in getting things ready for leaving.
Shortly afterward they slipped out of the house in the deepening twilight, and moved toward the river with their precious box.
Tom and Huck rose up, weak but vastly relieved, and stared after them through the chinks between the logs of the house.
Follow?
Not they.
They were content to reach ground again without broken necks, and take the townward track over the hill.
They did not talk much.
They were too much absorbed in hating themselves--hating the ill luck that made them take the spade and the pick there.
But for that, Injun Joe never would have suspected.
He would have hidden the silver with the gold to wait there till his "revenge" was satisfied, and then he would have had the misfortune to find that money turn up missing.
Bitter, bitter luck that the tools were ever brought there!
They resolved to keep a lookout for that Spaniard when he should come to town spying out for chances to do his revengeful job, and follow him to "Number Two," wherever that might be.
Then a ghastly thought occurred to Tom.
"Revenge?
What if he means _us_, Huck"!
"Oh, don't"!
said Huck, nearly fainting.
They talked it all over, and as they entered town they agreed to believe that he might possibly mean somebody else--at least that he might at least mean nobody but Tom, since only Tom had testified.
Very, very small comfort it was to Tom to be alone in danger!
Company would be a palpable improvement, he thought.
CHAPTER XXVII THE adventure of the day mightily tormented Tom's dreams that night.
Four times he had his hands on that rich treasure and four times it wasted to nothingness in his fingers as sleep forsook him and wakefulness brought back the hard reality of his misfortune.
As he lay in the early morning recalling the incidents of his great adventure, he noticed that they seemed curiously subdued and far away--somewhat as if they had happened in another world, or in a time long gone by.
Then it occurred to him that the great adventure itself must be a dream!
There was one very strong argument in favor of this idea--namely, that the quantity of coin he had seen was too vast to be real.
He had never seen as much as fifty dollars in one mass before, and he was like all boys of his age and station in life, in that he imagined that all references to "hundreds" and "thousands" were mere fanciful forms of speech, and that no such sums really
He never had supposed for a moment that so large a sum as a hundred dollars was to be found in actual money in any one's possession.
If his notions of hidden treasure had been analyzed, they would have been found to consist of a handful of real dimes and a bushel of vague, splendid, ungraspable dollars.
But the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper and clearer under the attrition of thinking them over, and so he presently found himself leaning to the impression that the thing might not have been a dream, after all.
This uncertainty must be swept away.
He would snatch a hurried breakfast and go and find Huck.
Huck was sitting on the gunwale of a flatboat, listlessly dangling his feet in the water and looking very melancholy.
Tom concluded to let Huck lead up to the subject.
If he did not do it, then the adventure would be proved to have been only a dream.
"Hello, Huck"!
"Hello, yourself".
Silence, for a minute.
"Tom, if we'd 'a' left the blame tools at the dead tree, we'd 'a' got the money.
Oh, ain't it awful"!
"'Tain't a dream, then, 'tain't a dream!
Somehow I most wish it was.
Dog'd if I don't, Huck".
"What ain't a dream"?
"Oh, that thing yesterday.
I been half thinking it was".
"Dream!
If them stairs hadn't broke down you'd 'a' seen how much dream it was!
I've had dreams enough all night--with that patch-eyed Spanish devil going for me all through 'em--rot him"!
"No, not rot him.
_Find_ him!
Track the money"!
"Tom, we'll never find him.
A feller don't have only one chance for such a pile--and that one's lost.
I'd feel mighty shaky if I was to see him, anyway".
"Well, so'd I; but I'd like to see him, anyway--and track him out--to his Number Two".
"Number Two--yes, that's it.
I been thinking 'bout that.
But I can't make nothing out of it.
What do you reckon it is"?
"I dono.
It's too deep.
Say, Huck--maybe it's the number of a house"!
"Goody!
...
No, Tom, that ain't it.
If it is, it ain't in this one-horse town.
They ain't no numbers here".
"Well, that's so.
Lemme think a minute.
Here--it's the number of a room--in a tavern, you know"!
"Oh, that's the trick!
They ain't only two taverns.
We can find out quick".
"You stay here, Huck, till I come".
Tom was off at once.
He did not care to have Huck's company in public places.
He was gone half an hour.
He found that in the best tavern, No.
2 had long been occupied by a young lawyer, and was still so occupied.
In the less ostentatious house, No.
2 was a mystery.
The tavern-keeper's young son said it was kept locked all the time, and he never saw anybody go into it or come out of it except at night; he did not know any particular reason for this state of things; had had some little curiosity, but it was rather
"That's what I've found out, Huck.
I reckon that's the very No.
2 we're after".
"I reckon it is, Tom.
Now what you going to do"?
"Lemme think".
Tom thought a long time.
Then he said: "I'll tell you.
The back door of that No.
2 is the door that comes out into that little close alley between the tavern and the old rattle trap of a brick store.
Now you get hold of all the doorkeys you can find, and I'll nip all of auntie's, and the first dark night we'll go there and try 'em.
And mind you, keep a lookout for Injun Joe, because he said he was going to drop into town and spy around once more for a chance to get his revenge.
If you see him, you just follow him; and if he don't go to that No.
2, that ain't the place".
"Lordy, I don't want to foller him by myself"!
"Why, it'll be night, sure.
He mightn't ever see you--and if he did, maybe he'd never think anything".
"Well, if it's pretty dark I reckon I'll track him.
I dono--I dono.
I'll try".
"You bet I'll follow him, if it's dark, Huck.
Why, he might 'a' found out he couldn't get his revenge, and be going right after that money".
"It's so, Tom, it's so.
I'll foller him; I will, by jingoes"!
"Now you're _talking_!
Don't you ever weaken, Huck, and I won't".
CHAPTER XXVIII THAT night Tom and Huck were ready for their adventure.
They hung about the neighborhood of the tavern until after nine, one watching the alley at a distance and the other the tavern door.
Nobody entered the alley or left it; nobody resembling the Spaniard entered or left the tavern door.
The night promised to be a fair one; so Tom went home with the understanding that if a considerable degree of darkness came on, Huck was to come and "maow," whereupon he would slip out and try the keys.
But the night remained clear, and Huck closed his watch and retired to bed in an empty sugar hogshead about twelve.
Tuesday the boys had the same ill luck.
Also Wednesday.
But Thursday night promised better.
Tom slipped out in good season with his aunt's old tin lantern, and a large towel to blindfold it with.
He hid the lantern in Huck's sugar hogshead and the watch began.
An hour before midnight the tavern closed up and its lights (the only ones thereabouts) were put out.
No Spaniard had been seen.
Nobody had entered or left the alley.
Everything was auspicious.
The blackness of darkness reigned, the perfect stillness was interrupted only by occasional mutterings of distant thunder.
Tom got his lantern, lit it in the hogshead, wrapped it closely in the towel, and the two adventurers crept in the gloom toward the tavern.
Huck stood sentry and Tom felt his way into the alley.
Then there was a season of waiting anxiety that weighed upon Huck's spirits like a mountain.
He began to wish he could see a flash from the lantern--it would frighten him, but it would at least tell him that Tom was alive yet.
It seemed hours since Tom had disappeared.
Surely he must have fainted; maybe he was dead; maybe his heart had burst under terror and excitement.
In his uneasiness Huck found himself drawing closer and closer to the alley; fearing all sorts of dreadful things, and momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take away his breath.
There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to inhale it by thimblefuls, and his heart would soon wear itself out, the way it was beating.
Suddenly there was a flash of light and Tom came tearing by him: "Run"!
said he; "run, for your life"!
He needn't have repeated it; once was enough; Huck was making thirty or forty miles an hour before the repetition was uttered.
The boys never stopped till they reached the shed of a deserted slaughter-house at the lower end of the village.
Just as they got within its shelter the storm burst and the rain poured down.
As soon as Tom got his breath he said: "Huck, it was awful!
I tried two of the keys, just as soft as I could; but they seemed to make such a power of racket that I couldn't hardly get my breath I was so scared.
They wouldn't turn in the lock, either.
Well, without noticing what I was doing, I took hold of the knob, and open comes the door!
It warn't locked!
I hopped in, and shook off the towel, and, _Great Caesar's Ghost!
_" "What!
--what'd you see, Tom"?
"Huck, I most stepped onto Injun Joe's hand"!
"No"!
"Yes!
He was lying there, sound asleep on the floor, with his old patch on his eye and his arms spread out".
"Lordy, what did you do?
Did he wake up"?
"No, never budged.
Drunk, I reckon.
I just grabbed that towel and started"!
"I'd never 'a' thought of the towel, I bet"!
"Well, I would.
My aunt would make me mighty sick if I lost it".
"Say, Tom, did you see that box"?
"Huck, I didn't wait to look around.
I didn't see the box, I didn't see the cross.
I didn't see anything but a bottle and a tin cup on the floor by Injun Joe; yes, I saw two barrels and lots more bottles in the room.
Don't you see, now, what's the matter with that ha'nted room"?
"How"?
"Why, it's ha'nted with whiskey!
Maybe _all_ the Temperance Taverns have got a ha'nted room, hey, Huck"?
"Well, I reckon maybe that's so.
Who'd 'a' thought such a thing?
But say, Tom, now's a mighty good time to get that box, if Injun Joe's drunk".
"It is, that!
You try it"!
Huck shuddered.
"Well, no--I reckon not".
"And I reckon not, Huck.
Only one bottle alongside of Injun Joe ain't enough.
If there'd been three, he'd be drunk enough and I'd do it".
There was a long pause for reflection, and then Tom said: "Lookyhere, Huck, less not try that thing any more till we know Injun Joe's not in there.
It's too scary.
Now, if we watch every night, we'll be dead sure to see him go out, some time or other, and then we'll snatch that box quicker'n lightning".
"Well, I'm agreed.
I'll watch the whole night long, and I'll do it every night, too, if you'll do the other part of the job".
"All right, I will.
All you got to do is to trot up Hooper Street a block and maow--and if I'm asleep, you throw some gravel at the window and that'll fetch me".
"Agreed, and good as wheat"!
"Now, Huck, the storm's over, and I'll go home.
It'll begin to be daylight in a couple of hours.
You go back and watch that long, will you"?
"I said I would, Tom, and I will.
I'll ha'nt that tavern every night for a year!
I'll sleep all day and I'll stand watch all night".
"That's all right.
Now, where you going to sleep"?
"In Ben Rogers' hayloft.
He lets me, and so does his pap's nigger man, Uncle Jake.
I tote water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and any time I ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can spare it.
That's a mighty good nigger, Tom.
He likes me, becuz I don't ever act as if I was above him.
Sometime I've set right down and eat _with_ him.
But you needn't tell that.
A body's got to do things when he's awful hungry he wouldn't want to do as a steady thing".
"Well, if I don't want you in the daytime, I'll let you sleep.
I won't come bothering around.
Any time you see something's up, in the night, just skip right around and maow".
CHAPTER XXIX THE first thing Tom heard on Friday morning was a glad piece of news--Judge Thatcher's family had come back to town the night before.
Both Injun Joe and the treasure sunk into secondary importance for a moment, and Becky took the chief place in the boy's interest.
He saw her and they had an exhausting good time playing "hispy" and "gully-keeper" with a crowd of their schoolmates.
The day was completed and crowned in a peculiarly satisfactory way: Becky teased her mother to appoint the next day for the long-promised and long-delayed picnic, and she consented.
The child's delight was boundless; and Tom's not more moderate.
The invitations were sent out before sunset, and straightway the young folks of the village were thrown into a fever of preparation and pleasurable anticipation.
Tom's excitement enabled him to keep awake until a pretty late hour, and he had good hopes of hearing Huck's "maow," and of having his treasure to astonish Becky and the picnickers with, next day; but he was disappointed.
No signal came that night.
Morning came, eventually, and by ten or eleven o'clock a giddy and rollicking company were gathered at Judge Thatcher's, and everything was ready for a start.
It was not the custom for elderly people to mar the picnics with their presence.
The children were considered safe enough under the wings of a few young ladies of eighteen and a few young gentlemen of twenty-three or thereabouts.
The old steam ferry-boat was chartered for the occasion; presently the gay throng filed up the main street laden with provision-baskets.
Sid was sick and had to miss the fun; Mary remained at home to entertain him.
The last thing Mrs. Thatcher said to Becky, was: "You'll not get back till late.
Perhaps you'd better stay all night with some of the girls that live near the ferry-landing, child".
"Then I'll stay with Susy Harper, mamma".
"Very well.
And mind and behave yourself and don't be any trouble".
Presently, as they tripped along, Tom said to Becky: "Say--I'll tell you what we'll do.
'Stead of going to Joe Harper's we'll climb right up the hill and stop at the Widow Douglas'.
She'll have ice-cream!
She has it most every day--dead loads of it.
And she'll be awful glad to have us".
"Oh, that will be fun"!
Then Becky reflected a moment and said: "But what will mamma say"?
"How'll she ever know"?
The girl turned the idea over in her mind, and said reluctantly: "I reckon it's wrong--but--" "But shucks!
Your mother won't know, and so what's the harm?
All she wants is that you'll be safe; and I bet you she'd 'a' said go there if she'd 'a' thought of it.
I know she would"!
The Widow Douglas' splendid hospitality was a tempting bait.
It and Tom's persuasions presently carried the day.
So it was decided to say nothing to anybody about the night's programme.
Presently it occurred to Tom that maybe Huck might come this very night and give the signal.
The thought took a deal of the spirit out of his anticipations.
Still he could not bear to give up the fun at Widow Douglas'.
And why should he give it up, he reasoned--the signal did not come the night before, so why should it be any more likely to come tonight?
The sure fun of the evening outweighed the uncertain treasure; and, boy-like, he determined to yield to the stronger inclination and not allow himself to think of the box of money another time that day.
Three miles below town the ferryboat stopped at the mouth of a woody hollow and tied up.
The crowd swarmed ashore and soon the forest distances and craggy heights echoed far and near with shoutings and laughter.
All the different ways of getting hot and tired were gone through with, and by-and-by the rovers straggled back to camp fortified with responsible appetites, and then the destruction of the good things began.
After the feast there was a refreshing season of rest and chat in the shade of spreading oaks.
By-and-by somebody shouted: "Who's ready for the cave"?
Everybody was.
Bundles of candles were procured, and straightway there was a general scamper up the hill.
The mouth of the cave was up the hillside--an opening shaped like a letter A. Its massive oaken door stood unbarred.
Within was a small chamber, chilly as an icehouse, and walled by Nature with solid limestone that was dewy with a cold sweat.
It was romantic and mysterious to stand here in the deep gloom and look out upon the green valley shining in the sun.
But the impressiveness of the situation quickly wore off, and the romping began again.
The moment a candle was lighted there was a general rush upon the owner of it; a struggle and a gallant defence followed, but the candle was soon knocked down or blown out, and then there was a glad clamor of laughter and a new chase.
But all things have an end.
By-and-by the procession went filing down the steep descent of the main avenue, the flickering rank of lights dimly revealing the lofty walls of rock almost to their point of junction sixty feet overhead.
This main avenue was not more than eight or ten feet wide.
Every few steps other lofty and still narrower crevices branched from it on either hand--for McDougal's cave was but a vast labyrinth of crooked aisles that ran into each other and out again and led nowhere.
It was said that one might wander days and nights together through its intricate tangle of rifts and chasms, and never find the end of the cave; and that he might go down, and down, and still down, into the earth, and it was just the same--labyrinth under
No man "knew" the cave.
That was an impossible thing.
Most of the young men knew a portion of it, and it was not customary to venture much beyond this known portion.
Tom Sawyer knew as much of the cave as any one.
The procession moved along the main avenue some three-quarters of a mile, and then groups and couples began to slip aside into branch avenues, fly along the dismal corridors, and take each other by surprise at points where the corridors joined again.
Parties were able to elude each other for the space of half an hour without going beyond the "known" ground.
By-and-by, one group after another came straggling back to the mouth of the cave, panting, hilarious, smeared from head to foot with tallow drippings, daubed with clay, and entirely delighted with the success of the day.
Then they were astonished to find that they had been taking no note of time and that night was about at hand.
The clanging bell had been calling for half an hour.
However, this sort of close to the day's adventures was romantic and therefore satisfactory.
When the ferryboat with her wild freight pushed into the stream, nobody cared sixpence for the wasted time but the captain of the craft.
Huck was already upon his watch when the ferryboat's lights went glinting past the wharf.
He heard no noise on board, for the young people were as subdued and still as people usually are who are nearly tired to death.
He wondered what boat it was, and why she did not stop at the wharf--and then he dropped her out of his mind and put his attention upon his business.
The night was growing cloudy and dark.
Ten o'clock came, and the noise of vehicles ceased, scattered lights began to wink out, all straggling foot-passengers disappeared, the village betook itself to its slumbers and left the small watcher alone with the silence and the ghosts.
Eleven o'clock came, and the tavern lights were put out; darkness everywhere, now.
Huck waited what seemed a weary long time, but nothing happened.
His faith was weakening.
Was there any use?
Was there really any use?
Why not give it up and turn in?
A noise fell upon his ear.
He was all attention in an instant.
The alley door closed softly.
He sprang to the corner of the brick store.
The next moment two men brushed by him, and one seemed to have something under his arm.
It must be that box!
So they were going to remove the treasure.
Why call Tom now?
It would be absurd--the men would get away with the box and never be found again.
No, he would stick to their wake and follow them; he would trust to the darkness for security from discovery.
So communing with himself, Huck stepped out and glided along behind the men, cat-like, with bare feet, allowing them to keep just far enough ahead not to be invisible.
They moved up the river street three blocks, then turned to the left up a crossstreet.
They went straight ahead, then, until they came to the path that led up Cardiff Hill; this they took.
They passed by the old Welshman's house, halfway up the hill, without hesitating, and still climbed upward.
Good, thought Huck, they will bury it in the old quarry.
But they never stopped at the quarry.
They passed on, up the summit.
They plunged into the narrow path between the tall sumach bushes, and were at once hidden in the gloom.
Huck closed up and shortened his distance, now, for they would never be able to see him.
He trotted along awhile; then slackened his pace, fearing he was gaining too fast; moved on a piece, then stopped altogether; listened; no sound; none, save that he seemed to hear the beating of his own heart.
The hooting of an owl came over the hill--ominous sound!
But no footsteps.
Heavens, was everything lost!
He was about to spring with winged feet, when a man cleared his throat not four feet from him!
Huck's heart shot into his throat, but he swallowed it again; and then he stood there shaking as if a dozen agues had taken charge of him at once, and so weak that he thought he must surely fall to the ground.
He knew where he was.
He knew he was within five steps of the stile leading into Widow Douglas' grounds.
Very well, he thought, let them bury it there; it won't be hard to find.
Now there was a voice--a very low voice--Injun Joe's: "Damn her, maybe she's got company--there's lights, late as it is".
"I can't see any".
This was that stranger's voice--the stranger of the haunted house.
A deadly chill went to Huck's heart--this, then, was the "revenge" job!
His thought was, to fly.
Then he remembered that the Widow Douglas had been kind to him more than once, and maybe these men were going to murder her.
He wished he dared venture to warn her; but he knew he didn't dare--they might come and catch him.
He thought all this and more in the moment that elapsed between the stranger's remark and Injun Joe's next--which was-- "Because the bush is in your way.
Now--this way--now you see, don't you"?
"Yes.
Well, there _is_ company there, I reckon.
Better give it up".
"Give it up, and I just leaving this country forever!
Give it up and maybe never have another chance.
I tell you again, as I've told you before, I don't care for her swag--you may have it.
But her husband was rough on me--many times he was rough on me--and mainly he was the justice of the peace that jugged me for a vagrant.
And that ain't all.
It ain't a millionth part of it!
He had me _horsewhipped_!
--horsewhipped in front of the jail, like a nigger!
--with all the town looking on!
_Horsewhipped_!
--do you understand?
He took advantage of me and died.
But I'll take it out of _her_".
"Oh, don't kill her!
Don't do that"!
"Kill?
Who said anything about killing?
I would kill _him_ if he was here; but not her.
When you want to get revenge on a woman you don't kill her--bosh!
you go for her looks.
You slit her nostrils--you notch her ears like a sow"!
"By God, that's--" "Keep your opinion to yourself!
It will be safest for you.
I'll tie her to the bed.
If she bleeds to death, is that my fault?
I'll not cry, if she does.
My friend, you'll help me in this thing--for _my_ sake--that's why you're here--I mightn't be able alone.
If you flinch, I'll kill you.
Do you understand that?
And if I have to kill you, I'll kill her--and then I reckon nobody'll ever know much about who done this business".
"Well, if it's got to be done, let's get at it.
The quicker the better--I'm all in a shiver".
"Do it _now_?
And company there?
Look here--I'll get suspicious of you, first thing you know.
No--we'll wait till the lights are out--there's no hurry".
Huck felt that a silence was going to ensue--a thing still more awful than any amount of murderous talk; so he held his breath and stepped gingerly back; planted his foot carefully and firmly, after balancing, one-legged, in a precarious way and almost
He took another step back, with the same elaboration and the same risks; then another and another, and--a twig snapped under his foot!
His breath stopped and he listened.
There was no sound--the stillness was perfect.
His gratitude was measureless.
Now he turned in his tracks, between the walls of sumach bushes--turned himself as carefully as if he were a ship--and then stepped quickly but cautiously along.
When he emerged at the quarry he felt secure, and so he picked up his nimble heels and flew.
Down, down he sped, till he reached the Welshman's.
He banged at the door, and presently the heads of the old man and his two stalwart sons were thrust from windows.
"What's the row there?
Who's banging?
What do you want"?
"Let me in--quick!
I'll tell everything".
"Why, who are you"?
"Huckleberry Finn--quick, let me in"!
"Huckleberry Finn, indeed!
It ain't a name to open many doors, I judge!
But let him in, lads, and let's see what's the trouble".
"Please don't ever tell I told you," were Huck's first words when he got in.
"Please don't--I'd be killed, sure--but the widow's been good friends to me sometimes, and I want to tell--I _will_ tell if you'll promise you won't ever say it was me".
"By George, he _has_ got something to tell, or he wouldn't act so"!
exclaimed the old man; "out with it and nobody here'll ever tell, lad".
Three minutes later the old man and his sons, well armed, were up the hill, and just entering the sumach path on tiptoe, their weapons in their hands.
Huck accompanied them no further.
He hid behind a great bowlder and fell to listening.
There was a lagging, anxious silence, and then all of a sudden there was an explosion of firearms and a cry.
Huck waited for no particulars.
He sprang away and sped down the hill as fast as his legs could carry him.
CHAPTER XXX AS the earliest suspicion of dawn appeared on Sunday morning, Huck came groping up the hill and rapped gently at the old Welshman's door.
The inmates were asleep, but it was a sleep that was set on a hair-trigger, on account of the exciting episode of the night.
A call came from a window: "Who's there"!
Huck's scared voice answered in a low tone: "Please let me in!
It's only Huck Finn"!
"It's a name that can open this door night or day, lad!
--and welcome"!
These were strange words to the vagabond boy's ears, and the pleasantest he had ever heard.
He could not recollect that the closing word had ever been applied in his case before.
The door was quickly unlocked, and he entered.
Huck was given a seat and the old man and his brace of tall sons speedily dressed themselves.
"Now, my boy, I hope you're good and hungry, because breakfast will be ready as soon as the sun's up, and we'll have a piping hot one, too--make yourself easy about that!
I and the boys hoped you'd turn up and stop here last night".
"I was awful scared," said Huck, "and I run.
I took out when the pistols went off, and I didn't stop for three mile.
I've come now becuz I wanted to know about it, you know; and I come before daylight becuz I didn't want to run across them devils, even if they was dead".
"Well, poor chap, you do look as if you'd had a hard night of it--but there's a bed here for you when you've had your breakfast.
No, they ain't dead, lad--we are sorry enough for that.
You see we knew right where to put our hands on them, by your description; so we crept along on tiptoe till we got within fifteen feet of them--dark as a cellar that sumach path was--and just then I found I was going to sneeze.
It was the meanest kind of luck!
I tried to keep it back, but no use--'twas bound to come, and it did come!
I was in the lead with my pistol raised, and when the sneeze started those scoundrels a-rustling to get out of the path, I sung out, 'Fire boys!
' and blazed away at the place where the rustling was.
So did the boys.
But they were off in a jiffy, those villains, and we after them, down through the woods.
I judge we never touched them.
They fired a shot apiece as they started, but their bullets whizzed by and didn't do us any harm.
As soon as we lost the sound of their feet we quit chasing, and went down and stirred up the constables.
They got a posse together, and went off to guard the river bank, and as soon as it is light the sheriff and a gang are going to beat up the woods.
My boys will be with them presently.
I wish we had some sort of description of those rascals--'twould help a good deal.
But you couldn't see what they were like, in the dark, lad, I suppose"?
"Oh yes; I saw them downtown and follered them".
"Splendid!
Describe them--describe them, my boy"!
"One's the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that's ben around here once or twice, and t'other's a mean-looking, ragged--" "That's enough, lad, we know the men!
Happened on them in the woods back of the widow's one day, and they slunk away.
Off with you, boys, and tell the sheriff--get your breakfast tomorrow morning"!
The Welshman's sons departed at once.
As they were leaving the room Huck sprang up and exclaimed: "Oh, please don't tell _any_body it was me that blowed on them!
Oh, please"!
"All right if you say it, Huck, but you ought to have the credit of what you did".
"Oh no, no!
Please don't tell"!
When the young men were gone, the old Welshman said: "They won't tell--and I won't.
But why don't you want it known"?
Huck would not explain, further than to say that he already knew too much about one of those men and would not have the man know that he knew anything against him for the whole world--he would be killed for knowing it, sure.
The old man promised secrecy once more, and said: "How did you come to follow these fellows, lad?
Were they looking suspicious"?
Huck was silent while he framed a duly cautious reply.
Then he said: "Well, you see, I'm a kind of a hard lot,--least everybody says so, and I don't see nothing agin it--and sometimes I can't sleep much, on account of thinking about it and sort of trying to strike out a new way of doing.
That was the way of it last night.
I couldn't sleep, and so I come along upstreet 'bout midnight, a-turning it all over, and when I got to that old shackly brick store by the Temperance Tavern, I backed up agin the wall to have another think.
Well, just then along comes these two chaps slipping along close by me, with something under their arm, and I reckoned they'd stole it.
One was a-smoking, and t'other one wanted a light; so they stopped right before me and the cigars lit up their faces and I see that the big one was the deaf and dumb Spaniard, by his white whiskers and the patch on his eye, and t'other one was a rusty,
"Could you see the rags by the light of the cigars"?
This staggered Huck for a moment.
Then he said: "Well, I don't know--but somehow it seems as if I did".
"Then they went on, and you--" "Follered 'em--yes.
That was it.
I wanted to see what was up--they sneaked along so.
I dogged 'em to the widder's stile, and stood in the dark and heard the ragged one beg for the widder, and the Spaniard swear he'd spile her looks just as I told you and your two--" "What!
The _deaf and dumb_ man said all that"!
Huck had made another terrible mistake!
He was trying his best to keep the old man from getting the faintest hint of who the Spaniard might be, and yet his tongue seemed determined to get him into trouble in spite of all he could do.
He made several efforts to creep out of his scrape, but the old man's eye was upon him and he made blunder after blunder.
Presently the Welshman said: "My boy, don't be afraid of me.
I wouldn't hurt a hair of your head for all the world.
No--I'd protect you--I'd protect you.
This Spaniard is not deaf and dumb; you've let that slip without intending it; you can't cover that up now.
You know something about that Spaniard that you want to keep dark.
Now trust me--tell me what it is, and trust me--I won't betray you".
Huck looked into the old man's honest eyes a moment, then bent over and whispered in his ear: "'Tain't a Spaniard--it's Injun Joe"!
The Welshman almost jumped out of his chair.
In a moment he said: "It's all plain enough, now.
When you talked about notching ears and slitting noses I judged that that was your own embellishment, because white men don't take that sort of revenge.
But an Injun!
That's a different matter altogether".
During breakfast the talk went on, and in the course of it the old man said that the last thing which he and his sons had done, before going to bed, was to get a lantern and examine the stile and its vicinity for marks of blood.
They found none, but captured a bulky bundle of-- "Of _what_"?
If the words had been lightning they could not have leaped with a more stunning suddenness from Huck's blanched lips.
His eyes were staring wide, now, and his breath suspended--waiting for the answer.
The Welshman started--stared in return--three seconds--five seconds--ten--then replied: "Of burglar's tools.
Why, what's the _matter_ with you"?
Huck sank back, panting gently, but deeply, unutterably grateful.
The Welshman eyed him gravely, curiously--and presently said: "Yes, burglar's tools.
That appears to relieve you a good deal.
But what did give you that turn?
What were _you_ expecting we'd found"?
Huck was in a close place--the inquiring eye was upon him--he would have given anything for material for a plausible answer--nothing suggested itself--the inquiring eye was boring deeper and deeper--a senseless reply offered--there was no time to weigh it,
Poor Huck was too distressed to smile, but the old man laughed loud and joyously, shook up the details of his anatomy from head to foot, and ended by saying that such a laugh was money in a-man's pocket, because it cut down the doctor's bill like
Then he added: "Poor old chap, you're white and jaded--you ain't well a bit--no wonder you're a little flighty and off your balance.
But you'll come out of it.
Rest and sleep will fetch you out all right, I hope".
Huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose and betrayed such a suspicious excitement, for he had dropped the idea that the parcel brought from the tavern was the treasure, as soon as he had heard the talk at the widow's stile.
He had only thought it was not the treasure, however--he had not known that it wasn't--and so the suggestion of a captured bundle was too much for his self-possession.
But on the whole he felt glad the little episode had happened, for now he knew beyond all question that that bundle was not _the_ bundle, and so his mind was at rest and exceedingly comfortable.
In fact, everything seemed to be drifting just in the right direction, now; the treasure must be still in No.
2, the men would be captured and jailed that day, and he and Tom could seize the gold that night without any trouble or any fear of interruption.
Just as breakfast was completed there was a knock at the door.
Huck jumped for a hiding-place, for he had no mind to be connected even remotely with the late event.
The Welshman admitted several ladies and gentlemen, among them the Widow Douglas, and noticed that groups of citizens were climbing up the hill--to stare at the stile.
So the news had spread.
The Welshman had to tell the story of the night to the visitors.
The widow's gratitude for her preservation was outspoken.
"Don't say a word about it, madam.
There's another that you're more beholden to than you are to me and my boys, maybe, but he don't allow me to tell his name.
We wouldn't have been there but for him".
Of course this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost belittled the main matter--but the Welshman allowed it to eat into the vitals of his visitors, and through them be transmitted to the whole town, for he refused to part with his secret.
When all else had been learned, the widow said: "I went to sleep reading in bed and slept straight through all that noise.
Why didn't you come and wake me"?
"We judged it warn't worth while.
Those fellows warn't likely to come again--they hadn't any tools left to work with, and what was the use of waking you up and scaring you to death?
My three negro men stood guard at your house all the rest of the night.
They've just come back".
More visitors came, and the story had to be told and retold for a couple of hours more.
There was no Sabbath-school during day-school vacation, but everybody was early at church.
The stirring event was well canvassed.
News came that not a sign of the two villains had been yet discovered.
When the sermon was finished, Judge Thatcher's wife dropped alongside of Mrs. Harper as she moved down the aisle with the crowd and said: "Is my Becky going to sleep all day?
I just expected she would be tired to death".
"Your Becky"?
"Yes," with a startled look--"didn't she stay with you last night"?
"Why, no".
Mrs. Thatcher turned pale, and sank into a pew, just as Aunt Polly, talking briskly with a friend, passed by.
Aunt Polly said: "Goodmorning, Mrs. Thatcher.
Goodmorning, Mrs. Harper.
I've got a boy that's turned up missing.
I reckon my Tom stayed at your house last night--one of you.
And now he's afraid to come to church.
I've got to settle with him".
Mrs. Thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler than ever.
"He didn't stay with us," said Mrs. Harper, beginning to look uneasy.
A marked anxiety came into Aunt Polly's face.
"Joe Harper, have you seen my Tom this morning"?
"No'm".
"When did you see him last"?
Joe tried to remember, but was not sure he could say.
The people had stopped moving out of church.
Whispers passed along, and a boding uneasiness took possession of every countenance.
Children were anxiously questioned, and young teachers.
They all said they had not noticed whether Tom and Becky were on board the ferryboat on the homeward trip; it was dark; no one thought of inquiring if any one was missing.
One young man finally blurted out his fear that they were still in the cave!
Mrs. Thatcher swooned away.
Aunt Polly fell to crying and wringing her hands.
The alarm swept from lip to lip, from group to group, from street to street, and within five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and the whole town was up!
The Cardiff Hill episode sank into instant insignificance, the burglars were forgotten, horses were saddled, skiffs were manned, the ferryboat ordered out, and before the horror was half an hour old, two hundred men were pouring down highroad and river
All the long afternoon the village seemed empty and dead.
Many women visited Aunt Polly and Mrs. Thatcher and tried to comfort them.
They cried with them, too, and that was still better than words.
All the tedious night the town waited for news; but when the morning dawned at last, all the word that came was, "Send more candles--and send food".
Mrs. Thatcher was almost crazed; and Aunt Polly, also.
Judge Thatcher sent messages of hope and encouragement from the cave, but they conveyed no real cheer.
The old Welshman came home toward daylight, spattered with candle-grease, smeared with clay, and almost worn out.
He found Huck still in the bed that had been provided for him, and delirious with fever.
The physicians were all at the cave, so the Widow Douglas came and took charge of the patient.
She said she would do her best by him, because, whether he was good, bad, or indifferent, he was the Lord's, and nothing that was the Lord's was a thing to be neglected.
The Welshman said Huck had good spots in him, and the widow said: "You can depend on it.
That's the Lord's mark.
He don't leave it off.
He never does.
Puts it somewhere on every creature that comes from his hands".
Early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to straggle into the village, but the strongest of the citizens continued searching.
All the news that could be gained was that remotenesses of the cavern were being ransacked that had never been visited before; that every corner and crevice was going to be thoroughly searched; that wherever one wandered through the maze of passages,
In one place, far from the section usually traversed by tourists, the names "BECKY & TOM" had been found traced upon the rocky wall with candle-smoke, and near at hand a grease-soiled bit of ribbon.
Mrs. Thatcher recognized the ribbon and cried over it.
She said it was the last relic she should ever have of her child; and that no other memorial of her could ever be so precious, because this one parted latest from the living body before the awful death came.
Some said that now and then, in the cave, a far-away speck of light would glimmer, and then a glorious shout would burst forth and a score of men go trooping down the echoing aisle--and then a sickening disappointment always followed; the children were not
Three dreadful days and nights dragged their tedious hours along, and the village sank into a hopeless stupor.
No one had heart for anything.
The accidental discovery, just made, that the proprietor of the Temperance Tavern kept liquor on his premises, scarcely fluttered the public pulse, tremendous as the fact was.
In a lucid interval, Huck feebly led up to the subject of taverns, and finally asked--dimly dreading the worst--if anything had been discovered at the Temperance Tavern since he had been ill.
"Yes," said the widow.
Huck started up in bed, wildeyed: "What?
What was it"?
"Liquor!
--and the place has been shut up.
Lie down, child--what a turn you did give me"!
"Only tell me just one thing--only just one--please!
Was it Tom Sawyer that found it"?
The widow burst into tears.
"Hush, hush, child, hush!
I've told you before, you must _not_ talk.
You are very, very sick"!
Then nothing but liquor had been found; there would have been a great powwow if it had been the gold.
So the treasure was gone forever--gone forever!
But what could she be crying about?
Curious that she should cry.
These thoughts worked their dim way through Huck's mind, and under the weariness they gave him he fell asleep.
The widow said to herself: "There--he's asleep, poor wreck.
Tom Sawyer find it!
Pity but somebody could find Tom Sawyer!
Ah, there ain't many left, now, that's got hope enough, or strength enough, either, to go on searching".
CHAPTER XXXI NOW to return to Tom and Becky's share in the picnic.
They tripped along the murky aisles with the rest of the company, visiting the familiar wonders of the cave--wonders dubbed with rather over-descriptive names, such as "The Drawing-Room," "The Cathedral," "Aladdin's Palace," and so on.
Presently the hide-and-seek frolicking began, and Tom and Becky engaged in it with zeal until the exertion began to grow a trifle wearisome; then they wandered down a sinuous avenue holding their candles aloft and reading the tangled webwork of names,
Still drifting along and talking, they scarcely noticed that they were now in a part of the cave whose walls were not frescoed.
They smoked their own names under an overhanging shelf and moved on.
Presently they came to a place where a little stream of water, trickling over a ledge and carrying a limestone sediment with it, had, in the slow-dragging ages, formed a laced and ruffled Niagara in gleaming and imperishable stone.
Tom squeezed his small body behind it in order to illuminate it for Becky's gratification.
He found that it curtained a sort of steep natural stairway which was enclosed between narrow walls, and at once the ambition to be a discoverer seized him.
Becky responded to his call, and they made a smoke-mark for future guidance, and started upon their quest.
They wound this way and that, far down into the secret depths of the cave, made another mark, and branched off in search of novelties to tell the upper world about.
In one place they found a spacious cavern, from whose ceiling depended a multitude of shining stalactites of the length and circumference of a man's leg; they walked all about it, wondering and admiring, and presently left it by one of the numerous
This shortly brought them to a bewitching spring, whose basin was incrusted with a frostwork of glittering crystals; it was in the midst of a cavern whose walls were supported by many fantastic pillars which had been formed by the joining of great
Under the roof vast knots of bats had packed themselves together, thousands in a bunch; the lights disturbed the creatures and they came flocking down by hundreds, squeaking and darting furiously at the candles.
Tom knew their ways and the danger of this sort of conduct.
He seized Becky's hand and hurried her into the first corridor that offered; and none too soon, for a bat struck Becky's light out with its wing while she was passing out of the cavern.
The bats chased the children a good distance; but the fugitives plunged into every new passage that offered, and at last got rid of the perilous things.
Tom found a subterranean lake, shortly, which stretched its dim length away until its shape was lost in the shadows.
He wanted to explore its borders, but concluded that it would be best to sit down and rest awhile, first.
Now, for the first time, the deep stillness of the place laid a clammy hand upon the spirits of the children.
Becky said: "Why, I didn't notice, but it seems ever so long since I heard any of the others".
"Come to think, Becky, we are away down below them--and I don't know how far away north, or south, or east, or whichever it is.
We couldn't hear them here".
Becky grew apprehensive.
"I wonder how long we've been down here, Tom?
We better start back".
"Yes, I reckon we better.
P'raps we better".
"Can you find the way, Tom?
It's all a mixed-up crookedness to me".
"I reckon I could find it--but then the bats.
If they put our candles out it will be an awful fix.
Let's try some other way, so as not to go through there".
"Well.
But I hope we won't get lost.
It would be so awful"!
and the girl shuddered at the thought of the dreadful possibilities.
They started through a corridor, and traversed it in silence a long way, glancing at each new opening, to see if there was anything familiar about the look of it; but they were all strange.
Every time Tom made an examination, Becky would watch his face for an encouraging sign, and he would say cheerily: "Oh, it's all right.
This ain't the one, but we'll come to it right away"!
But he felt less and less hopeful with each failure, and presently began to turn off into diverging avenues at sheer random, in desperate hope of finding the one that was wanted.
He still said it was "all right," but there was such a leaden dread at his heart that the words had lost their ring and sounded just as if he had said, "All is lost"!
Becky clung to his side in an anguish of fear, and tried hard to keep back the tears, but they would come.
At last she said: "Oh, Tom, never mind the bats, let's go back that way!
We seem to get worse and worse off all the time".
"Listen"!
said he.
Profound silence; silence so deep that even their breathings were conspicuous in the hush.
Tom shouted.
The call went echoing down the empty aisles and died out in the distance in a faint sound that resembled a ripple of mocking laughter.
"Oh, don't do it again, Tom, it is too horrid," said Becky.
"It is horrid, but I better, Becky; they might hear us, you know," and he shouted again.
The "might" was even a chillier horror than the ghostly laughter, it so confessed a perishing hope.
The children stood still and listened; but there was no result.
Tom turned upon the back track at once, and hurried his steps.
It was but a little while before a certain indecision in his manner revealed another fearful fact to Becky--he could not find his way back!
"Oh, Tom, you didn't make any marks"!
"Becky, I was such a fool!
Such a fool!
I never thought we might want to come back!
No--I can't find the way.
It's all mixed up".
"Tom, Tom, we're lost!
we're lost!
We never can get out of this awful place!
Oh, why _did_ we ever leave the others"!
She sank to the ground and burst into such a frenzy of crying that Tom was appalled with the idea that she might die, or lose her reason.
He sat down by her and put his arms around her; she buried her face in his bosom, she clung to him, she poured out her terrors, her unavailing regrets, and the far echoes turned them all to jeering laughter.
Tom begged her to pluck up hope again, and she said she could not.
He fell to blaming and abusing himself for getting her into this miserable situation; this had a better effect.
She said she would try to hope again, she would get up and follow wherever he might lead if only he would not talk like that any more.
For he was no more to blame than she, she said.
So they moved on again--aimlessly--simply at random--all they could do was to move, keep moving.
For a little while, hope made a show of reviving--not with any reason to back it, but only because it is its nature to revive when the spring has not been taken out of it by age and familiarity with failure.
By-and-by Tom took Becky's candle and blew it out.
This economy meant so much!
Words were not needed.
Becky understood, and her hope died again.
She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in his pockets--yet he must economize.
By-and-by, fatigue began to assert its claims; the children tried to pay attention, for it was dreadful to think of sitting down when time was grown to be so precious, moving, in some direction, in any direction, was at least progress and might bear fruit;
At last Becky's frail limbs refused to carry her farther.
She sat down.
Tom rested with her, and they talked of home, and the friends there, and the comfortable beds and, above all, the light!
Becky cried, and Tom tried to think of some way of comforting her, but all his encouragements were grown thread-bare with use, and sounded like sarcasms.
Fatigue bore so heavily upon Becky that she drowsed off to sleep.
Tom was grateful.
He sat looking into her drawn face and saw it grow smooth and natural under the influence of pleasant dreams; and by-and-by a smile dawned and rested there.
The peaceful face reflected somewhat of peace and healing into his own spirit, and his thoughts wandered away to bygone times and dreamy memories.
While he was deep in his musings, Becky woke up with a breezy little laugh--but it was stricken dead upon her lips, and a groan followed it.
"Oh, how _could_ I sleep!
I wish I never, never had waked!
No!
No, I don't, Tom!
Don't look so!
I won't say it again".
"I'm glad you've slept, Becky; you'll feel rested, now, and we'll find the way out".
"We can try, Tom; but I've seen such a beautiful country in my dream.
I reckon we are going there".
"Maybe not, maybe not.
Cheer up, Becky, and let's go on trying".
They rose up and wandered along, hand in hand and hopeless.
They tried to estimate how long they had been in the cave, but all they knew was that it seemed days and weeks, and yet it was plain that this could not be, for their candles were not gone yet.
A long time after this--they could not tell how long--Tom said they must go softly and listen for dripping water--they must find a spring.
They found one presently, and Tom said it was time to rest again.
Both were cruelly tired, yet Becky said she thought she could go a little farther.
She was surprised to hear Tom dissent.
She could not understand it.
They sat down, and Tom fastened his candle to the wall in front of them with some clay.
Thought was soon busy; nothing was said for some time.
Then Becky broke the silence: "Tom, I am so hungry"!
Tom took something out of his pocket.
"Do you remember this"?
said he.
Becky almost smiled.
"It's our wedding-cake, Tom".
"Yes--I wish it was as big as a barrel, for it's all we've got".
"I saved it from the picnic for us to dream on, Tom, the way grownup people do with wedding-cake--but it'll be our--" She dropped the sentence where it was.
Tom divided the cake and Becky ate with good appetite, while Tom nibbled at his moiety.
There was abundance of cold water to finish the feast with.
By-and-by Becky suggested that they move on again.
Tom was silent a moment.
Then he said: "Becky, can you bear it if I tell you something"?
Becky's face paled, but she thought she could.
"Well, then, Becky, we must stay here, where there's water to drink.
That little piece is our last candle"!
Becky gave loose to tears and wailings.
Tom did what he could to comfort her, but with little effect.
At length Becky said: "Tom"!
"Well, Becky"?
"They'll miss us and hunt for us"!
"Yes, they will!
Certainly they will"!
"Maybe they're hunting for us now, Tom".
"Why, I reckon maybe they are.
I hope they are".
"When would they miss us, Tom"?
"When they get back to the boat, I reckon".
"Tom, it might be dark then--would they notice we hadn't come"?
"I don't know.
But anyway, your mother would miss you as soon as they got home".
A frightened look in Becky's face brought Tom to his senses and he saw that he had made a blunder.
Becky was not to have gone home that night!
The children became silent and thoughtful.
In a moment a new burst of grief from Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had struck hers also--that the Sabbath morning might be half spent before Mrs. Thatcher discovered that Becky was not at Mrs. Harper's.
The children fastened their eyes upon their bit of candle and watched it melt slowly and pitilessly away; saw the half inch of wick stand alone at last; saw the feeble flame rise and fall, climb the thin column of smoke, linger at its top a moment, and
How long afterward it was that Becky came to a slow consciousness that she was crying in Tom's arms, neither could tell.
All that they knew was, that after what seemed a mighty stretch of time, both awoke out of a dead stupor of sleep and resumed their miseries once more.
Tom said it might be Sunday, now--maybe Monday.
He tried to get Becky to talk, but her sorrows were too oppressive, all her hopes were gone.
Tom said that they must have been missed long ago, and no doubt the search was going on.
He would shout and maybe some one would come.
He tried it; but in the darkness the distant echoes sounded so hideously that he tried it no more.
The hours wasted away, and hunger came to torment the captives again.
A portion of Tom's half of the cake was left; they divided and ate it.
But they seemed hungrier than before.
The poor morsel of food only whetted desire.
By-and-by Tom said: "SH!
Did you hear that"?
Both held their breath and listened.
There was a sound like the faintest, far-off shout.
Instantly Tom answered it, and leading Becky by the hand, started groping down the corridor in its direction.
Presently he listened again; again the sound was heard, and apparently a little nearer.
"It's them"!
said Tom; "they're coming!
Come along, Becky--we're all right now"!
The joy of the prisoners was almost overwhelming.
Their speed was slow, however, because pitfalls were somewhat common, and had to be guarded against.
They shortly came to one and had to stop.
It might be three feet deep, it might be a hundred--there was no passing it at any rate.
Tom got down on his breast and reached as far down as he could.
No bottom.
They must stay there and wait until the searchers came.
They listened; evidently the distant shoutings were growing more distant!
a moment or two more and they had gone altogether.
The heart-sinking misery of it!
Tom whooped until he was hoarse, but it was of no use.
He talked hopefully to Becky; but an age of anxious waiting passed and no sounds came again.
The children groped their way back to the spring.
The weary time dragged on; they slept again, and awoke famished and woe-stricken.
Tom believed it must be Tuesday by this time.
Now an idea struck him.
There were some side passages near at hand.
It would be better to explore some of these than bear the weight of the heavy time in idleness.
He took a kite-line from his pocket, tied it to a projection, and he and Becky started, Tom in the lead, unwinding the line as he groped along.
At the end of twenty steps the corridor ended in a "jumping-off place".
Tom got down on his knees and felt below, and then as far around the corner as he could reach with his hands conveniently; he made an effort to stretch yet a little farther to the right, and at that moment, not twenty yards away, a human hand, holding a
Tom lifted up a glorious shout, and instantly that hand was followed by the body it belonged to--Injun Joe's!
Tom was paralyzed; he could not move.
He was vastly gratified the next moment, to see the "Spaniard" take to his heels and get himself out of sight.
Tom wondered that Joe had not recognized his voice and come over and killed him for testifying in court.
But the echoes must have disguised the voice.
Without doubt, that was it, he reasoned.
Tom's fright weakened every muscle in his body.
He said to himself that if he had strength enough to get back to the spring he would stay there, and nothing should tempt him to run the risk of meeting Injun Joe again.
He was careful to keep from Becky what it was he had seen.
He told her he had only shouted "for luck".
But hunger and wretchedness rise superior to fears in the long run.
Another tedious wait at the spring and another long sleep brought changes.
The children awoke tortured with a raging hunger.
Tom believed that it must be Wednesday or Thursday or even Friday or Saturday, now, and that the search had been given over.
He proposed to explore another passage.
He felt willing to risk Injun Joe and all other terrors.
But Becky was very weak.
She had sunk into a dreary apathy and would not be roused.
She said she would wait, now, where she was, and die--it would not be long.
She told Tom to go with the kite-line and explore if he chose; but she implored him to come back every little while and speak to her; and she made him promise that when the awful time came, he would stay by her and hold her hand until all was over.
Tom kissed her, with a choking sensation in his throat, and made a show of being confident of finding the searchers or an escape from the cave; then he took the kite-line in his hand and went groping down one of the passages on his hands and knees,
CHAPTER XXXII TUESDAY afternoon came, and waned to the twilight.
The village of St. Petersburg still mourned.
The lost children had not been found.
Public prayers had been offered up for them, and many and many a private prayer that had the petitioner's whole heart in it; but still no good news came from the cave.
The majority of the searchers had given up the quest and gone back to their daily avocations, saying that it was plain the children could never be found.
Mrs. Thatcher was very ill, and a great part of the time delirious.
People said it was heartbreaking to hear her call her child, and raise her head and listen a whole minute at a time, then lay it wearily down again with a moan.
Aunt Polly had drooped into a settled melancholy, and her gray hair had grown almost white.
The village went to its rest on Tuesday night, sad and forlorn.
Away in the middle of the night a wild peal burst from the village bells, and in a moment the streets were swarming with frantic half-clad people, who shouted, "Turn out!
turn out!
they're found!
they're found"!
Tin pans and horns were added to the din, the population massed itself and moved toward the river, met the children coming in an open carriage drawn by shouting citizens, thronged around it, joined its homeward march, and swept magnificently up the main
The village was illuminated; nobody went to bed again; it was the greatest night the little town had ever seen.
During the first half-hour a procession of villagers filed through Judge Thatcher's house, seized the saved ones and kissed them, squeezed Mrs. Thatcher's hand, tried to speak but couldn't--and drifted out raining tears all over the place.
Aunt Polly's happiness was complete, and Mrs. Thatcher's nearly so.
It would be complete, however, as soon as the messenger dispatched with the great news to the cave should get the word to her husband.
Tom lay upon a sofa with an eager auditory about him and told the history of the wonderful adventure, putting in many striking additions to adorn it withal; and closed with a description of how he left Becky and went on an exploring expedition; how he
And if it had only happened to be night he would not have seen that speck of daylight and would not have explored that passage any more!
He told how he went back for Becky and broke the good news and she told him not to fret her with such stuff, for she was tired, and knew she was going to die, and wanted to.
He described how he labored with her and convinced her; and how she almost died for joy when she had groped to where she actually saw the blue speck of daylight; how he pushed his way out at the hole and then helped her out; how they sat there and cried
Before day-dawn, Judge Thatcher and the handful of searchers with him were tracked out, in the cave, by the twine clews they had strung behind them, and informed of the great news.
Three days and nights of toil and hunger in the cave were not to be shaken off at once, as Tom and Becky soon discovered.
They were bedridden all of Wednesday and Thursday, and seemed to grow more and more tired and worn, all the time.
Tom got about, a little, on Thursday, was downtown Friday, and nearly as whole as ever Saturday; but Becky did not leave her room until Sunday, and then she looked as if she had passed through a wasting illness.
Tom learned of Huck's sickness and went to see him on Friday, but could not be admitted to the bedroom; neither could he on Saturday or Sunday.
He was admitted daily after that, but was warned to keep still about his adventure and introduce no exciting topic.
The Widow Douglas stayed by to see that he obeyed.
At home Tom learned of the Cardiff Hill event; also that the "ragged man's" body had eventually been found in the river near the ferry-landing; he had been drowned while trying to escape, perhaps.
About a fortnight after Tom's rescue from the cave, he started off to visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough, now, to hear exciting talk, and Tom had some that would interest him, he thought.
Judge Thatcher's house was on Tom's way, and he stopped to see Becky.
The Judge and some friends set Tom to talking, and some one asked him ironically if he wouldn't like to go to the cave again.
Tom said he thought he wouldn't mind it.
The Judge said: "Well, there are others just like you, Tom, I've not the least doubt.
But we have taken care of that.
Nobody will get lost in that cave any more".
"Why"?
"Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two weeks ago, and triple-locked--and I've got the keys".
Tom turned as white as a sheet.
"What's the matter, boy!
Here, run, somebody!
Fetch a glass of water"!
The water was brought and thrown into Tom's face.
"Ah, now you're all right.
What was the matter with you, Tom"?
"Oh, Judge, Injun Joe's in the cave"!
CHAPTER XXXIII WITHIN a few minutes the news had spread, and a dozen skiff-loads of men were on their way to McDougal's cave, and the ferryboat, well filled with passengers, soon followed.
Tom Sawyer was in the skiff that bore Judge Thatcher.
When the cave door was unlocked, a sorrowful sight presented itself in the dim twilight of the place.
Injun Joe lay stretched upon the ground, dead, with his face close to the crack of the door, as if his longing eyes had been fixed, to the latest moment, upon the light and the cheer of the free world outside.
Tom was touched, for he knew by his own experience how this wretch had suffered.
His pity was moved, but nevertheless he felt an abounding sense of relief and security, now, which revealed to him in a degree which he had not fully appreciated before how vast a weight of dread had been lying upon him since the day he lifted his voice
Injun Joe's bowie-knife lay close by, its blade broken in two.
The great foundation-beam of the door had been chipped and hacked through, with tedious labor; useless labor, too, it was, for the native rock formed a sill outside it, and upon that stubborn material the knife had wrought no effect; the only damage done
But if there had been no stony obstruction there the labor would have been useless still, for if the beam had been wholly cut away Injun Joe could not have squeezed his body under the door, and he knew it.
So he had only hacked that place in order to be doing something--in order to pass the weary time--in order to employ his tortured faculties.
Ordinarily one could find half a dozen bits of candle stuck around in the crevices of this vestibule, left there by tourists; but there were none now.
The prisoner had searched them out and eaten them.
He had also contrived to catch a few bats, and these, also, he had eaten, leaving only their claws.
The poor unfortunate had starved to death.
In one place, near at hand, a stalagmite had been slowly growing up from the ground for ages, builded by the water-drip from a stalactite overhead.
The captive had broken off the stalagmite, and upon the stump had placed a stone, wherein he had scooped a shallow hollow to catch the precious drop that fell once in every three minutes with the dreary regularity of a clock-tick--a dessertspoonful once in
That drop was falling when the Pyramids were new; when Troy fell; when the foundations of Rome were laid; when Christ was crucified; when the Conqueror created the British empire; when Columbus sailed; when the massacre at Lexington was "news".
It is falling now; it will still be falling when all these things shall have sunk down the afternoon of history, and the twilight of tradition, and been swallowed up in the thick night of oblivion.
Has everything a purpose and a mission?
Did this drop fall patiently during five thousand years to be ready for this flitting human insect's need?
and has it another important object to accomplish ten thousand years to come?
No matter.
It is many and many a year since the hapless half-breed scooped out the stone to catch the priceless drops, but to this day the tourist stares longest at that pathetic stone and that slow-dropping water when he comes to see the wonders of McDougal's cave.
Injun Joe's cup stands first in the list of the cavern's marvels; even "Aladdin's Palace" cannot rival it.
Injun Joe was buried near the mouth of the cave; and people flocked there in boats and wagons from the towns and from all the farms and hamlets for seven miles around; they brought their children, and all sorts of provisions, and confessed that they had
This funeral stopped the further growth of one thing--the petition to the governor for Injun Joe's pardon.
The petition had been largely signed; many tearful and eloquent meetings had been held, and a committee of sappy women been appointed to go in deep mourning and wail around the governor, and implore him to be a merciful ass and trample his duty under foot.
Injun Joe was believed to have killed five citizens of the village, but what of that?
If he had been Satan himself there would have been plenty of weaklings ready to scribble their names to a pardon-petition, and drip a tear on it from their permanently impaired and leaky water-works.
The morning after the funeral Tom took Huck to a private place to have an important talk.
Huck had learned all about Tom's adventure from the Welshman and the Widow Douglas, by this time, but Tom said he reckoned there was one thing they had not told him; that thing was what he wanted to talk about now.
Huck's face saddened.
He said: "I know what it is.
You got into No.
2 and never found anything but whiskey.
Nobody told me it was you; but I just knowed it must 'a' ben you, soon as I heard 'bout that whiskey business; and I knowed you hadn't got the money becuz you'd 'a' got at me some way or other and told me even if you was mum to everybody else.
Tom, something's always told me we'd never get holt of that swag".
"Why, Huck, I never told on that tavern-keeper.
_You_ know his tavern was all right the Saturday I went to the picnic.
Don't you remember you was to watch there that night"?
"Oh yes!
Why, it seems 'bout a year ago.
It was that very night that I follered Injun Joe to the widder's".
"_You_ followed him"?
"Yes--but you keep mum.
I reckon Injun Joe's left friends behind him, and I don't want 'em souring on me and doing me mean tricks.
If it hadn't ben for me he'd be down in Texas now, all right".
Then Huck told his entire adventure in confidence to Tom, who had only heard of the Welshman's part of it before.
"Well," said Huck, presently, coming back to the main question, "whoever nipped the whiskey in No.
2, nipped the money, too, I reckon--anyways it's a goner for us, Tom".
"Huck, that money wasn't ever in No.
2"!
"What"!
Huck searched his comrade's face keenly.
"Tom, have you got on the track of that money again"?
"Huck, it's in the cave"!
Huck's eyes blazed.
"Say it again, Tom".
"The money's in the cave"!
"Tom--honest injun, now--is it fun, or earnest"?
"Earnest, Huck--just as earnest as ever I was in my life.
Will you go in there with me and help get it out"?
"I bet I will!
I will if it's where we can blaze our way to it and not get lost".
"Huck, we can do that without the least little bit of trouble in the world".
"Good as wheat!
What makes you think the money's--" "Huck, you just wait till we get in there.
If we don't find it I'll agree to give you my drum and every thing I've got in the world.
I will, by jings".
"All right--it's a whiz.
When do you say"?
"Right now, if you say it.
Are you strong enough"?
"Is it far in the cave?
I ben on my pins a little, three or four days, now, but I can't walk more'n a mile, Tom--least I don't think I could".
"It's about five mile into there the way anybody but me would go, Huck, but there's a mighty short cut that they don't anybody but me know about.
Huck, I'll take you right to it in a skiff.
I'll float the skiff down there, and I'll pull it back again all by myself.
You needn't ever turn your hand over".
"Less start right off, Tom".
"All right.
We want some bread and meat, and our pipes, and a little bag or two, and two or three kite-strings, and some of these new-fangled things they call lucifer matches.
I tell you, many's the time I wished I had some when I was in there before".
A trifle after noon the boys borrowed a small skiff from a citizen who was absent, and got under way at once.
When they were several miles below "Cave Hollow," Tom said: "Now you see this bluff here looks all alike all the way down from the cave hollow--no houses, no wood-yards, bushes all alike.
But do you see that white place up yonder where there's been a landslide?
Well, that's one of my marks.
We'll get ashore, now".
They landed.
"Now, Huck, where we're a-standing you could touch that hole I got out of with a fishing-pole.
See if you can find it".
Huck searched all the place about, and found nothing.
Tom proudly marched into a thick clump of sumach bushes and said: "Here you are!
Look at it, Huck; it's the snuggest hole in this country.
You just keep mum about it.
All along I've been wanting to be a robber, but I knew I'd got to have a thing like this, and where to run across it was the bother.
We've got it now, and we'll keep it quiet, only we'll let Joe Harper and Ben Rogers in--because of course there's got to be a Gang, or else there wouldn't be any style about it.
Tom Sawyer's Gang--it sounds splendid, don't it, Huck"?
"Well, it just does, Tom.
And who'll we rob"?
"Oh, most anybody.
Waylay people--that's mostly the way".
"And kill them"?
"No, not always.
Hive them in the cave till they raise a ransom".
"What's a ransom"?
"Money.
You make them raise all they can, off'n their friends; and after you've kept them a year, if it ain't raised then you kill them.
That's the general way.
Only you don't kill the women.
You shut up the women, but you don't kill them.
They're always beautiful and rich, and awfully scared.
You take their watches and things, but you always take your hat off and talk polite.
They ain't anybody as polite as robbers--you'll see that in any book.
Well, the women get to loving you, and after they've been in the cave a week or two weeks they stop crying and after that you couldn't get them to leave.
If you drove them out they'd turn right around and come back.
It's so in all the books".
"Why, it's real bully, Tom.
I believe it's better'n to be a pirate".
"Yes, it's better in some ways, because it's close to home and circuses and all that".
By this time everything was ready and the boys entered the hole, Tom in the lead.
They toiled their way to the farther end of the tunnel, then made their spliced kite-strings fast and moved on.
A few steps brought them to the spring, and Tom felt a shudder quiver all through him.
He showed Huck the fragment of candle-wick perched on a lump of clay against the wall, and described how he and Becky had watched the flame struggle and expire.
The boys began to quiet down to whispers, now, for the stillness and gloom of the place oppressed their spirits.
They went on, and presently entered and followed Tom's other corridor until they reached the "jumping-off place".
The candles revealed the fact that it was not really a precipice, but only a steep clay hill twenty or thirty feet high.
Tom whispered: "Now I'll show you something, Huck".
He held his candle aloft and said: "Look as far around the corner as you can.
Do you see that?
There--on the big rock over yonder--done with candle-smoke".
"Tom, it's a _cross_"!
"_Now_ where's your Number Two?
'_under the cross_,' hey?
Right yonder's where I saw Injun Joe poke up his candle, Huck"!
Huck stared at the mystic sign awhile, and then said with a shaky voice: "Tom, less git out of here"!
"What!
and leave the treasure"?
"Yes--leave it.
Injun Joe's ghost is round about there, certain".
"No it ain't, Huck, no it ain't.
It would ha'nt the place where he died--away out at the mouth of the cave--five mile from here".
"No, Tom, it wouldn't.
It would hang round the money.
I know the ways of ghosts, and so do you".
Tom began to fear that Huck was right.
Mis-givings gathered in his mind.
But presently an idea occurred to him-- "Lookyhere, Huck, what fools we're making of ourselves!
Injun Joe's ghost ain't a going to come around where there's a cross"!
The point was well taken.
It had its effect.
"Tom, I didn't think of that.
But that's so.
It's luck for us, that cross is.
I reckon we'll climb down there and have a hunt for that box".
Tom went first, cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he descended.
Huck followed.
Four avenues opened out of the small cavern which the great rock stood in.
The boys examined three of them with no result.
They found a small recess in the one nearest the base of the rock, with a pallet of blankets spread down in it; also an old suspender, some bacon rind, and the well-gnawed bones of two or three fowls.
But there was no moneybox.
The lads searched and researched this place, but in vain.
Tom said: "He said _under_ the cross.
Well, this comes nearest to being under the cross.
It can't be under the rock itself, because that sets solid on the ground".
They searched everywhere once more, and then sat down discouraged.
Huck could suggest nothing.
By-and-by Tom said: "Lookyhere, Huck, there's footprints and some candle-grease on the clay about one side of this rock, but not on the other sides.
Now, what's that for?
I bet you the money _is_ under the rock.
I'm going to dig in the clay".
"That ain't no bad notion, Tom"!
said Huck with animation.
Tom's "real Barlow" was out at once, and he had not dug four inches before he struck wood.
"Hey, Huck!
--you hear that"?
Huck began to dig and scratch now.
Some boards were soon uncovered and removed.
They had concealed a natural chasm which led under the rock.
Tom got into this and held his candle as far under the rock as he could, but said he could not see to the end of the rift.
He proposed to explore.
He stooped and passed under; the narrow way descended gradually.
He followed its winding course, first to the right, then to the left, Huck at his heels.
Tom turned a short curve, by-and-by, and exclaimed: "My goodness, Huck, lookyhere"!
It was the treasure-box, sure enough, occupying a snug little cavern, along with an empty powder-keg, a couple of guns in leather cases, two or three pairs of old moccasins, a leather belt, and some other rubbish well soaked with the water-drip.
"Got it at last"!
said Huck, ploughing among the tarnished coins with his hand.
"My, but we're rich, Tom"!
"Huck, I always reckoned we'd get it.
It's just too good to believe, but we _have_ got it, sure!
Say--let's not fool around here.
Let's snake it out.
Lemme see if I can lift the box".
It weighed about fifty pounds.
Tom could lift it, after an awkward fashion, but could not carry it conveniently.
"I thought so," he said; "_They_ carried it like it was heavy, that day at the ha'nted house.
I noticed that.
I reckon I was right to think of fetching the little bags along".
The money was soon in the bags and the boys took it up to the cross rock.
"Now less fetch the guns and things," said Huck.
"No, Huck--leave them there.
They're just the tricks to have when we go to robbing.
We'll keep them there all the time, and we'll hold our orgies there, too.
It's an awful snug place for orgies".
"What orgies"?
"I dono.
But robbers always have orgies, and of course we've got to have them, too.
Come along, Huck, we've been in here a long time.
It's getting late, I reckon.
I'm hungry, too.
We'll eat and smoke when we get to the skiff".
They presently emerged into the clump of sumach bushes, looked warily out, found the coast clear, and were soon lunching and smoking in the skiff.
As the sun dipped toward the horizon they pushed out and got under way.
Tom skimmed up the shore through the long twilight, chatting cheerily with Huck, and landed shortly after dark.
"Now, Huck," said Tom, "we'll hide the money in the loft of the widow's woodshed, and I'll come up in the morning and we'll count it and divide, and then we'll hunt up a place out in the woods for it where it will be safe.
Just you lay quiet here and watch the stuff till I run and hook Benny Taylor's little wagon; I won't be gone a minute".
He disappeared, and presently returned with the wagon, put the two small sacks into it, threw some old rags on top of them, and started off, dragging his cargo behind him.
When the boys reached the Welshman's house, they stopped to rest.
Just as they were about to move on, the Welshman stepped out and said: "Hallo, who's that"?
"Huck and Tom Sawyer".
"Good!
Come along with me, boys, you are keeping everybody waiting.
Here--hurry up, trot ahead--I'll haul the wagon for you.
Why, it's not as light as it might be.
Got bricks in it?
--or old metal"?
"Old metal," said Tom.
"I judged so; the boys in this town will take more trouble and fool away more time hunting up six bits' worth of old iron to sell to the foundry than they would to make twice the money at regular work.
But that's human nature--hurry along, hurry along"!
The boys wanted to know what the hurry was about.
"Never mind; you'll see, when we get to the Widow Douglas'".
Huck said with some apprehension--for he was long used to being falsely accused: "Mr. Jones, we haven't been doing nothing".
The Welshman laughed.
"Well, I don't know, Huck, my boy.
I don't know about that.
Ain't you and the widow good friends"?
"Yes.
Well, she's ben good friends to me, anyway".
"All right, then.
What do you want to be afraid for"?
This question was not entirely answered in Huck's slow mind before he found himself pushed, along with Tom, into Mrs. Douglas' drawing-room.
Mr. Jones left the wagon near the door and followed.
The place was grandly lighted, and everybody that was of any consequence in the village was there.
The Thatchers were there, the Harpers, the Rogerses, Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, the minister, the editor, and a great many more, and all dressed in their best.
The widow received the boys as heartily as any one could well receive two such looking beings.
They were covered with clay and candle-grease.
Aunt Polly blushed crimson with humiliation, and frowned and shook her head at Tom.
Nobody suffered half as much as the two boys did, however.
Mr. Jones said: "Tom wasn't at home, yet, so I gave him up; but I stumbled on him and Huck right at my door, and so I just brought them along in a hurry".
"And you did just right," said the widow.
"Come with me, boys".
She took them to a bedchamber and said: "Now wash and dress yourselves.
Here are two new suits of clothes--shirts, socks, everything complete.
They're Huck's--no, no thanks, Huck--Mr. Jones bought one and I the other.
But they'll fit both of you.
Get into them.
We'll wait--come down when you are slicked up enough".
Then she left.
CHAPTER XXXIV HUCK said: "Tom, we can slope, if we can find a rope.
The window ain't high from the ground".
"Shucks!
what do you want to slope for"?
"Well, I ain't used to that kind of a crowd.
I can't stand it.
I ain't going down there, Tom".
"Oh, bother!
It ain't anything.
I don't mind it a bit.
I'll take care of you".
Sid appeared.
"Tom," said he, "auntie has been waiting for you all the afternoon.
Mary got your Sunday clothes ready, and everybody's been fretting about you.
Say--ain't this grease and clay, on your clothes"?
"Now, Mr. Siddy, you jist 'tend to your own business.
What's all this blowout about, anyway"?
"It's one of the widow's parties that she's always having.
This time it's for the Welshman and his sons, on account of that scrape they helped her out of the other night.
And say--I can tell you something, if you want to know".
"Well, what"?
"Why, old Mr. Jones is going to try to spring something on the people here tonight, but I overheard him tell auntie today about it, as a secret, but I reckon it's not much of a secret now.
Everybody knows--the widow, too, for all she tries to let on she don't.
Mr. Jones was bound Huck should be here--couldn't get along with his grand secret without Huck, you know"!
"Secret about what, Sid"?
"About Huck tracking the robbers to the widow's.
I reckon Mr. Jones was going to make a grand time over his surprise, but I bet you it will drop pretty flat".
Sid chuckled in a very contented and satisfied way.
"Sid, was it you that told"?
"Oh, never mind who it was.
_Somebody_ told--that's enough".
"Sid, there's only one person in this town mean enough to do that, and that's you.
If you had been in Huck's place you'd 'a' sneaked down the hill and never told anybody on the robbers.
You can't do any but mean things, and you can't bear to see anybody praised for doing good ones.
There--no thanks, as the widow says"--and Tom cuffed Sid's ears and helped him to the door with several kicks.
"Now go and tell auntie if you dare--and tomorrow you'll catch it"!
Some minutes later the widow's guests were at the supper-table, and a dozen children were propped up at little side-tables in the same room, after the fashion of that country and that day.
At the proper time Mr. Jones made his little speech, in which he thanked the widow for the honor she was doing himself and his sons, but said that there was another person whose modesty-- And so forth and so on.
He sprung his secret about Huck's share in the adventure in the finest dramatic manner he was master of, but the surprise it occasioned was largely counterfeit and not as clamorous and effusive as it might have been under happier circumstances.
However, the widow made a pretty fair show of astonishment, and heaped so many compliments and so much gratitude upon Huck that he almost forgot the nearly intolerable discomfort of his new clothes in the entirely intolerable discomfort of being set up as
The widow said she meant to give Huck a home under her roof and have him educated; and that when she could spare the money she would start him in business in a modest way.
Tom's chance was come.
He said: "Huck don't need it.
Huck's rich".
Nothing but a heavy strain upon the good manners of the company kept back the due and proper complimentary laugh at this pleasant joke.
But the silence was a little awkward.
Tom broke it: "Huck's got money.
Maybe you don't believe it, but he's got lots of it.
Oh, you needn't smile--I reckon I can show you.
You just wait a minute".
Tom ran out of doors.
The company looked at each other with a perplexed interest--and inquiringly at Huck, who was tongue-tied.
"Sid, what ails Tom"?
said Aunt Polly.
"He--well, there ain't ever any making of that boy out.
I never--" Tom entered, struggling with the weight of his sacks, and Aunt Polly did not finish her sentence.
Tom poured the mass of yellow coin upon the table and said: "There--what did I tell you?
Half of it's Huck's and half of it's mine"!
The spectacle took the general breath away.
All gazed, nobody spoke for a moment.
Then there was a unanimous call for an explanation.
Tom said he could furnish it, and he did.
The tale was long, but brimful of interest.
There was scarcely an interruption from any one to break the charm of its flow.
When he had finished, Mr. Jones said: "I thought I had fixed up a little surprise for this occasion, but it don't amount to anything now.
This one makes it sing mighty small, I'm willing to allow".
The money was counted.
The sum amounted to a little over twelve thousand dollars.
It was more than any one present had ever seen at one time before, though several persons were there who were worth considerably more than that in property.
CHAPTER XXXV THE reader may rest satisfied that Tom's and Huck's windfall made a mighty stir in the poor little village of St. Petersburg.
So vast a sum, all in actual cash, seemed next to incredible.
It was talked about, gloated over, glorified, until the reason of many of the citizens tottered under the strain of the unhealthy excitement.
Every "haunted" house in St. Petersburg and the neighboring villages was dissected, plank by plank, and its foundations dug up and ransacked for hidden treasure--and not by boys, but men--pretty grave, unromantic men, too, some of them.
Wherever Tom and Huck appeared they were courted, admired, stared at.
The boys were not able to remember that their remarks had possessed weight before; but now their sayings were treasured and repeated; everything they did seemed somehow to be regarded as remarkable; they had evidently lost the power of doing and saying
The village paper published biographical sketches of the boys.
The Widow Douglas put Huck's money out at six per cent.
, and Judge Thatcher did the same with Tom's at Aunt Polly's request.
Each lad had an income, now, that was simply prodigious--a dollar for every weekday in the year and half of the Sundays.
It was just what the minister got--no, it was what he was promised--he generally couldn't collect it.
A dollar and a quarter a week would board, lodge, and school a boy in those old simple days--and clothe him and wash him, too, for that matter.
Judge Thatcher had conceived a great opinion of Tom.
He said that no commonplace boy would ever have got his daughter out of the cave.
When Becky told her father, in strict confidence, how Tom had taken her whipping at school, the Judge was visibly moved; and when she pleaded grace for the mighty lie which Tom had told in order to shift that whipping from her shoulders to his own, the
Becky thought her father had never looked so tall and so superb as when he walked the floor and stamped his foot and said that.
She went straight off and told Tom about it.
Judge Thatcher hoped to see Tom a great lawyer or a great soldier some day.
He said he meant to look to it that Tom should be admitted to the National Military Academy and afterward trained in the best law school in the country, in order that he might be ready for either career or both.
Huck Finn's wealth and the fact that he was now under the Widow Douglas' protection introduced him into society--no, dragged him into it, hurled him into it--and his sufferings were almost more than he could bear.
The widow's servants kept him clean and neat, combed and brushed, and they bedded him nightly in unsympathetic sheets that had not one little spot or stain which he could press to his heart and know for a friend.
He had to eat with a knife and fork; he had to use napkin, cup, and plate; he had to learn his book, he had to go to church; he had to talk so properly that speech was become insipid in his mouth; whithersoever he turned, the bars and shackles of
He bravely bore his miseries three weeks, and then one day turned up missing.
For forty-eight hours the widow hunted for him everywhere in great distress.
The public were profoundly concerned; they searched high and low, they dragged the river for his body.
Early the third morning Tom Sawyer wisely went poking among some old empty hogsheads down behind the abandoned slaughter-house, and in one of them he found the refugee.
Huck had slept there; he had just breakfasted upon some stolen odds and ends of food, and was lying off, now, in comfort, with his pipe.
He was unkempt, uncombed, and clad in the same old ruin of rags that had made him picturesque in the days when he was free and happy.
Tom routed him out, told him the trouble he had been causing, and urged him to go home.
Huck's face lost its tranquil content, and took a melancholy cast.
He said: "Don't talk about it, Tom.
I've tried it, and it don't work; it don't work, Tom.
It ain't for me; I ain't used to it.
The widder's good to me, and friendly; but I can't stand them ways.
She makes me get up just at the same time every morning; she makes me wash, they comb me all to thunder; she won't let me sleep in the woodshed; I got to wear them blamed clothes that just smothers me, Tom; they don't seem to any air git through 'em,
I can't ketch a fly in there, I can't chaw.
I got to wear shoes all Sunday.
The widder eats by a bell; she goes to bed by a bell; she gits up by a bell--everything's so awful reg'lar a body can't stand it".
"Well, everybody does that way, Huck".
"Tom, it don't make no difference.
I ain't everybody, and I can't _stand_ it.
It's awful to be tied up so.
And grub comes too easy--I don't take no interest in vittles, that way.
I got to ask to go a-fishing; I got to ask to go in a-swimming--dern'd if I hain't got to ask to do everything.
Well, I'd got to talk so nice it wasn't no comfort--I'd got to go up in the attic and rip out awhile, every day, to git a taste in my mouth, or I'd a died, Tom.
The widder wouldn't let me smoke; she wouldn't let me yell, she wouldn't let me gape, nor stretch, nor scratch, before folks--" [Then with a spasm of special irritation and injury]--"And dad fetch it, she prayed all the time!
I never see such a woman!
I _had_ to shove, Tom--I just had to.
And besides, that school's going to open, and I'd a had to go to it--well, I wouldn't stand _that_, Tom.
Looky-here, Tom, being rich ain't what it's cracked up to be.
It's just worry and worry, and sweat and sweat, and a-wishing you was dead all the time.
Now these clothes suits me, and this bar'l suits me, and I ain't ever going to shake 'em any more.
Tom, I wouldn't ever got into all this trouble if it hadn't 'a' ben for that money; now you just take my sheer of it along with your'n, and gimme a ten-center sometimes--not many times, becuz I don't give a dern for a thing 'thout it's tollable hard to
"Oh, Huck, you know I can't do that.
'Tain't fair; and besides if you'll try this thing just a while longer you'll come to like it".
"Like it!
Yes--the way I'd like a hot stove if I was to set on it long enough.
No, Tom, I won't be rich, and I won't live in them cussed smothery houses.
I like the woods, and the river, and hogsheads, and I'll stick to 'em, too.
Blame it all!
just as we'd got guns, and a cave, and all just fixed to rob, here this dern foolishness has got to come up and spile it all"!
Tom saw his opportunity-- "Lookyhere, Huck, being rich ain't going to keep me back from turning robber".
"No!
Oh, good-licks; are you in real dead-wood earnest, Tom"?
"Just as dead earnest as I'm sitting here.
But Huck, we can't let you into the gang if you ain't respectable, you know".
Huck's joy was quenched.
"Can't let me in, Tom?
Didn't you let me go for a pirate"?
"Yes, but that's different.
A robber is more high-toned than what a pirate is--as a general thing.
In most countries they're awful high up in the nobility--dukes and such".
"Now, Tom, hain't you always ben friendly to me?
You wouldn't shet me out, would you, Tom?
You wouldn't do that, now, _would_ you, Tom"?
"Huck, I wouldn't want to, and I _don't_ want to--but what would people say?
Why, they'd say, 'Mph!
Tom Sawyer's Gang!
pretty low characters in it!
' They'd mean you, Huck.
You wouldn't like that, and I wouldn't".
Huck was silent for some time, engaged in a mental struggle.
Finally he said: "Well, I'll go back to the widder for a month and tackle it and see if I can come to stand it, if you'll let me b'long to the gang, Tom".
"All right, Huck, it's a whiz!
Come along, old chap, and I'll ask the widow to let up on you a little, Huck".
"Will you, Tom--now will you?
That's good.
If she'll let up on some of the roughest things, I'll smoke private and cuss private, and crowd through or bust.
When you going to start the gang and turn robbers"?
"Oh, right off.
We'll get the boys together and have the initiation tonight, maybe".
"Have the which"?
"Have the initiation".
"What's that"?
"It's to swear to stand by one another, and never tell the gang's secrets, even if you're chopped all to flinders, and kill anybody and all his family that hurts one of the gang".
"That's gay--that's mighty gay, Tom, I tell you".
"Well, I bet it is.
And all that swearing's got to be done at midnight, in the lonesomest, awfulest place you can find--a ha'nted house is the best, but they're all ripped up now".
"Well, midnight's good, anyway, Tom".
"Yes, so it is.
And you've got to swear on a coffin, and sign it with blood".
"Now, that's something _like_!
Why, it's a million times bullier than pirating.
I'll stick to the widder till I rot, Tom; and if I git to be a reg'lar ripper of a robber, and everybody talking 'bout it, I reckon she'll be proud she snaked me in out of the wet".
CONCLUSION SO endeth this chronicle.
It being strictly a history of a _boy_, it must stop here; the story could not go much further without becoming the history of a _man_.
When one writes a novel about grown people, he knows exactly where to stop--that is, with a marriage; but when he writes of juveniles, he must stop where he best can.
Most of the characters that perform in this book still live, and are prosperous and happy.
Some day it may seem worth while to take up the story of the younger ones again and see what sort of men and women they turned out to be; therefore it will be wisest not to reveal any of that part of their lives at present.Produced by David Widger INNOCENTS ABROAD by Mark Twain [From an 1869--1st Edition] CONTENTS CHAPTER I. Popular Talk of the Excursion--Programme of the Trip--Duly Ticketed for the Excursion--Defection of the Celebrities CHAPTER II.
Grand Preparations--An Imposing Dignitary--The European Exodus --Mr. Blucher's Opinion--Stateroom No.
10--The Assembling of the Clans --At Sea at Last CHAPTER III.
"Averaging" the Passengers--Far, far at Sea.
--Tribulation among the Patriarchs--Seeking Amusement under Difficulties--Five Captains in the Ship CHAPTER IV.
The Pilgrims Becoming Domesticated--Pilgrim Life at Sea --"Horse-Billiards"--The "Synagogue"--The Writing School--Jack's "Journal" --The "Q.
C. Club"--The Magic Lantern--State Ball on Deck--Mock Trials --Charades--Pilgrim Solemnity--Slow Music--The Executive Officer Delivers an Opinion CHAPTER V. Summer in Mid-Atlantic--An Eccentric Moon--Mr. Blucher Loses Confidence --The Mystery of "Ship
Solid Information--A Fossil Community--Curious Ways and Customs --Jesuit Humbuggery--Fantastic Pilgrimizing--Origin of the Russ Pavement --Squaring Accounts with the Fossils--At Sea Again CHAPTER VII.
A Tempest at Night--Spain and Africa on Exhibition--Greeting a Majestic Stranger--The Pillars of Hercules--The Rock of Gibraltar--Tiresome Repetition--"The Queen's Chair"--Serenity Conquered--Curiosities of the Secret Caverns--Personnel of Gibraltar--Some
The Ancient City of Tangier, Morocco--Strange Sights--A Cradle of Antiquity--We become Wealthy--How they Rob the Mail in Africa--The Danger of being Opulent in Morocco CHAPTER IX.
A Pilgrim--in Deadly Peril--How they Mended the Clock--Moorish Punishments for Crime--Marriage Customs--Looking Several ways for Sunday --Shrewd, Practice of Mohammedan Pilgrims--Reverence for Cats--Bliss of being a Consul-General CHAPTER X. Fourth of July
Getting used to it--No Soap--Bill of Fare, Table d'hote--"An American Sir"--A Curious Discovery--The "Pilgrim" Bird--Strange Companionship --A Grave of the Living--A Long Captivity--Some of Dumas' Heroes--Dungeon of the Famous "Iron Mask".
CHAPTER XII.
A Holiday Flight through France--Summer Garb of the Landscape--Abroad on the Great Plains--Peculiarities of French Cars--French Politeness American Railway Officials--"Twenty Minutes to Dinner"!
--Why there are no Accidents--The "Old Travellers"--Still on the Wing--Paris at Last----French Order and Quiet--Place of the Bastile--Seeing the Sights --A Barbarous Atrocity--Absurd Billiards CHAPTER XIII.
More Trouble--Monsieur Billfinger--Re-Christening the Frenchman--In the Clutches of a Paris Guide--The International Exposition--Fine Military Review--Glimpse of the Emperor Napoleon and the Sultan of Turkey CHAPTER XIV.
The Venerable Cathedral of Notre-Dame--Jean Sanspeur's Addition --Treasures and Sacred Relics--The Legend of the Cross--The Morgue--The Outrageious 'Can-Can'--Blondin Aflame--The Louvre Palace--The Great Park --Showy Pageantry--Preservation of Noted Things
French National Burying--Ground--Among the Great Dead--The Shrine of Disappointed Love--The Story of Abelard and Heloise--"English Spoken Here"--"American Drinks Compounded Here"--Imperial Honors to an American--The Over-estimated Grisette--Departure from
Versailles--Paradise Regained--A Wonderful Park--Paradise Lost --Napoleonic Strategy CHAPTER XVII.
War--The American Forces Victorious--" Home Again"--Italy in Sight The "City of Palaces"--Beauty of the Genoese Women--The "Stub-Hunters" --Among the Palaces--Gifted Guide--Church Magnificence--"Women not Admitted"--How the Genoese Live--Massive
Flying Through Italy--Marengo--First Glimpse of the Famous Cathedral --Description of some of its Wonders--A Horror Carved in Stone----An Unpleasant Adventure--A Good Man--A Sermon from the Tomb--Tons of Gold and Silver--Some More Holy Relics--Solomon's
--La Scala--Petrarch and Laura--Lucrezia Borgia--Ingenious Frescoes--Ancient Roman Amphitheatre--A Clever Delusion--Distressing Billiards--The Chief Charm of European Life--An Italian Bath--Wanted: Soap--Crippled French--Mutilated English--The Most
The Pretty Lago di Lecco--A Carriage Drive in the Country--Astonishing Sociability in a Coachman--Sleepy Land--Bloody Shrines--The Heart and Home of Priestcraft--A Thrilling Mediaeval Romance--The Birthplace of Harlequin--Approaching Venice CHAPTER XXII.
Night in Venice--The "Gay Gondolier"--The Grand Fete by Moonlight --The Notable Sights of Venice--The Mother of the Republics Desolate CHANTER XXIII.
The Famous Gondola--The Gondola in an Unromantic Aspect--The Great Square of St. Mark and the Winged Lion--Snobs, at Home and Abroad--Sepulchres of the Great Dead--A Tilt at the "Old Masters"--A Contraband Guide --The Conspiracy--Moving Again CHAPTER XXIV.
Down Through Italy by Rail--Idling in Florence--Dante and Galileo--An Ungrateful City--Dazzling Generosity--Wonderful Mosaics--The Historical Arno--Lost Again--Found Again, but no Fatted Calf Ready--The Leaning Tower of Pisa--The Ancient Duomo--The Old
The Works of Bankruptcy--Railway Grandeur--How to Fill an Empty Treasury--The Sumptuousness of Mother Church--Ecclesiastical Splendor --Magnificence and Misery--General Execration--More Magnificence A Good Word for the Priests--Civita Vecchia the
The Modern Roman on His Travels--The Grandeur of St. Peter's--Holy Relics --Grand View from the Dome--The Holy Inquisition--Interesting Old Monkish Frauds--The Ruined Coliseum--The Coliseum in the Days of its Prime --Ancient Playbill of a Coliseum
"Butchered to Make a Roman Holiday"--The Man who Never Complained --An Exasperating Subject--Asinine Guides--The Roman Catacombs The Saint Whose Fervor Burst his Ribs--The Miracle of the Bleeding Heart --The Legend of Ara Coeli CHAPTER XXVIII.
Picturesque Horrors--The Legend of Brother Thomas--Sorrow Scientifically Analyzed--A Festive Company of the Dead--The Great Vatican Museum Artist Sins of Omission--The Rape of the Sabines--Papal Protection of Art--High Price of "Old Masters"--Improved
Naples--In Quarantine at Last--Annunciation--Ascent of Mount Vesuvius--A Two Cent Community--The Black Side of Neapolitan Character--Monkish Miracles--Ascent of Mount Vesuvius Continued--The Stranger and the Hackman--Night View of Naples from the
Ascent of Mount Vesuvius Continued--Beautiful View at Dawn--Less Beautiful in the Back Streets--Ascent of Vesuvius Continued--Dwellings a Hundred Feet High--A Motley Procession--Bill of Fare for a Peddler's Breakfast--Princely Salaries--Ascent of Vesuvius
The Buried City of Pompeii--How Dwellings Appear that have been Unoccupied for Eighteen hundred years--The Judgment Seat--Desolation--The Footprints of the Departed--"No Women Admitted"--Theatres, Bakeshops, Schools--Skeletons preserved by the Ashes and
At Sea Once More--The Pilgrims all Well--Superb Stromboli--Sicily by Moonlight--Scylla and Charybdis--The "Oracle" at Fault--Skirting the Isles of Greece Ancient Athens--Blockaded by Quarantine and Refused Permission to Enter--Running the Blockade--A
Modern Greece--Fallen Greatness--Sailing Through the Archipelago and the Dardanelles--Footprints of History--The First Shoddy Contractor of whom History gives any Account--Anchored Before Constantinople--Fantastic Fashions--The Ingenious
Scarcity of Morals and Whiskey--Slave-Girl Market Report--Commercial Morality at a Discount--The Slandered Dogs of Constantinople --Questionable Delights of Newspaperdom in Turkey--Ingenious Italian Journalism--No More Turkish Lunches Desired--The Turkish
Sailing Through the Bosporus and the Black Sea--"Far-Away Moses" --Melancholy Sebastopol--Hospitably Received in Russia--Pleasant English People--Desperate Fighting--Relic Hunting--How Travellers Form "Cabinets" CHAPTER XXXVI.
Nine Thousand Miles East--Imitation American Town in Russia--Gratitude that Came Too Late--To Visit the Autocrat of All the Russias CHAPTER XXXVII.
Summer Home of Royalty--Practising for the Dread Ordeal--Committee on Imperial Address--Reception by the Emperor and Family--Dresses of the Imperial Party--Concentrated Power--Counting the Spoons--At the Grand Duke's--A Charming Villa--A Knightly
Return to Constantinople--We Sail for Asia--The Sailors Burlesque the Imperial Visitors--Ancient Smyrna--The "Oriental Splendor" Fraud --The "Biblical Crown of Life"--Pilgrim Prophecy-Savans--Sociable Armenian Girls--A Sweet Reminiscence--"The Camels are
CHAPTER XXXIX.
Smyrna's Lions--The Martyr Polycarp--The "Seven Churches"--Remains of the Six Smyrnas--Mysterious Oyster Mine Oysters--Seeking Scenery--A Millerite Tradition--A Railroad Out of its Sphere CHAPTER XL.
Journeying Toward Ancient Ephesus--Ancient Ayassalook--The Villanous Donkey--A Fantastic Procession--Bygone Magnificence--Fragments of History--The Legend of the Seven Sleepers CHAPTER XLI.
Vandalism Prohibited--Angry Pilgrims--Approaching Holy Land!
--The "Shrill Note of Preparation"--Distress About Dragomans and Transportation --The "Long Route" Adopted--In Syria--Something about Beirout--A Choice Specimen of a Greek "Ferguson"--Outfits--Hideous Horseflesh--Pilgrim "Style"--What of Aladdin's Lamp?
CHAPTER XLII.
"Jacksonville," in the Mountains of Lebanon--Breakfasting above a Grand Panorama--The Vanished City--The Peculiar Steed, "Jericho"--The Pilgrims Progress--Bible Scenes--Mount Hermon, Joshua's Battle Fields, etc.
--The Tomb of Noah--A Most Unfortunate People CHAPTER XLIII.
Patriarchal Customs--Magnificent Baalbec--Description of the Ruins --Scribbling Smiths and Joneses--Pilgrim Fidelity to the Letter of the Law --The Revered Fountain of Baalam's Ass CHAPTER XLIV.
Extracts from Note-Book--Mahomet's Paradise and the Bible's--Beautiful Damascus the Oldest City on Earth--Oriental Scenes within the Curious Old City--Damascus Street Car--The Story of St. Paul--The "Street called Straight"--Mahomet's Tomb and St.
The Cholera by way of Variety--Hot--Another Outlandish Procession--Pen and-Ink Photograph of "Jonesborough," Syria--Tomb of Nimrod, the Mighty Hunter--The Stateliest Ruin of All--Stepping over the Borders of Holy-Land--Bathing in the Sources of
Dan--Bashan--Genessaret--A Notable Panorama--Smallness of Palestine --Scraps of History--Character of the Country--Bedouin Shepherds--Glimpses of the Hoary Past--Mr. Grimes's Bedouins--A Battle--Ground of Joshua --That Soldier's Manner of Fighting--Barak's
"Jack's Adventure"--Joseph's Pit--The Story of Joseph--Joseph's Magnanimity and Esau's--The Sacred Lake of Genessaret--Enthusiasm of the Pilgrims--Why We did not Sail on Galilee--About Capernaum--Concerning the Saviour's Brothers and Sisters--Journeying
Curious Specimens of Art and Architecture--Public Reception of the Pilgrims--Mary Magdalen's House--Tiberias and its Queer Inhabitants --The Sacred Sea of Galilee--Galilee by Night CHAPTER XLIX.
The Ancient Baths--Ye Apparition--A Distinguished Panorama--The Last Battle of the Crusades--The Story of the Lord of Kerak--Mount Tabor --What one Sees from its Top--Memory of a Wonderful Garden--The House of Deborah the Prophetess CHAPTER L. Toward
Boyhood of the Saviour--Unseemly Antics of Sober Pilgrims--Home of the Witch of Endor--Nain--Profanation--A Popular Oriental Picture--Biblical Metaphors Becoming steadily More Intelligible--The Shuuem Miracle --The "Free Son of The Desert"--Ancient
"The Joy of the Whole Earth"--Description of Jerusalem--Church of the Holy Sepulchre--The Stone of Unction--The Grave of Jesus--Graves of Nicodemus and Joseph of Armattea--Places of the Apparition--The Finding of the There Crosses----The Legend--Monkish
The "Sorrowful Way"--The Legend of St. Veronica's Handkerchief --An Illustrious Stone--House of the Wandering Jew--The Tradition of the Wanderer--Solomon's Temple--Mosque of Omar--Moslem Traditions--"Women not Admitted"--The Fate of a Gossip--Turkish
Rebellion in the Camp--Charms of Nomadic Life--Dismal Rumors--En Route for Jericho and The Dead Sea--Pilgrim Strategy--Bethany and the Dwelling of Lazarus--"Bedouins"!
--Ancient Jericho--Misery--The Night March --The Dead Sea--An Idea of What a "Wilderness" in Palestine is--The Holy hermits of Mars Saba--Good St. Saba--Women not Admitted--Buried from the World for all Time--Unselfish Catholic Benevolence--Gazelles--The
Departure from Jerusalem--Samson--The Plain of Sharon--Arrival at Joppa --Horse of Simon the Tanner--The Long Pilgrimage Ended--Character of Palestine Scenery--The Curse CHAPTER LVII.
The Happiness of being at Sea once more--"Home" as it is in a Pleasure Ship--"Shaking Hands" with the Vessel--Jack in Costume--His Father's Parting Advice--Approaching Egypt--Ashore in Alexandria--A Deserved Compliment for the Donkeys--Invasion of the Lost
"Recherche" Donkeys--A Wild Ride--Specimens of Egyptian Modesty--Moses in the Bulrushes--Place where the Holy Family Sojourned--Distant view of the Pyramids--A Nearer View--The Ascent--Superb View from the top of the Pyramid--"Backsheesh!
Backsheesh"!
--An Arab Exploit--In the Bowels of the Pyramid--Strategy--Reminiscence of "Holiday's Hill"--Boyish Exploit--The Majestic Sphynx--Things the Author will not Tell--Grand Old Egypt CHAPTER LIX.
Going Home--A Demoralized Note-Book--A Boy's Diary--Mere Mention of Old Spain--Departure from Cadiz--A Deserved Rebuke--The Beautiful Madeiras --Tabooed--In the Delightful Bermudas--An English Welcome--Good-by to "Our Friends the Bermudians"--Packing
Thankless Devotion--A Newspaper Valedictory--Conclusion PREFACE This book is a record of a pleasure trip.
If it were a record of a solemn scientific expedition, it would have about it that gravity, that profundity, and that impressive incomprehensibility which are so proper to works of that kind, and withal so attractive.
Yet notwithstanding it is only a record of a pic-nic, it has a purpose, which is to suggest to the reader how he would be likely to see Europe and the East if he looked at them with his own eyes instead of the eyes of those who traveled in those countries
I make small pretense of showing anyone how he ought to look at objects of interest beyond the sea--other books do that, and therefore, even if I were competent to do it, there is no need.
I offer no apologies for any departures from the usual style of travel-writing that may be charged against me--for I think I have seen with impartial eyes, and I am sure I have written at least honestly, whether wisely or not.
In this volume I have used portions of letters which I wrote for the Daily Alta California, of San Francisco, the proprietors of that journal having waived their rights and given me the necessary permission.
I have also inserted portions of several letters written for the New York Tribune and the New York Herald.
THE AUTHOR.
SAN FRANCISCO.
CHAPTER I. For months the great pleasure excursion to Europe and the Holy Land was chatted about in the newspapers everywhere in America and discussed at countless firesides.
It was a novelty in the way of excursions--its like had not been thought of before, and it compelled that interest which attractive novelties always command.
It was to be a picnic on a gigantic scale.
The participants in it, instead of freighting an ungainly steam ferry--boat with youth and beauty and pies and doughnuts, and paddling up some obscure creek to disembark upon a grassy lawn and wear themselves out with a long summer day's laborious
They were to sail for months over the breezy Atlantic and the sunny Mediterranean; they were to scamper about the decks by day, filling the ship with shouts and laughter--or read novels and poetry in the shade of the smokestacks, or watch for the
It was a brave conception; it was the offspring of a most ingenious brain.
It was well advertised, but it hardly needed it: the bold originality, the extraordinary character, the seductive nature, and the vastness of the enterprise provoked comment everywhere and advertised it in every household in the land.
Who could read the program of the excursion without longing to make one of the party?
I will insert it here.
It is almost as good as a map.
As a text for this book, nothing could be better: EXCURSION TO THE HOLY LAND, EGYPT, THE CRIMEA, GREECE, AND INTERMEDIATE POINTS OF INTEREST.
BROOKLYN, February 1st, 1867 The undersigned will make an excursion as above during the coming season, and begs to submit to you the following programme: A first-class steamer, to be under his own command, and capable of accommodating at least one hundred
There is good reason to believe that this company can be easily made up in this immediate vicinity, of mutual friends and acquaintances.
The steamer will be provided with every necessary comfort, including library and musical instruments.
An experienced physician will be on board.
Leaving New York about June 1st, a middle and pleasant route will be taken across the Atlantic, and passing through the group of Azores, St. Michael will be reached in about ten days.
A day or two will be spent here, enjoying the fruit and wild scenery of these islands, and the voyage continued, and Gibraltar reached in three or four days.
A day or two will be spent here in looking over the wonderful subterraneous fortifications, permission to visit these galleries being readily obtained.
From Gibraltar, running along the coasts of Spain and France, Marseilles will be reached in three days.
Here ample time will be given not only to look over the city, which was founded six hundred years before the Christian era, and its artificial port, the finest of the kind in the Mediterranean, but to visit Paris during the Great Exhibition; and the
Passengers who may wish to extend the time at Paris can do so, and, passing down through Switzerland, rejoin the steamer at Genoa.
From Marseilles to Genoa is a run of one night.
The excursionists will have an opportunity to look over this, the "magnificent city of palaces," and visit the birthplace of Columbus, twelve miles off, over a beautiful road built by Napoleon I. From this point, excursions may be made to Milan, Lakes Como
Or, if passengers desire to visit Parma (famous for Correggio's frescoes) and Bologna, they can by rail go on to Florence, and rejoin the steamer at Leghorn, thus spending about three weeks amid the cities most famous for art in Italy.
From Genoa the run to Leghorn will be made along the coast in one night, and time appropriated to this point in which to visit Florence, its palaces and galleries; Pisa, its cathedral and "Leaning Tower," and Lucca and its baths, and Roman amphitheater;
From Leghorn to Naples (calling at Civita Vecchia to land any who may prefer to go to Rome from that point), the distance will be made in about thirty-six hours; the route will lay along the coast of Italy, close by Caprera, Elba, and Corsica.
Arrangements have been made to take on board at Leghorn a pilot for Caprera, and, if practicable, a call will be made there to visit the home of Garibaldi.
Rome [by rail], Herculaneum, Pompeii, Vesuvius, Vergil's tomb, and possibly the ruins of Paestum can be visited, as well as the beautiful surroundings of Naples and its charming bay.
The next point of interest will be Palermo, the most beautiful city of Sicily, which will be reached in one night from Naples.
A day will be spent here, and leaving in the evening, the course will be taken towards Athens.
Skirting along the north coast of Sicily, passing through the group of Aeolian Isles, in sight of Stromboli and Vulcania, both active volcanoes, through the Straits of Messina, with "Scylla" on the one hand and "Charybdis" on the other, along the east
After tarrying here awhile, the Bay of Salamis will be crossed, and a day given to Corinth, whence the voyage will be continued to Constantinople, passing on the way through the Grecian Archipelago, the Dardanelles, the Sea of Marmora, and the mouth of the
After leaving Constantinople, the way will be taken out through the beautiful Bosphorus, across the Black Sea to Sebastopol and Balaklava, a run of about twenty-four hours.
Here it is proposed to remain two days, visiting the harbors, fortifications, and battlefields of the Crimea; thence back through the Bosphorus, touching at Constantinople to take in any who may have preferred to remain there; down through the Sea of
A sufficient stay will be made here to give opportunity of visiting Ephesus, fifty miles distant by rail.
From Smyrna towards the Holy Land the course will lay through the Grecian Archipelago, close by the Isle of Patmos, along the coast of Asia, ancient Pamphylia, and the Isle of Cyprus.
Beirut will be reached in three days.
At Beirut time will be given to visit Damascus; after which the steamer will proceed to Joppa.
From Joppa, Jerusalem, the River Jordan, the Sea of Tiberias, Nazareth, Bethany, Bethlehem, and other points of interest in the Holy Land can be visited, and here those who may have preferred to make the journey from Beirut through the country, passing
Leaving Joppa, the next point of interest to visit will be Alexandria, which will be reached in twenty-four hours.
The ruins of Caesar's Palace, Pompey's Pillar, Cleopatra's Needle, the Catacombs, and ruins of ancient Alexandria will be found worth the visit.
The journey to Cairo, one hundred and thirty miles by rail, can be made in a few hours, and from which can be visited the site of ancient Memphis, Joseph's Granaries, and the Pyramids.
From Alexandria the route will be taken homeward, calling at Malta, Cagliari (in Sardinia), and Palma (in Majorca), all magnificent harbors, with charming scenery, and abounding in fruits.
A day or two will be spent at each place, and leaving Parma in the evening, Valencia in Spain will be reached the next morning.
A few days will be spent in this, the finest city of Spain.
From Valencia, the homeward course will be continued, skirting along the coast of Spain.
Alicant, Carthagena, Palos, and Malaga will be passed but a mile or two distant, and Gibraltar reached in about twenty-four hours.
A stay of one day will be made here, and the voyage continued to Madeira, which will be reached in about three days.
Captain Marryatt writes: "I do not know a spot on the globe which so much astonishes and delights upon first arrival as Madeira".
A stay of one or two days will be made here, which, if time permits, may be extended, and passing on through the islands, and probably in sight of the Peak of Teneriffe, a southern track will be taken, and the Atlantic crossed within the latitudes of the
A call will be made at Bermuda, which lies directly in this route homeward, and will be reached in about ten days from Madeira, and after spending a short time with our friends the Bermudians, the final departure will be made for home, which will be
Already, applications have been received from parties in Europe wishing to join the Excursion there.
The ship will at all times be a home, where the excursionists, if sick, will be surrounded by kind friends, and have all possible comfort and sympathy.
Should contagious sickness exist in any of the ports named in the program, such ports will be passed, and others of interest substituted.
The price of passage is fixed at $1,250, currency, for each adult passenger.
Choice of rooms and of seats at the tables apportioned in the order in which passages are engaged; and no passage considered engaged until ten percent of the passage money is deposited with the treasurer.
Passengers can remain on board of the steamer, at all ports, if they desire, without additional expense, and all boating at the expense of the ship.
All passages must be paid for when taken, in order that the most perfect arrangements be made for starting at the appointed time.
Applications for passage must be approved by the committee before tickets are issued, and can be made to the undersigned.
Articles of interest or curiosity, procured by the passengers during the voyage, may be brought home in the steamer free of charge.
Five dollars per day, in gold, it is believed, will be a fair calculation to make for all traveling expenses onshore and at the various points where passengers may wish to leave the steamer for days at a time.
The trip can be extended, and the route changed, by unanimous vote of the passengers.
CHAS.
C. DUNCAN, 117 WALL STREET, NEW YORK R. R. G******, Treasurer Committee on Applications J. T. H*****, ESQ.
R. R. G*****, ESQ.
C. C. Duncan Committee on Selecting Steamer CAPT.
W. W. S* * * *, Surveyor for Board of Underwriters C. W. C******, Consulting Engineer for U.S. and Canada J. T. H*****, Esq.
C. C. DUNCAN P.S.--The very beautiful and substantial side-wheel steamship "Quaker City" has been chartered for the occasion, and will leave New York June 8th.
Letters have been issued by the government commending the party to courtesies abroad.
What was there lacking about that program to make it perfectly irresistible?
Nothing that any finite mind could discover.
Paris, England, Scotland, Switzerland, Italy--Garibaldi!
The Grecian Archipelago!
Vesuvius!
Constantinople!
Smyrna!
The Holy Land!
Egypt and "our friends the Bermudians"!
People in Europe desiring to join the excursion--contagious sickness to be avoided--boating at the expense of the ship--physician on board--the circuit of the globe to be made if the passengers unanimously desired it--the company to be rigidly selected by
Human nature could not withstand these bewildering temptations.
I hurried to the treasurer's office and deposited my ten percent.
I rejoiced to know that a few vacant staterooms were still left.
I did avoid a critical personal examination into my character by that bowelless committee, but I referred to all the people of high standing I could think of in the community who would be least likely to know anything about me.
Shortly a supplementary program was issued which set forth that the Plymouth Collection of Hymns would be used on board the ship.
I then paid the balance of my passage money.
I was provided with a receipt and duly and officially accepted as an excursionist.
There was happiness in that but it was tame compared to the novelty of being "select".
This supplementary program also instructed the excursionists to provide themselves with light musical instruments for amusement in the ship, with saddles for Syrian travel, green spectacles and umbrellas, veils for Egypt, and substantial clothing to use in
Furthermore, it was suggested that although the ship's library would afford a fair amount of reading matter, it would still be well if each passenger would provide himself with a few guidebooks, a Bible, and some standard works of travel.
A list was appended, which consisted chiefly of books relating to the Holy Land, since the Holy Land was part of the excursion and seemed to be its main feature.
Reverend Henry Ward Beecher was to have accompanied the expedition, but urgent duties obliged him to give up the idea.
There were other passengers who could have been spared better and would have been spared more willingly.
Lieutenant General Sherman was to have been of the party also, but the Indian war compelled his presence on the plains.
A popular actress had entered her name on the ship's books, but something interfered and she couldn't go.
The "Drummer Boy of the Potomac" deserted, and lo, we had never a celebrity left!
However, we were to have a "battery of guns" from the Navy Department (as per advertisement) to be used in answering royal salutes; and the document furnished by the Secretary of the Navy, which was to make "General Sherman and party" welcome guests in the
However, had not we the seductive program still, with its Paris, its Constantinople, Smyrna, Jerusalem, Jericho, and "our friends the Bermudians"?
What did we care?
CHAPTER II.
Occasionally, during the following month, I dropped in at 117 Wall Street to inquire how the repairing and refurnishing of the vessel was coming on, how additions to the passenger list were averaging, how many people the committee were decreeing not
I was glad to know that we were to have a little printing press on board and issue a daily newspaper of our own.
I was glad to learn that our piano, our parlor organ, and our melodeon were to be the best instruments of the kind that could be had in the market.
I was proud to observe that among our excursionists were three ministers of the gospel, eight doctors, sixteen or eighteen ladies, several military and naval chieftains with sounding titles, an ample crop of "Professors" of various kinds, and a gentleman
I had carefully prepared myself to take rather a back seat in that ship because of the uncommonly select material that would alone be permitted to pass through the camel's eye of that committee on credentials; I had schooled myself to expect an imposing
I fell under that titular avalanche a torn and blighted thing.
I said that if that potentate must go over in our ship, why, I supposed he must --but that to my thinking, when the United States considered it necessary to send a dignitary of that tonnage across the ocean, it would be in better taste, and safer, to take
Ah, if I had only known then that he was only a common mortal, and that his mission had nothing more overpowering about it than the collecting of seeds and uncommon yams and extraordinary cabbages and peculiar bullfrogs for that poor, useless, innocent,
During that memorable month I basked in the happiness of being for once in my life drifting with the tide of a great popular movement.
Everybody was going to Europe--I, too, was going to Europe.
Everybody was going to the famous Paris Exposition--I, too, was going to the Paris Exposition.
The steamship lines were carrying Americans out of the various ports of the country at the rate of four or five thousand a week in the aggregate.
If I met a dozen individuals during that month who were not going to Europe shortly, I have no distinct remembrance of it now.
I walked about the city a good deal with a young Mr. Blucher, who was booked for the excursion.
He was confiding, good-natured, unsophisticated, companionable; but he was not a man to set the river on fire.
He had the most extraordinary notions about this European exodus and came at last to consider the whole nation as packing up for emigration to France.
We stepped into a store on Broadway one day, where he bought a handkerchief, and when the man could not make change, Mr. B. said: "Never mind, I'll hand it to you in Paris".
"But I am not going to Paris".
"How is--what did I understand you to say"?
"I said I am not going to Paris".
"Not going to Paris!
Not g---- well, then, where in the nation are you going to"?
"Nowhere at all".
"Not anywhere whatsoever?
--not any place on earth but this"?
"Not any place at all but just this--stay here all summer".
My comrade took his purchase and walked out of the store without a word --walked out with an injured look upon his countenance.
Up the street apiece he broke silence and said impressively: "It was a lie--that is my opinion of it"!
In the fullness of time the ship was ready to receive her passengers.
I was introduced to the young gentleman who was to be my roommate, and found him to be intelligent, cheerful of spirit, unselfish, full of generous impulses, patient, considerate, and wonderfully good-natured.
Not any passenger that sailed in the Quaker City will withhold his endorsement of what I have just said.
We selected a stateroom forward of the wheel, on the starboard side, "below decks".
It bad two berths in it, a dismal dead-light, a sink with a washbowl in it, and a long, sumptuously cushioned locker, which was to do service as a sofa--partly --and partly as a hiding place for our things.
Notwithstanding all this furniture, there was still room to turn around in, but not to swing a cat in, at least with entire security to the cat.
However, the room was large, for a ship's stateroom, and was in every way satisfactory.
The vessel was appointed to sail on a certain Saturday early in June.
A little after noon on that distinguished Saturday I reached the ship and went on board.
All was bustle and confusion.
[I have seen that remark before somewhere.
] The pier was crowded with carriages and men; passengers were arriving and hurrying on board; the vessel's decks were encumbered with trunks and valises; groups of excursionists, arrayed in unattractive traveling costumes, were moping about in a drizzling
The gallant flag was up, but it was under the spell, too, and hung limp and disheartened by the mast.
Altogether, it was the bluest, bluest spectacle!
It was a pleasure excursion--there was no gainsaying that, because the program said so--it was so nominated in the bond--but it surely hadn't the general aspect of one.
Finally, above the banging, and rumbling, and shouting, and hissing of steam rang the order to "cast off"!
--a sudden rush to the gangways--a scampering ashore of visitors-a revolution of the wheels, and we were off--the pic-nic was begun!
Two very mild cheers went up from the dripping crowd on the pier; we answered them gently from the slippery decks; the flag made an effort to wave, and failed; the "battery of guns" spake not--the ammunition was out.
We steamed down to the foot of the harbor and came to anchor.
It was still raining.
And not only raining, but storming.
"Outside" we could see, ourselves, that there was a tremendous sea on.
We must lie still, in the calm harbor, till the storm should abate.
Our passengers hailed from fifteen states; only a few of them had ever been to sea before; manifestly it would not do to pit them against a full-blown tempest until they had got their sea-legs on.
Toward evening the two steam tugs that had accompanied us with a rollicking champagne-party of young New Yorkers on board who wished to bid farewell to one of our number in due and ancient form departed, and we were alone on the deep.
On deep five fathoms, and anchored fast to the bottom.
And out in the solemn rain, at that.
This was pleasuring with a vengeance.
It was an appropriate relief when the gong sounded for prayer meeting.
The first Saturday night of any other pleasure excursion might have been devoted to whist and dancing; but I submit it to the unprejudiced mind if it would have been in good taste for us to engage in such frivolities, considering what we had gone through
We would have shone at a wake, but not at anything more festive.
However, there is always a cheering influence about the sea; and in my berth that night, rocked by the measured swell of the waves and lulled by the murmur of the distant surf, I soon passed tranquilly out of all consciousness of the dreary experiences of
CHAPTER III.
All day Sunday at anchor.
The storm had gone down a great deal, but the sea had not.
It was still piling its frothy hills high in air "outside," as we could plainly see with the glasses.
We could not properly begin a pleasure excursion on Sunday; we could not offer untried stomachs to so pitiless a sea as that.
We must lie still till Monday.
And we did.
But we had repetitions of church and prayer-meetings; and so, of course, we were just as eligibly situated as we could have been any where.
I was up early that Sabbath morning and was early to breakfast.
I felt a perfectly natural desire to have a good, long, unprejudiced look at the passengers at a time when they should be free from self-consciousness --which is at breakfast, when such a moment occurs in the lives of human beings at all.
I was greatly surprised to see so many elderly people--I might almost say, so many venerable people.
A glance at the long lines of heads was apt to make one think it was all gray.
But it was not.
There was a tolerably fair sprinkling of young folks, and another fair sprinkling of gentlemen and ladies who were non-committal as to age, being neither actually old or absolutely young.
The next morning we weighed anchor and went to sea.
It was a great happiness to get away after this dragging, dispiriting delay.
I thought there never was such gladness in the air before, such brightness in the sun, such beauty in the sea.
I was satisfied with the picnic then and with all its belongings.
All my malicious instincts were dead within me; and as America faded out of sight, I think a spirit of charity rose up in their place that was as boundless, for the time being, as the broad ocean that was heaving its billows about us.
I wished to express my feelings --I wished to lift up my voice and sing; but I did not know anything to sing, and so I was obliged to give up the idea.
It was no loss to the ship, though, perhaps.
It was breezy and pleasant, but the sea was still very rough.
One could not promenade without risking his neck; at one moment the bowsprit was taking a deadly aim at the sun in midheaven, and at the next it was trying to harpoon a shark in the bottom of the ocean.
What a weird sensation it is to feel the stern of a ship sinking swiftly from under you and see the bow climbing high away among the clouds!
One's safest course that day was to clasp a railing and hang on; walking was too precarious a pastime.
By some happy fortune I was not seasick.
--That was a thing to be proud of.
I had not always escaped before.
If there is one thing in the world that will make a man peculiarly and insufferably self-conceited, it is to have his stomach behave itself, the first day at sea, when nearly all his comrades are seasick.
Soon a venerable fossil, shawled to the chin and bandaged like a mummy, appeared at the door of the after deck-house, and the next lurch of the ship shot him into my arms.
I said: "Good-morning, Sir.
It is a fine day".
He put his hand on his stomach and said, "Oh, my"!
and then staggered away and fell over the coop of a skylight.
Presently another old gentleman was projected from the same door with great violence.
I said: "Calm yourself, Sir--There is no hurry.
It is a fine day, Sir".
He, also, put his hand on his stomach and said "Oh, my"!
and reeled away.
In a little while another veteran was discharged abruptly from the same door, clawing at the air for a saving support.
I said: "Good morning, Sir.
It is a fine day for pleasuring.
You were about to say--" "Oh, my"!
I thought so.
I anticipated him, anyhow.
I stayed there and was bombarded with old gentlemen for an hour, perhaps; and all I got out of any of them was "Oh, my"!
I went away then in a thoughtful mood.
I said, this is a good pleasure excursion.
I like it.
The passengers are not garrulous, but still they are sociable.
I like those old people, but somehow they all seem to have the "Oh, my" rather bad.
I knew what was the matter with them.
They were seasick.
And I was glad of it.
We all like to see people seasick when we are not, ourselves.
Playing whist by the cabin lamps when it is storming outside is pleasant; walking the quarterdeck in the moonlight is pleasant; smoking in the breezy foretop is pleasant when one is not afraid to go up there; but these are all feeble and commonplace
I picked up a good deal of information during the afternoon.
At one time I was climbing up the quarterdeck when the vessel's stem was in the sky; I was smoking a cigar and feeling passably comfortable.
Somebody ejaculated: "Come, now, that won't answer.
Read the sign up there--NO SMOKING ABAFT THE WHEEL"!
It was Captain Duncan, chief of the expedition.
I went forward, of course.
I saw a long spyglass lying on a desk in one of the upper-deck state-rooms back of the pilot-house and reached after it--there was a ship in the distance.
"Ah, ah--hands off!
Come out of that"!
I came out of that.
I said to a deck-sweep--but in a low voice: "Who is that overgrown pirate with the whiskers and the discordant voice"?
"It's Captain Bursley--executive officer--sailing master".
I loitered about awhile, and then, for want of something better to do, fell to carving a railing with my knife.
Somebody said, in an insinuating, admonitory voice: "Now, say--my friend--don't you know any better than to be whittling the ship all to pieces that way?
You ought to know better than that".
I went back and found the deck sweep.
"Who is that smooth-faced, animated outrage yonder in the fine clothes"?
"That's Captain L****, the owner of the ship--he's one of the main bosses".
In the course of time I brought up on the starboard side of the pilot-house and found a sextant lying on a bench.
Now, I said, they "take the sun" through this thing; I should think I might see that vessel through it.
I had hardly got it to my eye when someone touched me on the shoulder and said deprecatingly: "I'll have to get you to give that to me, Sir.
If there's anything you'd like to know about taking the sun, I'd as soon tell you as not--but I don't like to trust anybody with that instrument.
If you want any figuring done--Aye, aye, sir"!
He was gone to answer a call from the other side.
I sought the deck-sweep.
"Who is that spider-legged gorilla yonder with the sanctimonious countenance"?
"It's Captain Jones, sir--the chief mate".
"Well.
This goes clear away ahead of anything I ever heard of before.
Do you--now I ask you as a man and a brother--do you think I could venture to throw a rock here in any given direction without hitting a captain of this ship"?
"Well, sir, I don't know--I think likely you'd fetch the captain of the watch may be, because he's a-standing right yonder in the way".
I went below--meditating and a little downhearted.
I thought, if five cooks can spoil a broth, what may not five captains do with a pleasure excursion.
CHAPTER IV.
We plowed along bravely for a week or more, and without any conflict of jurisdiction among the captains worth mentioning.
The passengers soon learned to accommodate themselves to their new circumstances, and life in the ship became nearly as systematically monotonous as the routine of a barrack.
I do not mean that it was dull, for it was not entirely so by any means--but there was a good deal of sameness about it.
As is always the fashion at sea, the passengers shortly began to pick up sailor terms --a sign that they were beginning to feel at home.
Half-past six was no longer half-past six to these pilgrims from New England, the South, and the Mississippi Valley, it was "seven bells"; eight, twelve, and four o'clock were "eight bells"; the captain did not take the longitude at nine o'clock, but at
They spoke glibly of the "after cabin," the "for'rard cabin," "port and starboard" and the "fo'castle".
At seven bells the first gong rang; at eight there was breakfast, for such as were not too seasick to eat it.
After that all the well people walked arm-in-arm up and down the long promenade deck, enjoying the fine summer mornings, and the seasick ones crawled out and propped themselves up in the lee of the paddle-boxes and ate their dismal tea and toast, and
From eleven o'clock until luncheon, and from luncheon until dinner at six in the evening, the employments and amusements were various.
Some reading was done, and much smoking and sewing, though not by the same parties; there were the monsters of the deep to be looked after and wondered at; strange ships had to be scrutinized through opera-glasses, and sage decisions arrived at concerning
Horse billiards is a fine game.
It affords good, active exercise, hilarity, and consuming excitement.
It is a mixture of "hop-scotch" and shuffleboard played with a crutch.
A large hop-scotch diagram is marked out on the deck with chalk, and each compartment numbered.
You stand off three or four steps, with some broad wooden disks before you on the deck, and these you send forward with a vigorous thrust of a long crutch.
If a disk stops on a chalk line, it does not count anything.
If it stops in division No.
7, it counts 7; in 5, it counts 5, and so on.
The game is 100, and four can play at a time.
That game would be very simple played on a stationary floor, but with us, to play it well required science.
We had to allow for the reeling of the ship to the right or the left.
Very often one made calculations for a heel to the right and the ship did not go that way.
The consequence was that that disk missed the whole hopscotch plan a yard or two, and then there was humiliation on one side and laughter on the other.
When it rained the passengers had to stay in the house, of course--or at least the cabins--and amuse themselves with games, reading, looking out of the windows at the very familiar billows, and talking gossip.
By 7 o'clock in the evening, dinner was about over; an hour's promenade on the upper deck followed; then the gong sounded and a large majority of the party repaired to the after cabin (upper), a handsome saloon fifty or sixty feet long, for prayers.
The unregenerated called this saloon the "Synagogue".
The devotions consisted only of two hymns from the Plymouth Collection and a short prayer, and seldom occupied more than fifteen minutes.
The hymns were accompanied by parlor-organ music when the sea was smooth enough to allow a performer to sit at the instrument without being lashed to his chair.
After prayers the Synagogue shortly took the semblance of a writing school.
The like of that picture was never seen in a ship before.
Behind the long dining tables on either side of the saloon, and scattered from one end to the other of the latter, some twenty or thirty gentlemen and ladies sat them down under the swaying lamps and for two or three hours wrote diligently in their
Alas!
that journals so voluminously begun should come to so lame and impotent a conclusion as most of them did!
I doubt if there is a single pilgrim of all that host but can show a hundred fair pages of journal concerning the first twenty days' voyaging in the Quaker City, and I am morally certain that not ten of the party can show twenty pages of journal for the
At certain periods it becomes the dearest ambition of a man to keep a faithful record of his performances in a book; and he dashes at this work with an enthusiasm that imposes on him the notion that keeping a journal is the veriest pastime in the world,
But if he only lives twenty-one days, he will find out that only those rare natures that are made up of pluck, endurance, devotion to duty for duty's sake, and invincible determination may hope to venture upon so tremendous an enterprise as the keeping of
One of our favorite youths, Jack, a splendid young fellow with a head full of good sense, and a pair of legs that were a wonder to look upon in the way of length and straightness and slimness, used to report progress every morning in the most glowing and
(he was a little given to slang in his happier moods.
) "I wrote ten pages in my journal last night--and you know I wrote nine the night before and twelve the night before that.
Why, it's only fun"!
"What do you find to put in it, Jack"?
"Oh, everything.
Latitude and longitude, noon every day; and how many miles we made last twenty-four hours; and all the domino games I beat and horse billiards; and whales and sharks and porpoises; and the text of the sermon Sundays (because that'll tell at home, you
--and how many lies Moult has told--Oh, every thing!
I've got everything down.
My father told me to keep that journal.
Father wouldn't take a thousand dollars for it when I get it done".
"No, Jack; it will be worth more than a thousand dollars--when you get it done".
"Do you?
--no, but do you think it will, though?
"Yes, it will be worth at least as much as a thousand dollars--when you get it done.
May be more".
"Well, I about half think so, myself.
It ain't no slouch of a journal".
But it shortly became a most lamentable "slouch of a journal".
One night in Paris, after a hard day's toil in sightseeing, I said: "Now I'll go and stroll around the cafes awhile, Jack, and give you a chance to write up your journal, old fellow".
His countenance lost its fire.
He said: "Well, no, you needn't mind.
I think I won't run that journal anymore.
It is awful tedious.
Do you know--I reckon I'm as much as four thousand pages behind hand.
I haven't got any France in it at all.
First I thought I'd leave France out and start fresh.
But that wouldn't do, would it?
The governor would say, 'Hello, here--didn't see anything in France?
That cat wouldn't fight, you know.
First I thought I'd copy France out of the guide-book, like old Badger in the for'rard cabin, who's writing a book, but there's more than three hundred pages of it.
Oh, I don't think a journal's any use--do you?
They're only a bother, ain't they"?
"Yes, a journal that is incomplete isn't of much use, but a journal properly kept is worth a thousand dollars--when you've got it done".
"A thousand!
--well, I should think so.
I wouldn't finish it for a million".
His experience was only the experience of the majority of that industrious night school in the cabin.
If you wish to inflict a heartless and malignant punishment upon a young person, pledge him to keep a journal a year.
A good many expedients were resorted to to keep the excursionists amused and satisfied.
A club was formed, of all the passengers, which met in the writing school after prayers and read aloud about the countries we were approaching and discussed the information so obtained.
Several times the photographer of the expedition brought out his transparent pictures and gave us a handsome magic-lantern exhibition.
His views were nearly all of foreign scenes, but there were one or two home pictures among them.
He advertised that he would "open his performance in the after cabin at 'two bells' (nine P.M.) and show the passengers where they shall eventually arrive"--which was all very well, but by a funny accident the first picture that flamed out upon the canvas
On several starlight nights we danced on the upper deck, under the awnings, and made something of a ball-room display of brilliancy by hanging a number of ship's lanterns to the stanchions.
Our music consisted of the well-mixed strains of a melodeon which was a little asthmatic and apt to catch its breath where it ought to come out strong, a clarinet which was a little unreliable on the high keys and rather melancholy on the low ones, and a
However, the dancing was infinitely worse than the music.
When the ship rolled to starboard the whole platoon of dancers came charging down to starboard with it, and brought up in mass at the rail; and when it rolled to port they went floundering down to port with the same unanimity of sentiment.
Waltzers spun around precariously for a matter of fifteen seconds and then went scurrying down to the rail as if they meant to go overboard.
The Virginia reel, as performed on board the Quaker City, had more genuine reel about it than any reel I ever saw before, and was as full of interest to the spectator as it was full of desperate chances and hairbreadth escapes to the participant.
We gave up dancing, finally.
We celebrated a lady's birthday anniversary with toasts, speeches, a poem, and so forth.
We also had a mock trial.
No ship ever went to sea that hadn't a mock trial on board.
The purser was accused of stealing an overcoat from stateroom No.
10.
A judge was appointed; also clerks, a crier of the court, constables, sheriffs; counsel for the State and for the defendant; witnesses were subpoenaed, and a jury empaneled after much challenging.
The witnesses were stupid and unreliable and contradictory, as witnesses always are.
The counsel were eloquent, argumentative, and vindictively abusive of each other, as was characteristic and proper.
The case was at last submitted and duly finished by the judge with an absurd decision and a ridiculous sentence.
The acting of charades was tried on several evenings by the young gentlemen and ladies, in the cabins, and proved the most distinguished success of all the amusement experiments.
An attempt was made to organize a debating club, but it was a failure.
There was no oratorical talent in the ship.
We all enjoyed ourselves--I think I can safely say that, but it was in a rather quiet way.
We very, very seldom played the piano; we played the flute and the clarinet together, and made good music, too, what there was of it, but we always played the same old tune; it was a very pretty tune --how well I remember it--I wonder when I shall ever get
We never played either the melodeon or the organ except at devotions--but I am too fast: young Albert did know part of a tune something about "O Something-Or-Other How Sweet It Is to Know That He's His What's-his-Name" (I do not remember the exact title of
But nobody ever sang by moonlight on the upper deck, and the congregational singing at church and prayers was not of a superior order of architecture.
I put up with it as long as I could and then joined in and tried to improve it, but this encouraged young George to join in too, and that made a failure of it; because George's voice was just "turning," and when he was singing a dismal sort of bass it was
George didn't know the tunes, either, which was also a drawback to his performances.
I said: "Come, now, George, don't improvise.
It looks too egotistical.
It will provoke remark.
Just stick to 'Coronation,' like the others.
It is a good tune--you can't improve it any, just off-hand, in this way".
"Why, I'm not trying to improve it--and I am singing like the others --just as it is in the notes".
And he honestly thought he was, too; and so he had no one to blame but himself when his voice caught on the center occasionally and gave him the lockjaw.
There were those among the unregenerated who attributed the unceasing head-winds to our distressing choir-music.
There were those who said openly that it was taking chances enough to have such ghastly music going on, even when it was at its best; and that to exaggerate the crime by letting George help was simply flying in the face of Providence.
These said that the choir would keep up their lacerating attempts at melody until they would bring down a storm some day that would sink the ship.
There were even grumblers at the prayers.
The executive officer said the pilgrims had no charity: "There they are, down there every night at eight bells, praying for fair winds--when they know as well as I do that this is the only ship going east this time of the year, but there's a thousand
It ain't good sense, it ain't good reason, it ain't good Christianity, it ain't common human charity.
Avast with such nonsense"!
CHAPTER V. Taking it "by and large," as the sailors say, we had a pleasant ten days' run from New York to the Azores islands--not a fast run, for the distance is only twenty-four hundred miles, but a right pleasant one in the main.
True, we had head winds all the time, and several stormy experiences which sent fifty percent of the passengers to bed sick and made the ship look dismal and deserted--stormy experiences that all will remember who weathered them on the tumbling deck and
We had the phenomenon of a full moon located just in the same spot in the heavens at the same hour every night.
The reason of this singular conduct on the part of the moon did not occur to us at first, but it did afterward when we reflected that we were gaining about twenty minutes every day because we were going east so fast--we gained just about enough every day
It was becoming an old moon to the friends we had left behind us, but to us Joshuas it stood still in the same place and remained always the same.
Young Mr. Blucher, who is from the Far West and is on his first voyage, was a good deal worried by the constantly changing "ship time".
He was proud of his new watch at first and used to drag it out promptly when eight bells struck at noon, but he came to look after a while as if he were losing confidence in it.
Seven days out from New York he came on deck and said with great decision: "This thing's a swindle"!
"What's a swindle"?
"Why, this watch.
I bought her out in Illinois--gave $150 for her--and I thought she was good.
And, by George, she is good onshore, but somehow she don't keep up her lick here on the water--gets seasick may be.
She skips; she runs along regular enough till half-past eleven, and then, all of a sudden, she lets down.
I've set that old regulator up faster and faster, till I've shoved it clear around, but it don't do any good; she just distances every watch in the ship, and clatters along in a way that's astonishing till it is noon, but them eight bells always gets in
I don't know what to do with her now.
She's doing all she can--she's going her best gait, but it won't save her.
Now, don't you know, there ain't a watch in the ship that's making better time than she is, but what does it signify?
When you hear them eight bells you'll find her just about ten minutes short of her score sure".
The ship was gaining a full hour every three days, and this fellow was trying to make his watch go fast enough to keep up to her.
But, as he had said, he had pushed the regulator up as far as it would go, and the watch was "on its best gait," and so nothing was left him but to fold his hands and see the ship beat the race.
We sent him to the captain, and he explained to him the mystery of "ship time" and set his troubled mind at rest.
This young man asked a great many questions about seasickness before we left, and wanted to know what its characteristics were and how he was to tell when he had it.
He found out.
We saw the usual sharks, blackfish, porpoises, &c.
, of course, and by and by large schools of Portuguese men-of-war were added to the regular list of sea wonders.
Some of them were white and some of a brilliant carmine color.
The nautilus is nothing but a transparent web of jelly that spreads itself to catch the wind, and has fleshy-looking strings a foot or two long dangling from it to keep it steady in the water.
It is an accomplished sailor and has good sailor judgment.
It reefs its sail when a storm threatens or the wind blows pretty hard, and furls it entirely and goes down when a gale blows.
Ordinarily it keeps its sail wet and in good sailing order by turning over and dipping it in the water for a moment.
Seamen say the nautilus is only found in these waters between the 35th and 45th parallels of latitude.
At three o'clock on the morning of the twenty-first of June, we were awakened and notified that the Azores islands were in sight.
I said I did not take any interest in islands at three o'clock in the morning.
But another persecutor came, and then another and another, and finally believing that the general enthusiasm would permit no one to slumber in peace, I got up and went sleepily on deck.
It was five and a half o'clock now, and a raw, blustering morning.
The passengers were huddled about the smoke-stacks and fortified behind ventilators, and all were wrapped in wintry costumes and looking sleepy and unhappy in the pitiless gale and the drenching spray.
The island in sight was Flores.
It seemed only a mountain of mud standing up out of the dull mists of the sea.
But as we bore down upon it the sun came out and made it a beautiful picture--a mass of green farms and meadows that swelled up to a height of fifteen hundred feet and mingled its upper outlines with the clouds.
It was ribbed with sharp, steep ridges and cloven with narrow canyons, and here and there on the heights, rocky upheavals shaped themselves into mimic battlements and castles; and out of rifted clouds came broad shafts of sunlight, that painted summit, and
It was the aurora borealis of the frozen pole exiled to a summer land!
We skirted around two-thirds of the island, four miles from shore, and all the opera glasses in the ship were called into requisition to settle disputes as to whether mossy spots on the uplands were groves of trees or groves of weeds, or whether the white
Finally we stood to sea and bore away for San Miguel, and Flores shortly became a dome of mud again and sank down among the mists, and disappeared.
But to many a seasick passenger it was good to see the green hills again, and all were more cheerful after this episode than anybody could have expected them to be, considering how sinfully early they had gotten up.
But we had to change our purpose about San Miguel, for a storm came up about noon that so tossed and pitched the vessel that common sense dictated a run for shelter.
Therefore we steered for the nearest island of the group--Fayal (the people there pronounce it Fy-all, and put the accent on the first syllable).
We anchored in the open roadstead of Horta, half a mile from the shore.
The town has eight thousand to ten thousand inhabitants.
Its snow-white houses nestle cosily in a sea of fresh green vegetation, and no village could look prettier or more attractive.
It sits in the lap of an amphitheater of hills which are three hundred to seven hundred feet high, and carefully cultivated clear to their summits--not a foot of soil left idle.
Every farm and every acre is cut up into little square inclosures by stone walls, whose duty it is to protect the growing products from the destructive gales that blow there.
These hundreds of green squares, marked by their black lava walls, make the hills look like vast checkerboards.
The islands belong to Portugal, and everything in Fayal has Portuguese characteristics about it.
But more of that anon.
A swarm of swarthy, noisy, lying, shoulder-shrugging, gesticulating Portuguese boatmen, with brass rings in their ears and fraud in their hearts, climbed the ship's sides, and various parties of us contracted with them to take us ashore at so much a head,
We landed under the walls of a little fort, armed with batteries of twelve-and-thirty-two-pounders, which Horta considered a most formidable institution, but if we were ever to get after it with one of our turreted monitors, they would have to move it out
The group on the pier was a rusty one--men and women, and boys and girls, all ragged and barefoot, uncombed and unclean, and by instinct, education, and profession beggars.
They trooped after us, and never more while we tarried in Fayal did we get rid of them.
We walked up the middle of the principal street, and these vermin surrounded us on all sides and glared upon us; and every moment excited couples shot ahead of the procession to get a good look back, just as village boys do when they accompany the elephant
It was very flattering to me to be part of the material for such a sensation.
Here and there in the doorways we saw women with fashionable Portuguese hoods on.
This hood is of thick blue cloth, attached to a cloak of the same stuff, and is a marvel of ugliness.
It stands up high and spreads far abroad, and is unfathomably deep.
It fits like a circus tent, and a woman's head is hidden away in it like the man's who prompts the singers from his tin shed in the stage of an opera.
There is no particle of trimming about this monstrous capote, as they call it--it is just a plain, ugly dead-blue mass of sail, and a woman can't go within eight points of the wind with one of them on; she has to go before the wind or not at all.
The general style of the capote is the same in all the islands, and will remain so for the next ten thousand years, but each island shapes its capotes just enough differently from the others to enable an observer to tell at a glance what particular island
The Portuguese pennies, or reis (pronounced rays), are prodigious.
It takes one thousand reis to make a dollar, and all financial estimates are made in reis.
We did not know this until after we had found it out through Blucher.
Blucher said he was so happy and so grateful to be on solid land once more that he wanted to give a feast--said he had heard it was a cheap land, and he was bound to have a grand banquet.
He invited nine of us, and we ate an excellent dinner at the principal hotel.
In the midst of the jollity produced by good cigars, good wine, and passable anecdotes, the landlord presented his bill.
Blucher glanced at it and his countenance fell.
He took another look to assure himself that his senses had not deceived him and then read the items aloud, in a faltering voice, while the roses in his cheeks turned to ashes: "'Ten dinners, at 600 reis, 6,000 reis!
' Ruin and desolation!
"'Twenty-five cigars, at 100 reis, 2,500 reis!
' Oh, my sainted mother!
"'Eleven bottles of wine, at 1,200 reis, 13,200 reis!
' Be with us all!
"'TOTAL, TWENTY-ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED REIS!
' The suffering Moses!
There ain't money enough in the ship to pay that bill!
Go--leave me to my misery, boys, I am a ruined community".
I think it was the blankest-looking party I ever saw.
Nobody could say a word.
It was as if every soul had been stricken dumb.
Wine glasses descended slowly to the table, their contents untasted.
Cigars dropped unnoticed from nerveless fingers.
Each man sought his neighbor's eye, but found in it no ray of hope, no encouragement.
At last the fearful silence was broken.
The shadow of a desperate resolve settled upon Blucher's countenance like a cloud, and he rose up and said: "Landlord, this is a low, mean swindle, and I'll never, never stand it.
Here's a hundred and fifty dollars, Sir, and it's all you'll get--I'll swim in blood before I'll pay a cent more".
Our spirits rose and the landlord's fell--at least we thought so; he was confused, at any rate, notwithstanding he had not understood a word that had been said.
He glanced from the little pile of gold pieces to Blucher several times and then went out.
He must have visited an American, for when he returned, he brought back his bill translated into a language that a Christian could understand--thus: 10 dinners, 6,000 reis, or .
.
.
$6.
00 25 cigars, 2,500 reis, or .
.
.
2.
50 11 bottles wine, 13,200 reis, or 13.
20 Total 21,700 reis, or .
.
.
.
$21.
70 Happiness reigned once more in Blucher's dinner party.
More refreshments were ordered.
CHAPTER VI.
I think the Azores must be very little known in America.
Out of our whole ship's company there was not a solitary individual who knew anything whatever about them.
Some of the party, well read concerning most other lands, had no other information about the Azores than that they were a group of nine or ten small islands far out in the Atlantic, something more than halfway between New York and Gibraltar.
That was all.
These considerations move me to put in a paragraph of dry facts just here.
The community is eminently Portuguese--that is to say, it is slow, poor, shiftless, sleepy, and lazy.
There is a civil governor, appointed by the King of Portugal, and also a military governor, who can assume supreme control and suspend the civil government at his pleasure.
The islands contain a population of about 200,000, almost entirely Portuguese.
Everything is staid and settled, for the country was one hundred years old when Columbus discovered America.
The principal crop is corn, and they raise it and grind it just as their great-great-great-grandfathers did.
They plow with a board slightly shod with iron; their trifling little harrows are drawn by men and women; small windmills grind the corn, ten bushels a day, and there is one assistant superintendent to feed the mill and a general superintendent to stand by
When the wind changes they hitch on some donkeys and actually turn the whole upper half of the mill around until the sails are in proper position, instead of fixing the concern so that the sails could be moved instead of the mill.
Oxen tread the wheat from the ear, after the fashion prevalent in the time of Methuselah.
There is not a wheelbarrow in the land--they carry everything on their heads, or on donkeys, or in a wicker-bodied cart, whose wheels are solid blocks of wood and whose axles turn with the wheel.
There is not a modern plow in the islands or a threshing machine.
All attempts to introduce them have failed.
The good Catholic Portuguese crossed himself and prayed God to shield him from all blasphemous desire to know more than his father did before him.
The climate is mild; they never have snow or ice, and I saw no chimneys in the town.
The donkeys and the men, women, and children of a family all eat and sleep in the same room, and are unclean, are ravaged by vermin, and are truly happy.
The people lie, and cheat the stranger, and are desperately ignorant, and have hardly any reverence for their dead.
The latter trait shows how little better they are than the donkeys they eat and sleep with.
The only well-dressed Portuguese in the camp are the half a dozen well-to-do families, the Jesuit priests, and the soldiers of the little garrison.
The wages of a laborer are twenty to twenty-four cents a day, and those of a good mechanic about twice as much.
They count it in reis at a thousand to the dollar, and this makes them rich and contented.
Fine grapes used to grow in the islands, and an excellent wine was made and exported.
But a disease killed all the vines fifteen years ago, and since that time no wine has been made.
The islands being wholly of volcanic origin, the soil is necessarily very rich.
Nearly every foot of ground is under cultivation, and two or three crops a year of each article are produced, but nothing is exported save a few oranges--chiefly to England.
Nobody comes here, and nobody goes away.
News is a thing unknown in Fayal.
A thirst for it is a passion equally unknown.
A Portuguese of average intelligence inquired if our civil war was over.
Because, he said, somebody had told him it was--or at least it ran in his mind that somebody had told him something like that!
And when a passenger gave an officer of the garrison copies of the Tribune, the Herald, and Times, he was surprised to find later news in them from Lisbon than he had just received by the little monthly steamer.
He was told that it came by cable.
He said he knew they had tried to lay a cable ten years ago, but it had been in his mind somehow that they hadn't succeeded!
It is in communities like this that Jesuit humbuggery flourishes.
We visited a Jesuit cathedral nearly two hundred years old and found in it a piece of the veritable cross upon which our Saviour was crucified.
It was polished and hard, and in as excellent a state of preservation as if the dread tragedy on Calvary had occurred yesterday instead of eighteen centuries ago.
But these confiding people believe in that piece of wood unhesitatingly.
In a chapel of the cathedral is an altar with facings of solid silver--at least they call it so, and I think myself it would go a couple of hundred to the ton (to speak after the fashion of the silver miners)--and before it is kept forever burning a small
A devout lady who died, left money and contracted for unlimited masses for the repose of her soul, and also stipulated that this lamp should be kept lighted always, day and night.
She did all this before she died, you understand.
It is a very small lamp and a very dim one, and it could not work her much damage, I think, if it went out altogether.
The great altar of the cathedral and also three or four minor ones are a perfect mass of gilt gimcracks and gingerbread.
And they have a swarm of rusty, dusty, battered apostles standing around the filagree work, some on one leg and some with one eye out but a gamey look in the other, and some with two or three fingers gone, and some with not enough nose left to blow--all of
The walls of the chancel are of porcelain, all pictured over with figures of almost life size, very elegantly wrought and dressed in the fanciful costumes of two centuries ago.
The design was a history of something or somebody, but none of us were learned enough to read the story.
The old father, reposing under a stone close by, dated 1686, might have told us if he could have risen.
But he didn't.
As we came down through the town we encountered a squad of little donkeys ready saddled for use.
The saddles were peculiar, to say the least.
They consisted of a sort of saw-buck with a small mattress on it, and this furniture covered about half the donkey.
There were no stirrups, but really such supports were not needed--to use such a saddle was the next thing to riding a dinner table--there was ample support clear out to one's knee joints.
A pack of ragged Portuguese muleteers crowded around us, offering their beasts at half a dollar an hour--more rascality to the stranger, for the market price is sixteen cents.
Half a dozen of us mounted the ungainly affairs and submitted to the indignity of making a ridiculous spectacle of ourselves through the principal streets of a town of 10,000 inhabitants.
We started.
It was not a trot, a gallop, or a canter, but a stampede, and made up of all possible or conceivable gaits.
No spurs were necessary.
There was a muleteer to every donkey and a dozen volunteers beside, and they banged the donkeys with their goad sticks, and pricked them with their spikes, and shouted something that sounded like "Sekki-yah"!
and kept up a din and a racket that was worse than Bedlam itself.
These rascals were all on foot, but no matter, they were always up to time--they can outrun and outlast a donkey.
Altogether, ours was a lively and a picturesque procession, and drew crowded audiences to the balconies wherever we went.
Blucher could do nothing at all with his donkey.
The beast scampered zigzag across the road and the others ran into him; he scraped Blucher against carts and the corners of houses; the road was fenced in with high stone walls, and the donkey gave him a polishing first on one side and then on the other,
After remounting, Blucher said to the muleteer, "Now, that's enough, you know; you go slow hereafter".
But the fellow knew no English and did not understand, so he simply said, "Sekki-yah"!
and the donkey was off again like a shot.
He turned a corner suddenly, and Blucher went over his head.
And, to speak truly, every mule stumbled over the two, and the whole cavalcade was piled up in a heap.
No harm done.
A fall from one of those donkeys is of little more consequence than rolling off a sofa.
The donkeys all stood still after the catastrophe and waited for their dismembered saddles to be patched up and put on by the noisy muleteers.
Blucher was pretty angry and wanted to swear, but every time he opened his mouth his animal did so also and let off a series of brays that drowned all other sounds.
It was fun, scurrying around the breezy hills and through the beautiful canyons.
There was that rare thing, novelty, about it; it was a fresh, new, exhilarating sensation, this donkey riding, and worth a hundred worn and threadbare home pleasures.
The roads were a wonder, and well they might be.
Here was an island with only a handful of people in it--25,000--and yet such fine roads do not exist in the United States outside of Central Park.
Everywhere you go, in any direction, you find either a hard, smooth, level thoroughfare, just sprinkled with black lava sand, and bordered with little gutters neatly paved with small smooth pebbles, or compactly paved ones like Broadway.
They talk much of the Russ pavement in New York, and call it a new invention--yet here they have been using it in this remote little isle of the sea for two hundred years!
Every street in Horta is handsomely paved with the heavy Russ blocks, and the surface is neat and true as a floor--not marred by holes like Broadway.
And every road is fenced in by tall, solid lava walls, which will last a thousand years in this land where frost is unknown.
They are very thick, and are often plastered and whitewashed and capped with projecting slabs of cut stone.
Trees from gardens above hang their swaying tendrils down, and contrast their bright green with the whitewash or the black lava of the walls and make them beautiful.
The trees and vines stretch across these narrow roadways sometimes and so shut out the sun that you seem to be riding through a tunnel.
The pavements, the roads, and the bridges are all government work.
The bridges are of a single span--a single arch--of cut stone, without a support, and paved on top with flags of lava and ornamental pebblework.
Everywhere are walls, walls, walls, and all of them tasteful and handsome--and eternally substantial; and everywhere are those marvelous pavements, so neat, so smooth, and so indestructible.
And if ever roads and streets and the outsides of houses were perfectly free from any sign or semblance of dirt, or dust, or mud, or uncleanliness of any kind, it is Horta, it is Fayal.
The lower classes of the people, in their persons and their domiciles, are not clean--but there it stops--the town and the island are miracles of cleanliness.
We arrived home again finally, after a ten-mile excursion, and the irrepressible muleteers scampered at our heels through the main street, goading the donkeys, shouting the everlasting "Sekki-yah," and singing "John Brown's Body" in ruinous English.
When we were dismounted and it came to settling, the shouting and jawing and swearing and quarreling among the muleteers and with us was nearly deafening.
One fellow would demand a dollar an hour for the use of his donkey; another claimed half a dollar for pricking him up, another a quarter for helping in that service, and about fourteen guides presented bills for showing us the way through the town and its
We paid one guide and paid for one muleteer to each donkey.
The mountains on some of the islands are very high.
We sailed along the shore of the island of Pico, under a stately green pyramid that rose up with one unbroken sweep from our very feet to an altitude of 7,613 feet, and thrust its summit above the white clouds like an island adrift in a fog!
We got plenty of fresh oranges, lemons, figs, apricots, etc.
, in these Azores, of course.
But I will desist.
I am not here to write Patent Office reports.
We are on our way to Gibraltar, and shall reach there five or six days out from the Azores.
CHAPTER VII.
A week of buffeting a tempestuous and relentless sea; a week of seasickness and deserted cabins; of lonely quarterdecks drenched with spray--spray so ambitious that it even coated the smokestacks thick with a white crust of salt to their very tops; a week
And the last night of the seven was the stormiest of all.
There was no thunder, no noise but the pounding bows of the ship, the keen whistling of the gale through the cordage, and the rush of the seething waters.
But the vessel climbed aloft as if she would climb to heaven--then paused an instant that seemed a century and plunged headlong down again, as from a precipice.
The sheeted sprays drenched the decks like rain.
The blackness of darkness was everywhere.
At long intervals a flash of lightning clove it with a quivering line of fire that revealed a heaving world of water where was nothing before, kindled the dusky cordage to glittering silver, and lit up the faces of the men with a ghastly luster!
Fear drove many on deck that were used to avoiding the night winds and the spray.
Some thought the vessel could not live through the night, and it seemed less dreadful to stand out in the midst of the wild tempest and see the peril that threatened than to be shut up in the sepulchral cabins, under the dim lamps, and imagine the horrors
And once out--once where they could see the ship struggling in the strong grasp of the storm--once where they could hear the shriek of the winds and face the driving spray and look out upon the majestic picture the lightnings disclosed, they were prisoners
It was a wild night --and a very, very long one.
Everybody was sent scampering to the deck at seven o'clock this lovely morning of the thirtieth of June with the glad news that land was in sight!
It was a rare thing and a joyful, to see all the ship's family abroad once more, albeit the happiness that sat upon every countenance could only partly conceal the ravages which that long siege of storms had wrought there.
But dull eyes soon sparkled with pleasure, pallid cheeks flushed again, and frames weakened by sickness gathered new life from the quickening influences of the bright, fresh morning.
Yea, and from a still more potent influence: the worn castaways were to see the blessed land again!
--and to see it was to bring back that motherland that was in all their thoughts.
Within the hour we were fairly within the Straits of Gibraltar, the tall yellow-splotched hills of Africa on our right, with their bases veiled in a blue haze and their summits swathed in clouds--the same being according to Scripture, which says that
The words were spoken of this particular portion of Africa, I believe.
On our left were the granite-ribbed domes of old Spain.
The strait is only thirteen miles wide in its narrowest part.
At short intervals along the Spanish shore were quaint-looking old stone towers--Moorish, we thought--but learned better afterwards.
In former times the Morocco rascals used to coast along the Spanish Main in their boats till a safe opportunity seemed to present itself, and then dart in and capture a Spanish village and carry off all the pretty women they could find.
It was a pleasant business, and was very popular.
The Spaniards built these watchtowers on the hills to enable them to keep a sharper lookout on the Moroccan speculators.
The picture on the other hand was very beautiful to eyes weary of the changeless sea, and by and by the ship's company grew wonderfully cheerful.
But while we stood admiring the cloud-capped peaks and the lowlands robed in misty gloom a finer picture burst upon us and chained every eye like a magnet--a stately ship, with canvas piled on canvas till she was one towering mass of bellying sail!
She came speeding over the sea like a great bird.
Africa and Spain were forgotten.
All homage was for the beautiful stranger.
While everybody gazed she swept superbly by and flung the Stars and Stripes to the breeze!
Quicker than thought, hats and handkerchiefs flashed in the air, and a cheer went up!
She was beautiful before--she was radiant now.
Many a one on our decks knew then for the first time how tame a sight his country's flag is at home compared to what it is in a foreign land.
To see it is to see a vision of home itself and all its idols, and feel a thrill that would stir a very river of sluggish blood!
We were approaching the famed Pillars of Hercules, and already the African one, "Ape's Hill," a grand old mountain with summit streaked with granite ledges, was in sight.
The other, the great Rock of Gibraltar, was yet to come.
The ancients considered the Pillars of Hercules the head of navigation and the end of the world.
The information the ancients didn't have was very voluminous.
Even the prophets wrote book after book and epistle after epistle, yet never once hinted at the existence of a great continent on our side of the water; yet they must have known it was there, I should think.
In a few moments a lonely and enormous mass of rock, standing seemingly in the center of the wide strait and apparently washed on all sides by the sea, swung magnificently into view, and we needed no tedious traveled parrot to tell us it was Gibraltar.
There could not be two rocks like that in one kingdom.
The Rock of Gibraltar is about a mile and a half long, I should say, by 1,400 to 1,500 feet high, and a quarter of a mile wide at its base.
One side and one end of it come about as straight up out of the sea as the side of a house, the other end is irregular and the other side is a steep slant which an army would find very difficult to climb.
At the foot of this slant is the walled town of Gibraltar--or rather the town occupies part of the slant.
Everywhere--on hillside, in the precipice, by the sea, on the heights--everywhere you choose to look, Gibraltar is clad with masonry and bristling with guns.
It makes a striking and lively picture from whatsoever point you contemplate it.
It is pushed out into the sea on the end of a flat, narrow strip of land, and is suggestive of a "gob" of mud on the end of a shingle.
A few hundred yards of this flat ground at its base belongs to the English, and then, extending across the strip from the Atlantic to the Mediterranean, a distance of a quarter of a mile, comes the "Neutral Ground," a space two or three hundred yards wide,
"Are you going through Spain to Paris"?
That question was bandied about the ship day and night from Fayal to Gibraltar, and I thought I never could get so tired of hearing any one combination of words again or more tired of answering, "I don't know".
At the last moment six or seven had sufficient decision of character to make up their minds to go, and did go, and I felt a sense of relief at once--it was forever too late now and I could make up my mind at my leisure not to go.
I must have a prodigious quantity of mind; it takes me as much as a week sometimes to make it up.
But behold how annoyances repeat themselves.
We had no sooner gotten rid of the Spain distress than the Gibraltar guides started another--a tiresome repetition of a legend that had nothing very astonishing about it, even in the first place: "That high hill yonder is called the Queen's Chair; it is
If the English hadn't been gallant enough to lower the flag for a few hours one day, she'd have had to break her oath or die up there".
We rode on asses and mules up the steep, narrow streets and entered the subterranean galleries the English have blasted out in the rock.
These galleries are like spacious railway tunnels, and at short intervals in them great guns frown out upon sea and town through portholes five or six hundred feet above the ocean.
There is a mile or so of this subterranean work, and it must have cost a vast deal of money and labor.
The gallery guns command the peninsula and the harbors of both oceans, but they might as well not be there, I should think, for an army could hardly climb the perpendicular wall of the rock anyhow.
Those lofty portholes afford superb views of the sea, though.
At one place, where a jutting crag was hollowed out into a great chamber whose furniture was huge cannon and whose windows were portholes, a glimpse was caught of a hill not far away, and a soldier said: "That high hill yonder is called the Queen's Chair;
If the English hadn't been gallant enough to lower the flag for a few hours one day, she'd have had to break her oath or die up there".
On the topmost pinnacle of Gibraltar we halted a good while, and no doubt the mules were tired.
They had a right to be.
The military road was good, but rather steep, and there was a good deal of it.
The view from the narrow ledge was magnificent; from it vessels seeming like the tiniest little toy boats were turned into noble ships by the telescopes, and other vessels that were fifty miles away and even sixty, they said, and invisible to the naked
Below, on one side, we looked down upon an endless mass of batteries and on the other straight down to the sea.
While I was resting ever so comfortably on a rampart, and cooling my baking head in the delicious breeze, an officious guide belonging to another party came up and said: "Senor, that high hill yonder is called the Queen's Chair--" "Sir, I am a helpless
Have pity on me.
Don't --now don't inflict that most in-FERNAL old legend on me anymore today"!
There--I had used strong language after promising I would never do so again; but the provocation was more than human nature could bear.
If you had been bored so, when you had the noble panorama of Spain and Africa and the blue Mediterranean spread abroad at your feet, and wanted to gaze and enjoy and surfeit yourself in its beauty in silence, you might have even burst into stronger
Gibraltar has stood several protracted sieges, one of them of nearly four years' duration (it failed), and the English only captured it by stratagem.
The wonder is that anybody should ever dream of trying so impossible a project as the taking it by assault--and yet it has been tried more than once.
The Moors held the place twelve hundred years ago, and a staunch old castle of theirs of that date still frowns from the middle of the town, with moss-grown battlements and sides well scarred by shots fired in battles and sieges that are forgotten now.
A secret chamber in the rock behind it was discovered some time ago, which contained a sword of exquisite workmanship, and some quaint old armor of a fashion that antiquaries are not acquainted with, though it is supposed to be Roman.
Roman armor and Roman relics of various kinds have been found in a cave in the sea extremity of Gibraltar; history says Rome held this part of the country about the Christian era, and these things seem to confirm the statement.
In that cave also are found human bones, crusted with a very thick, stony coating, and wise men have ventured to say that those men not only lived before the flood, but as much as ten thousand years before it.
It may be true--it looks reasonable enough--but as long as those parties can't vote anymore, the matter can be of no great public interest.
In this cave likewise are found skeletons and fossils of animals that exist in every part of Africa, yet within memory and tradition have never existed in any portion of Spain save this lone peak of Gibraltar!
So the theory is that the channel between Gibraltar and Africa was once dry land, and that the low, neutral neck between Gibraltar and the Spanish hills behind it was once ocean, and of course that these African animals, being over at Gibraltar (after
The hills in Africa, across the channel, are full of apes, and there are now and always have been apes on the rock of Gibraltar--but not elsewhere in Spain!
The subject is an interesting one.
There is an English garrison at Gibraltar of 6,000 or 7,000 men, and so uniforms of flaming red are plenty; and red and blue, and undress costumes of snowy white, and also the queer uniform of the bare-kneed Highlander; and one sees soft-eyed Spanish girls
You can easily understand that a tribe (somehow our pilgrims suggest that expression, because they march in a straggling procession through these foreign places with such an Indian-like air of complacency and independence about them) like ours, made up
Speaking of our pilgrims reminds me that we have one or two people among us who are sometimes an annoyance.
However, I do not count the Oracle in that list.
I will explain that the Oracle is an innocent old ass who eats for four and looks wiser than the whole Academy of France would have any right to look, and never uses a one-syllable word when he can think of a longer one, and never by any possible chance
He reads a chapter in the guidebooks, mixes the facts all up, with his bad memory, and then goes off to inflict the whole mess on somebody as wisdom which has been festering in his brain for years and which he gathered in college from erudite authors who
This morning at breakfast he pointed out of the window and said: "Do you see that there hill out there on that African coast?
It's one of them Pillows of Herkewls, I should say--and there's the ultimate one alongside of it".
"The ultimate one--that is a good word--but the pillars are not both on the same side of the strait".
(I saw he had been deceived by a carelessly written sentence in the guidebook.
) "Well, it ain't for you to say, nor for me.
Some authors states it that way, and some states it different.
Old Gibbons don't say nothing about it--just shirks it complete--Gibbons always done that when he got stuck --but there is Rolampton, what does he say?
Why, he says that they was both on the same side, and Trinculian, and Sobaster, and Syraccus, and Langomarganbl----" "Oh, that will do--that's enough.
If you have got your hand in for inventing authors and testimony, I have nothing more to say--let them be on the same side".
We don't mind the Oracle.
We rather like him.
We can tolerate the Oracle very easily, but we have a poet and a good-natured enterprising idiot on board, and they do distress the company.
The one gives copies of his verses to consuls, commanders, hotel keepers, Arabs, Dutch--to anybody, in fact, who will submit to a grievous infliction most kindly meant.
His poetry is all very well on shipboard, notwithstanding when he wrote an "Ode to the Ocean in a Storm" in one half hour, and an "Apostrophe to the Rooster in the Waist of the Ship" in the next, the transition was considered to be rather abrupt; but when
The other personage I have mentioned is young and green, and not bright, not learned, and not wise.
He will be, though, someday if he recollects the answers to all his questions.
He is known about the ship as the "Interrogation Point," and this by constant use has become shortened to "Interrogation".
He has distinguished himself twice already.
In Fayal they pointed out a hill and told him it was 800 feet high and 1,100 feet long.
And they told him there was a tunnel 2,000 feet long and 1,000 feet high running through the hill, from end to end.
He believed it.
He repeated it to everybody, discussed it, and read it from his notes.
Finally, he took a useful hint from this remark, which a thoughtful old pilgrim made: "Well, yes, it is a little remarkable--singular tunnel altogether--stands up out of the top of the hill about two hundred feet, and one end of it sticks out of the hill
Here in Gibraltar he corners these educated British officers and badgers them with braggadocio about America and the wonders she can perform!
He told one of them a couple of our gunboats could come here and knock Gibraltar into the Mediterranean Sea!
At this present moment half a dozen of us are taking a private pleasure excursion of our own devising.
We form rather more than half the list of white passengers on board a small steamer bound for the venerable Moorish town of Tangier, Africa.
Nothing could be more absolutely certain than that we are enjoying ourselves.
One can not do otherwise who speeds over these sparkling waters and breathes the soft atmosphere of this sunny land.
Care cannot assail us here.
We are out of its jurisdiction.
We even steamed recklessly by the frowning fortress of Malabat (a stronghold of the Emperor of Morocco) without a twinge of fear.
The whole garrison turned out under arms and assumed a threatening attitude--yet still we did not fear.
The entire garrison marched and counter-marched within the rampart, in full view--yet notwithstanding even this, we never flinched.
I suppose we really do not know what fear is.
I inquired the name of the garrison of the fortress of Malabat, and they said it was Mehemet Ali Ben Sancom.
I said it would be a good idea to get some more garrisons to help him; but they said no, he had nothing to do but hold the place, and he was competent to do that, had done it two years already.
That was evidence which one could not well refute.
There is nothing like reputation.
Every now and then my glove purchase in Gibraltar last night intrudes itself upon me.
Dan and the ship's surgeon and I had been up to the great square, listening to the music of the fine military bands and contemplating English and Spanish female loveliness and fashion, and at nine o'clock were on our way to the theater, when we met the
They said they were elegant and very moderate in price.
It seemed a stylish thing to go to the theater in kid gloves, and we acted upon the hint.
A very handsome young lady in the store offered me a pair of blue gloves.
I did not want blue, but she said they would look very pretty on a hand like mine.
The remark touched me tenderly.
I glanced furtively at my hand, and somehow it did seem rather a comely member.
I tried a glove on my left and blushed a little.
Manifestly the size was too small for me.
But I felt gratified when she said: "Oh, it is just right"!
Yet I knew it was no such thing.
I tugged at it diligently, but it was discouraging work.
She said: "Ah!
I see you are accustomed to wearing kid gloves--but some gentlemen are so awkward about putting them on".
It was the last compliment I had expected.
I only understand putting on the buckskin article perfectly.
I made another effort and tore the glove from the base of the thumb into the palm of the hand--and tried to hide the rent.
She kept up her compliments, and I kept up my determination to deserve them or die: "Ah, you have had experience!
[A rip down the back of the hand.
] They are just right for you--your hand is very small--if they tear you need not pay for them.
[A rent across the middle.
] I can always tell when a gentleman understands putting on kid gloves.
There is a grace about it that only comes with long practice".
The whole after-guard of the glove "fetched away," as the sailors say, the fabric parted across the knuckles, and nothing was left but a melancholy ruin.
I was too much flattered to make an exposure and throw the merchandise on the angel's hands.
I was hot, vexed, confused, but still happy; but I hated the other boys for taking such an absorbing interest in the proceedings.
I wished they were in Jericho.
I felt exquisitely mean when I said cheerfully: "This one does very well; it fits elegantly.
I like a glove that fits.
No, never mind, ma'am, never mind; I'll put the other on in the street.
It is warm here".
It was warm.
It was the warmest place I ever was in.
I paid the bill, and as I passed out with a fascinating bow I thought I detected a light in the woman's eye that was gently ironical; and when I looked back from the street, and she was laughing all to herself about something or other, I said to myself
A self-complacent ass, ready to be flattered out of your senses by every petticoat that chooses to take the trouble to do it"!
The silence of the boys annoyed me.
Finally Dan said musingly: "Some gentlemen don't know how to put on kid gloves at all, but some do".
And the doctor said (to the moon, I thought): "But it is always easy to tell when a gentleman is used to putting on kid gloves".
Dan soliloquized after a pause: "Ah, yes; there is a grace about it that only comes with long, very long practice".
"Yes, indeed, I've noticed that when a man hauls on a kid glove like he was dragging a cat out of an ash hole by the tail, he understands putting on kid gloves; he's had ex--" "Boys, enough of a thing's enough!
You think you are very smart, I suppose, but I don't.
And if you go and tell any of those old gossips in the ship about this thing, I'll never forgive you for it; that's all".
They let me alone then for the time being.
We always let each other alone in time to prevent ill feeling from spoiling a joke.
But they had bought gloves, too, as I did.
We threw all the purchases away together this morning.
They were coarse, unsubstantial, freckled all over with broad yellow splotches, and could neither stand wear nor public exhibition.
We had entertained an angel unawares, but we did not take her in.
She did that for us.
Tangier!
A tribe of stalwart Moors are wading into the sea to carry us ashore on their backs from the small boats.
CHAPTER VIII.
This is royal!
Let those who went up through Spain make the best of it --these dominions of the Emperor of Morocco suit our little party well enough.
We have had enough of Spain at Gibraltar for the present.
Tangier is the spot we have been longing for all the time.
Elsewhere we have found foreign-looking things and foreign-looking people, but always with things and people intermixed that we were familiar with before, and so the novelty of the situation lost a deal of its force.
We wanted something thoroughly and uncompromisingly foreign--foreign from top to bottom--foreign from center to circumference--foreign inside and outside and all around--nothing anywhere about it to dilute its foreignness --nothing to remind us of any
And lo!
In Tangier we have found it.
Here is not the slightest thing that ever we have seen save in pictures--and we always mistrusted the pictures before.
We cannot anymore.
The pictures used to seem exaggerations--they seemed too weird and fanciful for reality.
But behold, they were not wild enough--they were not fanciful enough--they have not told half the story.
Tangier is a foreign land if ever there was one, and the true spirit of it can never be found in any book save The Arabian Nights.
Here are no white men visible, yet swarms of humanity are all about us.
Here is a packed and jammed city enclosed in a massive stone wall which is more than a thousand years old.
All the houses nearly are one-and two-story, made of thick walls of stone, plastered outside, square as a dry-goods box, flat as a floor on top, no cornices, whitewashed all over--a crowded city of snowy tombs!
And the doors are arched with the peculiar arch we see in Moorish pictures; the floors are laid in varicolored diamond flags; in tesselated, many-colored porcelain squares wrought in the furnaces of Fez; in red tiles and broad bricks that time cannot wear;
And the streets are oriental--some of them three feet wide, some six, but only two that are over a dozen; a man can blockade the most of them by extending his body across them.
Isn't it an oriental picture?
There are stalwart Bedouins of the desert here, and stately Moors proud of a history that goes back to the night of time; and Jews whose fathers fled hither centuries upon centuries ago; and swarthy Riffians from the mountains--born cut-throats--and
And their dresses are strange beyond all description.
Here is a bronzed Moor in a prodigious white turban, curiously embroidered jacket, gold and crimson sash, of many folds, wrapped round and round his waist, trousers that only come a little below his knee and yet have twenty yards of stuff in them,
--I thought he was the Emperor at least.
And here are aged Moors with flowing white beards and long white robes with vast cowls; and Bedouins with long, cowled, striped cloaks; and Negroes and Riffians with heads clean-shaven except a kinky scalp lock back of the ear or, rather, upon the after
And here are Moorish women who are enveloped from head to foot in coarse white robes, and whose sex can only be determined by the fact that they only leave one eye visible and never look at men of their own race, or are looked at by them in public.
Here are five thousand Jews in blue gabardines, sashes about their waists, slippers upon their feet, little skullcaps upon the backs of their heads, hair combed down on the forehead, and cut straight across the middle of it from side to side--the selfsame
Their feet and ankles are bare.
Their noses are all hooked, and hooked alike.
They all resemble each other so much that one could almost believe they were of one family.
Their women are plump and pretty, and do smile upon a Christian in a way which is in the last degree comforting.
What a funny old town it is!
It seems like profanation to laugh and jest and bandy the frivolous chat of our day amid its hoary relics.
Only the stately phraseology and the measured speech of the sons of the Prophet are suited to a venerable antiquity like this.
Here is a crumbling wall that was old when Columbus discovered America; was old when Peter the Hermit roused the knightly men of the Middle Ages to arm for the first Crusade; was old when Charlemagne and his paladins beleaguered enchanted castles and
The Phoenicians, the Carthagenians, the English, Moors, Romans, all have battled for Tangier--all have won it and lost it.
Here is a ragged, oriental-looking Negro from some desert place in interior Africa, filling his goatskin with water from a stained and battered fountain built by the Romans twelve hundred years ago.
Yonder is a ruined arch of a bridge built by Julius Caesar nineteen hundred years ago.
Men who had seen the infant Saviour in the Virgin's arms have stood upon it, maybe.
Near it are the ruins of a dockyard where Caesar repaired his ships and loaded them with grain when he invaded Britain, fifty years before the Christian era.
Here, under the quiet stars, these old streets seem thronged with the phantoms of forgotten ages.
My eyes are resting upon a spot where stood a monument which was seen and described by Roman historians less than two thousand years ago, whereon was inscribed: "WE ARE THE CANAANITES.
WE ARE THEY THAT HAVE BEEN DRIVEN OUT OF THE LAND OF CANAAN BY THE JEWISH ROBBER, JOSHUA".
Joshua drove them out, and they came here.
Not many leagues from here is a tribe of Jews whose ancestors fled thither after an unsuccessful revolt against King David, and these their descendants are still under a ban and keep to themselves.
Tangier has been mentioned in history for three thousand years.
And it was a town, though a queer one, when Hercules, clad in his lion skin, landed here, four thousand years ago.
In these streets he met Anitus, the king of the country, and brained him with his club, which was the fashion among gentlemen in those days.
The people of Tangier (called Tingis then) lived in the rudest possible huts and dressed in skins and carried clubs, and were as savage as the wild beasts they were constantly obliged to war with.
But they were a gentlemanly race and did no work.
They lived on the natural products of the land.
Their king's country residence was at the famous Garden of Hesperides, seventy miles down the coast from here.
The garden, with its golden apples (oranges), is gone now--no vestige of it remains.
Antiquarians concede that such a personage as Hercules did exist in ancient times and agree that he was an enterprising and energetic man, but decline to believe him a good, bona-fide god, because that would be unconstitutional.
Down here at Cape Spartel is the celebrated cave of Hercules, where that hero took refuge when he was vanquished and driven out of the Tangier country.
It is full of inscriptions in the dead languages, which fact makes me think Hercules could not have traveled much, else he would not have kept a journal.
Five days' journey from here--say two hundred miles--are the ruins of an ancient city, of whose history there is neither record nor tradition.
And yet its arches, its columns, and its statues proclaim it to have been built by an enlightened race.
The general size of a store in Tangier is about that of an ordinary shower bath in a civilized land.
The Muhammadan merchant, tinman, shoemaker, or vendor of trifles sits cross-legged on the floor and reaches after any article you may want to buy.
You can rent a whole block of these pigeonholes for fifty dollars a month.
The market people crowd the marketplace with their baskets of figs, dates, melons, apricots, etc.
, and among them file trains of laden asses, not much larger, if any, than a Newfoundland dog.
The scene is lively, is picturesque, and smells like a police court.
The Jewish money-changers have their dens close at hand, and all day long are counting bronze coins and transferring them from one bushel basket to another.
They don't coin much money nowadays, I think.
I saw none but what was dated four or five hundred years back, and was badly worn and battered.
These coins are not very valuable.
Jack went out to get a napoleon changed, so as to have money suited to the general cheapness of things, and came back and said he had "swamped the bank, had bought eleven quarts of coin, and the head of the firm had gone on the street to negotiate for the
I bought nearly half a pint of their money for a shilling myself.
I am not proud on account of having so much money, though.
I care nothing for wealth.
The Moors have some small silver coins and also some silver slugs worth a dollar each.
The latter are exceedingly scarce--so much so that when poor ragged Arabs see one they beg to be allowed to kiss it.
They have also a small gold coin worth two dollars.
And that reminds me of something.
When Morocco is in a state of war, Arab couriers carry letters through the country and charge a liberal postage.
Every now and then they fall into the hands of marauding bands and get robbed.
Therefore, warned by experience, as soon as they have collected two dollars' worth of money they exchange it for one of those little gold pieces, and when robbers come upon them, swallow it.
The stratagem was good while it was unsuspected, but after that the marauders simply gave the sagacious United States mail an emetic and sat down to wait.
The Emperor of Morocco is a soulless despot, and the great officers under him are despots on a smaller scale.
There is no regular system of taxation, but when the Emperor or the Bashaw want money, they levy on some rich man, and he has to furnish the cash or go to prison.
Therefore, few men in Morocco dare to be rich.
It is too dangerous a luxury.
Vanity occasionally leads a man to display wealth, but sooner or later the Emperor trumps up a charge against him--any sort of one will do--and confiscates his property.
Of course, there are many rich men in the empire, but their money is buried, and they dress in rags and counterfeit poverty.
Every now and then the Emperor imprisons a man who is suspected of the crime of being rich, and makes things so uncomfortable for him that he is forced to discover where he has hidden his money.
Moors and Jews sometimes place themselves under the protection of the foreign consuls, and then they can flout their riches in the Emperor's face with impunity.
CHAPTER IX.
About the first adventure we had yesterday afternoon, after landing here, came near finishing that heedless Blucher.
We had just mounted some mules and asses and started out under the guardianship of the stately, the princely, the magnificent Hadji Muhammad Lamarty (may his tribe increase!
) when we came upon a fine Moorish mosque, with tall tower, rich with checker-work of many-colored porcelain, and every part and portion of the edifice adorned with the quaint architecture of the Alhambra, and Blucher started to ride into the open doorway.
A startling "Hi-hi"!
from our camp followers and a loud "Halt"!
from an English gentleman in the party checked the adventurer, and then we were informed that so dire a profanation is it for a Christian dog to set foot upon the sacred threshold of a Moorish mosque that no amount of purification can ever make it fit for
Had Blucher succeeded in entering the place, he would no doubt have been chased through the town and stoned; and the time has been, and not many years ago, either, when a Christian would have been most ruthlessly slaughtered if captured in a mosque.
We caught a glimpse of the handsome tessellated pavements within and of the devotees performing their ablutions at the fountains, but even that we took that glimpse was a thing not relished by the Moorish bystanders.
Some years ago the clock in the tower of the mosque got out of order.
The Moors of Tangier have so degenerated that it has been long since there was an artificer among them capable of curing so delicate a patient as a debilitated clock.
The great men of the city met in solemn conclave to consider how the difficulty was to be met.
They discussed the matter thoroughly but arrived at no solution.
Finally, a patriarch arose and said: "Oh, children of the Prophet, it is known unto you that a Portuguee dog of a Christian clock mender pollutes the city of Tangier with his presence.
Ye know, also, that when mosques are builded, asses bear the stones and the cement, and cross the sacred threshold.
Now, therefore, send the Christian dog on all fours, and barefoot, into the holy place to mend the clock, and let him go as an ass"!
And in that way it was done.
Therefore, if Blucher ever sees the inside of a mosque, he will have to cast aside his humanity and go in his natural character.
We visited the jail and found Moorish prisoners making mats and baskets.
(This thing of utilizing crime savors of civilization.
) Murder is punished with death.
A short time ago three murderers were taken beyond the city walls and shot.
Moorish guns are not good, and neither are Moorish marksmen.
In this instance they set up the poor criminals at long range, like so many targets, and practiced on them--kept them hopping about and dodging bullets for half an hour before they managed to drive the center.
When a man steals cattle, they cut off his right hand and left leg and nail them up in the marketplace as a warning to everybody.
Their surgery is not artistic.
They slice around the bone a little, then break off the limb.
Sometimes the patient gets well; but, as a general thing, he don't.
However, the Moorish heart is stout.
The Moors were always brave.
These criminals undergo the fearful operation without a wince, without a tremor of any kind, without a groan!
No amount of suffering can bring down the pride of a Moor or make him shame his dignity with a cry.
Here, marriage is contracted by the parents of the parties to it.
There are no valentines, no stolen interviews, no riding out, no courting in dim parlors, no lovers' quarrels and reconciliations--no nothing that is proper to approaching matrimony.
The young man takes the girl his father selects for him, marries her, and after that she is unveiled, and he sees her for the first time.
If after due acquaintance she suits him, he retains her; but if he suspects her purity, he bundles her back to her father; if he finds her diseased, the same; or if, after just and reasonable time is allowed her, she neglects to bear children, back she
Muhammadans here who can afford it keep a good many wives on hand.
They are called wives, though I believe the Koran only allows four genuine wives--the rest are concubines.
The Emperor of Morocco don't know how many wives he has, but thinks he has five hundred.
However, that is near enough--a dozen or so, one way or the other, don't matter.
Even the Jews in the interior have a plurality of wives.
I have caught a glimpse of the faces of several Moorish women (for they are only human, and will expose their faces for the admiration of a Christian dog when no male Moor is by), and I am full of veneration for the wisdom that leads them to cover up such
They carry their children at their backs, in a sack, like other savages the world over.
Many of the Negroes are held in slavery by the Moors.
But the moment a female slave becomes her master's concubine her bonds are broken, and as soon as a male slave can read the first chapter of the Koran (which contains the creed) he can no longer be held in bondage.
They have three Sundays a week in Tangier.
The Muhammadans' comes on Friday, the Jews' on Saturday, and that of the Christian Consuls on Sunday.
The Jews are the most radical.
The Moor goes to his mosque about noon on his Sabbath, as on any other day, removes his shoes at the door, performs his ablutions, makes his salaams, pressing his forehead to the pavement time and again, says his prayers, and goes back to his work.
But the Jew shuts up shop; will not touch copper or bronze money at all; soils his fingers with nothing meaner than silver and gold; attends the synagogue devoutly; will not cook or have anything to do with fire; and religiously refrains from embarking in
The Moor who has made a pilgrimage to Mecca is entitled to high distinction.
Men call him Hadji, and he is thenceforward a great personage.
Hundreds of Moors come to Tangier every year and embark for Mecca.
They go part of the way in English steamers, and the ten or twelve dollars they pay for passage is about all the trip costs.
They take with them a quantity of food, and when the commissary department fails they "skirmish," as Jack terms it in his sinful, slangy way.
From the time they leave till they get home again, they never wash, either on land or sea.
They are usually gone from five to seven months, and as they do not change their clothes during all that time, they are totally unfit for the drawing room when they get back.
Many of them have to rake and scrape a long time to gather together the ten dollars their steamer passage costs, and when one of them gets back he is a bankrupt forever after.
Few Moors can ever build up their fortunes again in one short lifetime after so reckless an outlay.
In order to confine the dignity of Hadji to gentlemen of patrician blood and possessions, the Emperor decreed that no man should make the pilgrimage save bloated aristocrats who were worth a hundred dollars in specie.
But behold how iniquity can circumvent the law!
For a consideration, the Jewish money-changer lends the pilgrim one hundred dollars long enough for him to swear himself through, and then receives it back before the ship sails out of the harbor!
Spain is the only nation the Moors fear.
The reason is that Spain sends her heaviest ships of war and her loudest guns to astonish these Muslims, while America and other nations send only a little contemptible tub of a gunboat occasionally.
The Moors, like other savages, learn by what they see, not what they hear or read.
We have great fleets in the Mediterranean, but they seldom touch at African ports.
The Moors have a small opinion of England, France, and America, and put their representatives to a deal of red-tape circumlocution before they grant them their common rights, let alone a favor.
But the moment the Spanish minister makes a demand, it is acceded to at once, whether it be just or not.
Spain chastised the Moors five or six years ago, about a disputed piece of property opposite Gibraltar, and captured the city of Tetouan.
She compromised on an augmentation of her territory, twenty million dollars' indemnity in money, and peace.
And then she gave up the city.
But she never gave it up until the Spanish soldiers had eaten up all the cats.
They would not compromise as long as the cats held out.
Spaniards are very fond of cats.
On the contrary, the Moors reverence cats as something sacred.
So the Spaniards touched them on a tender point that time.
Their unfeline conduct in eating up all the Tetouan cats aroused a hatred toward them in the breasts of the Moors, to which even the driving them out of Spain was tame and passionless.
Moors and Spaniards are foes forever now.
France had a minister here once who embittered the nation against him in the most innocent way.
He killed a couple of battalions of cats (Tangier is full of them) and made a parlor carpet out of their hides.
He made his carpet in circles--first a circle of old gray tomcats, with their tails all pointing toward the center; then a circle of yellow cats; next a circle of black cats and a circle of white ones; then a circle of all sorts of cats; and, finally, a
It was very beautiful, but the Moors curse his memory to this day.
When we went to call on our American Consul General today I noticed that all possible games for parlor amusement seemed to be represented on his center tables.
I thought that hinted at lonesomeness.
The idea was correct.
His is the only American family in Tangier.
There are many foreign consuls in this place, but much visiting is not indulged in.
Tangier is clear out of the world, and what is the use of visiting when people have nothing on earth to talk about?
There is none.
So each consul's family stays at home chiefly and amuses itself as best it can.
Tangier is full of interest for one day, but after that it is a weary prison.
The Consul General has been here five years, and has got enough of it to do him for a century, and is going home shortly.
His family seize upon their letters and papers when the mail arrives, read them over and over again for two days or three, talk them over and over again for two or three more till they wear them out, and after that for days together they eat and drink and
They have literally nothing whatever to talk about.
The arrival of an American man-of-war is a godsend to them.
"O Solitude, where are the charms which sages have seen in thy face"?
It is the completest exile that I can conceive of.
I would seriously recommend to the government of the United States that when a man commits a crime so heinous that the law provides no adequate punishment for it, they make him Consul General to Tangier.
I am glad to have seen Tangier--the second-oldest town in the world.
But I am ready to bid it good-bye, I believe.
We shall go hence to Gibraltar this evening or in the morning, and doubtless the Quaker City will sail from that port within the next forty-eight hours.
CHAPTER X. We passed the Fourth of July on board the Quaker City, in mid-ocean.
It was in all respects a characteristic Mediterranean day--faultlessly beautiful.
A cloudless sky; a refreshing summer wind; a radiant sunshine that glinted cheerily from dancing wavelets instead of crested mountains of water; a sea beneath us that was so wonderfully blue, so richly, brilliantly blue, that it overcame the dullest
They even have fine sunsets on the Mediterranean--a thing that is certainly rare in most quarters of the globe.
The evening we sailed away from Gibraltar, that hard-featured rock was swimming in a creamy mist so rich, so soft, so enchantingly vague and dreamy, that even the Oracle, that serene, that inspired, that overpowering humbug, scorned the dinner gong and
He said: "Well, that's gorgis, ain't it!
They don't have none of them things in our parts, do they?
I consider that them effects is on account of the superior refragability, as you may say, of the sun's diramic combination with the lymphatic forces of the perihelion of Jubiter.
What should you think"?
"Oh, go to bed"!
Dan said that, and went away.
"Oh, yes, it's all very well to say go to bed when a man makes an argument which another man can't answer.
Dan don't never stand any chance in an argument with me.
And he knows it, too.
What should you say, Jack"?
"Now, Doctor, don't you come bothering around me with that dictionary bosh.
I don't do you any harm, do I?
Then you let me alone".
"He's gone, too.
Well, them fellows have all tackled the old Oracle, as they say, but the old man's most too many for 'em.
Maybe the Poet Lariat ain't satisfied with them deductions"?
The poet replied with a barbarous rhyme and went below.
"'Pears that he can't qualify, neither.
Well, I didn't expect nothing out of him.
I never see one of them poets yet that knowed anything.
He'll go down now and grind out about four reams of the awfullest slush about that old rock and give it to a consul, or a pilot, or a nigger, or anybody he comes across first which he can impose on.
Pity but somebody'd take that poor old lunatic and dig all that poetry rubbage out of him.
Why can't a man put his intellect onto things that's some value?
Gibbons, and Hippocratus, and Sarcophagus, and all them old ancient philosophers was down on poets--" "Doctor," I said, "you are going to invent authorities now and I'll leave you, too.
I always enjoy your conversation, notwithstanding the luxuriance of your syllables, when the philosophy you offer rests on your own responsibility; but when you begin to soar--when you begin to support it with the evidence of authorities who are the
That was the way to flatter the doctor.
He considered it a sort of acknowledgment on my part of a fear to argue with him.
He was always persecuting the passengers with abstruse propositions framed in language that no man could understand, and they endured the exquisite torture a minute or two and then abandoned the field.
A triumph like this, over half a dozen antagonists was sufficient for one day; from that time forward he would patrol the decks beaming blandly upon all comers, and so tranquilly, blissfully happy!
But I digress.
The thunder of our two brave cannon announced the Fourth of July, at daylight, to all who were awake.
But many of us got our information at a later hour, from the almanac.
All the flags were sent aloft except half a dozen that were needed to decorate portions of the ship below, and in a short time the vessel assumed a holiday appearance.
During the morning, meetings were held and all manner of committees set to work on the celebration ceremonies.
In the afternoon the ship's company assembled aft, on deck, under the awnings; the flute, the asthmatic melodeon, and the consumptive clarinet crippled "The Star-Spangled Banner," the choir chased it to cover, and George came in with a peculiarly
Nobody mourned.
We carried out the corpse on three cheers (that joke was not intentional and I do not endorse it), and then the President, throned behind a cable locker with a national flag spread over it, announced the "Reader," who rose up and read that same old
Now came the choir into court again, with the complaining instruments, and assaulted "Hail Columbia"; and when victory hung wavering in the scale, George returned with his dreadful wild-goose stop turned on and the choir won, of course.
A minister pronounced the benediction, and the patriotic little gathering disbanded.
The Fourth of July was safe, as far as the Mediterranean was concerned.
At dinner in the evening, a well-written original poem was recited with spirit by one of the ship's captains, and thirteen regular toasts were washed down with several baskets of champagne.
The speeches were bad --execrable almost without exception.
In fact, without any exception but one.
Captain Duncan made a good speech; he made the only good speech of the evening.
He said: "LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:--May we all live to a green old age and be prosperous and happy.
Steward, bring up another basket of champagne".
It was regarded as a very able effort.
The festivities, so to speak, closed with another of those miraculous balls on the promenade deck.
We were not used to dancing on an even keel, though, and it was only a questionable success.
But take it all together, it was a bright, cheerful, pleasant Fourth.
Toward nightfall the next evening, we steamed into the great artificial harbor of this noble city of Marseilles, and saw the dying sunlight gild its clustering spires and ramparts, and flood its leagues of environing verdure with a mellow radiance that
[Copyright secured according to law.
] There were no stages out, and we could not get on the pier from the ship.
It was annoying.
We were full of enthusiasm--we wanted to see France!
Just at nightfall our party of three contracted with a waterman for the privilege of using his boat as a bridge--its stern was at our companion ladder and its bow touched the pier.
We got in and the fellow backed out into the harbor.
I told him in French that all we wanted was to walk over his thwarts and step ashore, and asked him what he went away out there for.
He said he could not understand me.
I repeated.
Still he could not understand.
He appeared to be very ignorant of French.
The doctor tried him, but he could not understand the doctor.
I asked this boatman to explain his conduct, which he did; and then I couldn't understand him.
Dan said: "Oh, go to the pier, you old fool--that's where we want to go"!
We reasoned calmly with Dan that it was useless to speak to this foreigner in English--that he had better let us conduct this business in the French language and not let the stranger see how uncultivated he was.
"Well, go on, go on," he said, "don't mind me.
I don't wish to interfere.
Only, if you go on telling him in your kind of French, he never will find out where we want to go to.
That is what I think about it".
We rebuked him severely for this remark and said we never knew an ignorant person yet but was prejudiced.
The Frenchman spoke again, and the doctor said: "There now, Dan, he says he is going to allez to the douain.
Means he is going to the hotel.
Oh, certainly--we don't know the French language".
This was a crusher, as Jack would say.
It silenced further criticism from the disaffected member.
We coasted past the sharp bows of a navy of great steamships and stopped at last at a government building on a stone pier.
It was easy to remember then that the douain was the customhouse and not the hotel.
We did not mention it, however.
With winning French politeness the officers merely opened and closed our satchels, declined to examine our passports, and sent us on our way.
We stopped at the first cafe we came to and entered.
An old woman seated us at a table and waited for orders.
The doctor said: "Avez-vous du vin"?
The dame looked perplexed.
The doctor said again, with elaborate distinctness of articulation: "Avez-vous du--vin"!
The dame looked more perplexed than before.
I said: "Doctor, there is a flaw in your pronunciation somewhere.
Let me try her.
Madame, avez-vous du vin?
--It isn't any use, Doctor--take the witness".
"Madame, avez-vous du vin--du fromage--pain--pickled pigs' feet--beurre --des oeufs--du boeuf--horseradish, sauerkraut, hog and hominy--anything, anything in the world that can stay a Christian stomach"!
She said: "Bless you, why didn't you speak English before?
I don't know anything about your plagued French"!
The humiliating taunts of the disaffected member spoiled the supper, and we dispatched it in angry silence and got away as soon as we could.
Here we were in beautiful France--in a vast stone house of quaint architecture--surrounded by all manner of curiously worded French signs --stared at by strangely habited, bearded French people--everything gradually and surely forcing upon us the coveted
It was exasperating.
We set out to find the centre of the city, inquiring the direction every now and then.
We never did succeed in making anybody understand just exactly what we wanted, and neither did we ever succeed in comprehending just exactly what they said in reply, but then they always pointed--they always did that--and we bowed politely and said,
He was restive under these victories and often asked: "What did that pirate say"?
"Why, he told us which way to go to find the Grand Casino".
"Yes, but what did he say"?
"Oh, it don't matter what he said--we understood him.
These are educated people--not like that absurd boatman".
"Well, I wish they were educated enough to tell a man a direction that goes some where--for we've been going around in a circle for an hour.
I've passed this same old drugstore seven times".
We said it was a low, disreputable falsehood (but we knew it was not).
It was plain that it would not do to pass that drugstore again, though --we might go on asking directions, but we must cease from following finger-pointings if we hoped to check the suspicions of the disaffected member.
A long walk through smooth, asphaltum-paved streets bordered by blocks of vast new mercantile houses of cream-colored stone every house and every block precisely like all the other houses and all the other blocks for a mile, and all brilliantly
On every hand were bright colors, flashing constellations of gas burners, gaily dressed men and women thronging the sidewalks --hurry, life, activity, cheerfulness, conversation, and laughter everywhere!
We found the Grand Hotel du Louvre et de la Paix, and wrote down who we were, where we were born, what our occupations were, the place we came from last, whether we were married or single, how we liked it, how old we were, where we were bound for and when
We hired a guide and began the business of sightseeing immediately.
That first night on French soil was a stirring one.
I cannot think of half the places we went to or what we particularly saw; we had no disposition to examine carefully into anything at all--we only wanted to glance and go--to move, keep moving!
The spirit of the country was upon us.
We sat down, finally, at a late hour, in the great Casino, and called for unstinted champagne.
It is so easy to be bloated aristocrats where it costs nothing of consequence!
There were about five hundred people in that dazzling place, I suppose, though the walls being papered entirely with mirrors, so to speak, one could not really tell but that there were a hundred thousand.
Young, daintily dressed exquisites and young, stylishly dressed women, and also old gentlemen and old ladies, sat in couples and groups about innumerable marble-topped tables and ate fancy suppers, drank wine, and kept up a chattering din of conversation
There was a stage at the far end and a large orchestra; and every now and then actors and actresses in preposterous comic dresses came out and sang the most extravagantly funny songs, to judge by their absurd actions; but that audience merely suspended its
I had always thought that Frenchmen were ready to laugh at any thing.
CHAPTER XI.
We are getting foreignized rapidly and with facility.
We are getting reconciled to halls and bedchambers with unhomelike stone floors and no carpets--floors that ring to the tread of one's heels with a sharpness that is death to sentimental musing.
We are getting used to tidy, noiseless waiters, who glide hither and thither, and hover about your back and your elbows like butterflies, quick to comprehend orders, quick to fill them; thankful for a gratuity without regard to the amount; and always
That is the strangest curiosity yet--a really polite hotel waiter who isn't an idiot.
We are getting used to driving right into the central court of the hotel, in the midst of a fragrant circle of vines and flowers, and in the midst also of parties of gentlemen sitting quietly reading the paper and smoking.
We are getting used to ice frozen by artificial process in ordinary bottles --the only kind of ice they have here.
We are getting used to all these things, but we are not getting used to carrying our own soap.
We are sufficiently civilized to carry our own combs and toothbrushes, but this thing of having to ring for soap every time we wash is new to us and not pleasant at all.
We think of it just after we get our heads and faces thoroughly wet or just when we think we have been in the bathtub long enough, and then, of course, an annoying delay follows.
These Marseillaises make Marseillaise hymns and Marseilles vests and Marseilles soap for all the world, but they never sing their hymns or wear their vests or wash with their soap themselves.
We have learned to go through the lingering routine of the table d'hote with patience, with serenity, with satisfaction.
We take soup, then wait a few minutes for the fish; a few minutes more and the plates are changed, and the roast beef comes; another change and we take peas; change again and take lentils; change and take snail patties (I prefer grasshoppers); change and
; finally coffee.
Wine with every course, of course, being in France.
With such a cargo on board, digestion is a slow process, and we must sit long in the cool chambers and smoke--and read French newspapers, which have a strange fashion of telling a perfectly straight story till you get to the "nub" of it, and then a word
An embankment fell on some Frenchmen yesterday, and the papers are full of it today--but whether those sufferers were killed, or crippled, or bruised, or only scared is more than I can possibly make out, and yet I would just give anything to know.
We were troubled a little at dinner today by the conduct of an American, who talked very loudly and coarsely and laughed boisterously where all others were so quiet and well behaved.
He ordered wine with a royal flourish and said: "I never dine without wine, sir" (which was a pitiful falsehood), and looked around upon the company to bask in the admiration he expected to find in their faces.
All these airs in a land where they would as soon expect to leave the soup out of the bill of fare as the wine!
--in a land where wine is nearly as common among all ranks as water!
This fellow said: "I am a free-born sovereign, sir, an American, sir, and I want everybody to know it"!
He did not mention that he was a lineal descendant of Balaam's ass, but everybody knew that without his telling it.
We have driven in the Prado--that superb avenue bordered with patrician mansions and noble shade trees--and have visited the chateau Boarely and its curious museum.
They showed us a miniature cemetery there--a copy of the first graveyard that was ever in Marseilles, no doubt.
The delicate little skeletons were lying in broken vaults and had their household gods and kitchen utensils with them.
The original of this cemetery was dug up in the principal street of the city a few years ago.
It had remained there, only twelve feet underground, for a matter of twenty-five hundred years or thereabouts.
Romulus was here before he built Rome, and thought something of founding a city on this spot, but gave up the idea.
He may have been personally acquainted with some of these Phoenicians whose skeletons we have been examining.
In the great Zoological Gardens we found specimens of all the animals the world produces, I think, including a dromedary, a monkey ornamented with tufts of brilliant blue and carmine hair--a very gorgeous monkey he was --a hippopotamus from the Nile, and a
This fellow stood up with his eyes shut and his shoulders stooped forward a little, and looked as if he had his hands under his coat tails.
Such tranquil stupidity, such supernatural gravity, such self-righteousness, and such ineffable self-complacency as were in the countenance and attitude of that gray-bodied, dark-winged, bald-headed, and preposterously uncomely bird!
He was so ungainly, so pimply about the head, so scaly about the legs, yet so serene, so unspeakably satisfied!
He was the most comical-looking creature that can be imagined.
It was good to hear Dan and the doctor laugh--such natural and such enjoyable laughter had not been heard among our excursionists since our ship sailed away from America.
This bird was a godsend to us, and I should be an ingrate if I forgot to make honorable mention of him in these pages.
Ours was a pleasure excursion; therefore we stayed with that bird an hour and made the most of him.
We stirred him up occasionally, but he only unclosed an eye and slowly closed it again, abating no jot of his stately piety of demeanor or his tremendous seriousness.
He only seemed to say, "Defile not Heaven's anointed with unsanctified hands".
We did not know his name, and so we called him "The Pilgrim".
Dan said: "All he wants now is a Plymouth Collection".
The boon companion of the colossal elephant was a common cat!
This cat had a fashion of climbing up the elephant's hind legs and roosting on his back.
She would sit up there, with her paws curved under her breast, and sleep in the sun half the afternoon.
It used to annoy the elephant at first, and he would reach up and take her down, but she would go aft and climb up again.
She persisted until she finally conquered the elephant's prejudices, and now they are inseparable friends.
The cat plays about her comrade's forefeet or his trunk often, until dogs approach, and then she goes aloft out of danger.
The elephant has annihilated several dogs lately that pressed his companion too closely.
We hired a sailboat and a guide and made an excursion to one of the small islands in the harbor to visit the Castle d'If.
This ancient fortress has a melancholy history.
It has been used as a prison for political offenders for two or three hundred years, and its dungeon walls are scarred with the rudely carved names of many and many a captive who fretted his life away here and left no record of himself but these sad
How thick the names were!
And their long-departed owners seemed to throng the gloomy cells and corridors with their phantom shapes.
We loitered through dungeon after dungeon, away down into the living rock below the level of the sea, it seemed.
Names everywhere!
--some plebeian, some noble, some even princely.
Plebeian, prince, and noble had one solicitude in common--they would not be forgotten!
They could suffer solitude, inactivity, and the horrors of a silence that no sound ever disturbed, but they could not bear the thought of being utterly forgotten by the world.
Hence the carved names.
In one cell, where a little light penetrated, a man had lived twenty-seven years without seeing the face of a human being--lived in filth and wretchedness, with no companionship but his own thoughts, and they were sorrowful enough and hopeless enough, no
Whatever his jailers considered that he needed was conveyed to his cell by night through a wicket.
This man carved the walls of his prison house from floor to roof with all manner of figures of men and animals grouped in intricate designs.
He had toiled there year after year, at his self-appointed task, while infants grew to boyhood--to vigorous youth--idled through school and college--acquired a profession--claimed man's mature estate--married and looked back to infancy as to a thing of
But who shall tell how many ages it seemed to this prisoner?
With the one, time flew sometimes; with the other, never--it crawled always.
To the one, nights spent in dancing had seemed made of minutes instead of hours; to the other, those selfsame nights had been like all other nights of dungeon life and seemed made of slow, dragging weeks instead of hours and minutes.
One prisoner of fifteen years had scratched verses upon his walls, and brief prose sentences--brief, but full of pathos.
These spoke not of himself and his hard estate, but only of the shrine where his spirit fled the prison to worship--of home and the idols that were templed there.
He never lived to see them.
The walls of these dungeons are as thick as some bed-chambers at home are wide--fifteen feet.
We saw the damp, dismal cells in which two of Dumas' heroes passed their confinement--heroes of "Monte Cristo".
It was here that the brave Abbe wrote a book with his own blood, with a pen made of a piece of iron hoop, and by the light of a lamp made out of shreds of cloth soaked in grease obtained from his food; and then dug through the thick wall with some trifling
It was a pity that so many weeks of dreary labor should have come to naught at last.
They showed us the noisome cell where the celebrated "Iron Mask"--that ill-starred brother of a hardhearted king of France--was confined for a season before he was sent to hide the strange mystery of his life from the curious in the dungeons of Ste.
Marguerite.
The place had a far greater interest for us than it could have had if we had known beyond all question who the Iron Mask was, and what his history had been, and why this most unusual punishment had been meted out to him.
Mystery!
That was the charm.
That speechless tongue, those prisoned features, that heart so freighted with unspoken troubles, and that breast so oppressed with its piteous secret had been here.
These dank walls had known the man whose dolorous story is a sealed book forever!
There was fascination in the spot.
CHAPTER XII.
We have come five hundred miles by rail through the heart of France.
What a bewitching land it is!
What a garden!
Surely the leagues of bright green lawns are swept and brushed and watered every day and their grasses trimmed by the barber.
Surely the hedges are shaped and measured and their symmetry preserved by the most architectural of gardeners.
Surely the long straight rows of stately poplars that divide the beautiful landscape like the squares of a checker-board are set with line and plummet, and their uniform height determined with a spirit level.
Surely the straight, smooth, pure white turnpikes are jack-planed and sandpapered every day.
How else are these marvels of symmetry, cleanliness, and order attained?
It is wonderful.
There are no unsightly stone walls and never a fence of any kind.
There is no dirt, no decay, no rubbish anywhere--nothing that even hints at untidiness --nothing that ever suggests neglect.
All is orderly and beautiful--every thing is charming to the eye.
We had such glimpses of the Rhone gliding along between its grassy banks; of cosy cottages buried in flowers and shrubbery; of quaint old red-tiled villages with mossy medieval cathedrals looming out of their midst; of wooded hills with ivy-grown towers
We knew then what the poet meant when he sang of: "--thy cornfields green, and sunny vines, O pleasant land of France"!
And it is a pleasant land.
No word describes it so felicitously as that one.
They say there is no word for "home" in the French language.
Well, considering that they have the article itself in such an attractive aspect, they ought to manage to get along without the word.
Let us not waste too much pity on "homeless" France.
I have observed that Frenchmen abroad seldom wholly give up the idea of going back to France some time or other.
I am not surprised at it now.
We are not infatuated with these French railway cars, though.
We took first-class passage, not because we wished to attract attention by doing a thing which is uncommon in Europe but because we could make our journey quicker by so doing.
It is hard to make railroading pleasant in any country.
It is too tedious.
Stagecoaching is infinitely more delightful.
Once I crossed the plains and deserts and mountains of the West in a stagecoach, from the Missouri line to California, and since then all my pleasure trips must be measured to that rare holiday frolic.
Two thousand miles of ceaseless rush and rattle and clatter, by night and by day, and never a weary moment, never a lapse of interest!
The first seven hundred miles a level continent, its grassy carpet greener and softer and smoother than any sea and figured with designs fitted to its magnitude--the shadows of the clouds.
Here were no scenes but summer scenes, and no disposition inspired by them but to lie at full length on the mail sacks in the grateful breeze and dreamily smoke the pipe of peace--what other, where all was repose and contentment?
In cool mornings, before the sun was fairly up, it was worth a lifetime of city toiling and moiling to perch in the foretop with the driver and see the six mustangs scamper under the sharp snapping of the whip that never touched them; to scan the blue
Then thirteen hundred miles of desert solitudes; of limitless panoramas of bewildering perspective; of mimic cities, of pinnacled cathedrals, of massive fortresses, counterfeited in the eternal rocks and splendid with the crimson and gold of the setting
But I forgot.
I am in elegant France now, and not scurrying through the great South Pass and the Wind River Mountains, among antelopes and buffaloes and painted Indians on the warpath.
It is not meet that I should make too disparaging comparisons between humdrum travel on a railway and that royal summer flight across a continent in a stagecoach.
I meant in the beginning to say that railway journeying is tedious and tiresome, and so it is--though at the time I was thinking particularly of a dismal fifty-hour pilgrimage between New York and St. Louis.
Of course our trip through France was not really tedious because all its scenes and experiences were new and strange; but as Dan says, it had its "discrepancies".
The cars are built in compartments that hold eight persons each.
Each compartment is partially subdivided, and so there are two tolerably distinct parties of four in it.
Four face the other four.
The seats and backs are thickly padded and cushioned and are very comfortable; you can smoke if you wish; there are no bothersome peddlers; you are saved the infliction of a multitude of disagreeable fellow passengers.
So far, so well.
But then the conductor locks you in when the train starts; there is no water to drink in the car; there is no heating apparatus for night travel; if a drunken rowdy should get in, you could not remove a matter of twenty seats from him or enter another car;
I prefer the American system.
It has not so many grievous "discrepancies".
In France, all is clockwork, all is order.
They make no mistakes.
Every third man wears a uniform, and whether he be a marshal of the empire or a brakeman, he is ready and perfectly willing to answer all your questions with tireless politeness, ready to tell you which car to take, yea, and ready to go and put you into it
You cannot pass into the waiting room of the depot till you have secured your ticket, and you cannot pass from its only exit till the train is at its threshold to receive you.
Once on board, the train will not start till your ticket has been examined--till every passenger's ticket has been inspected.
This is chiefly for your own good.
If by any possibility you have managed to take the wrong train, you will be handed over to a polite official who will take you whither you belong and bestow you with many an affable bow.
Your ticket will be inspected every now and then along the route, and when it is time to change cars you will know it.
You are in the hands of officials who zealously study your welfare and your interest, instead of turning their talents to the invention of new methods of discommoding and snubbing you, as is very often the main employment of that exceedingly self-satisfied
But the happiest regulation in French railway government is--thirty minutes to dinner!
No five-minute boltings of flabby rolls, muddy coffee, questionable eggs, gutta-percha beef, and pies whose conception and execution are a dark and bloody mystery to all save the cook that created them!
No, we sat calmly down--it was in old Dijon, which is so easy to spell and so impossible to pronounce except when you civilize it and call it Demijohn--and poured out rich Burgundian wines and munched calmly through a long table d'hote bill of fare, snail
A rare experience and one to be treasured forever.
They say they do not have accidents on these French roads, and I think it must be true.
If I remember rightly, we passed high above wagon roads or through tunnels under them, but never crossed them on their own level.
About every quarter of a mile, it seemed to me, a man came out and held up a club till the train went by, to signify that everything was safe ahead.
Switches were changed a mile in advance by pulling a wire rope that passed along the ground by the rail, from station to station.
Signals for the day and signals for the night gave constant and timely notice of the position of switches.
No, they have no railroad accidents to speak of in France.
But why?
Because when one occurs, somebody has to hang for it!
Not hang, maybe, but be punished at least with such vigor of emphasis as to make negligence a thing to be shuddered at by railroad officials for many a day thereafter.
"No blame attached to the officers"--that lying and disaster-breeding verdict so common to our softhearted juries is seldom rendered in France.
If the trouble occurred in the conductor's department, that officer must suffer if his subordinate cannot be proven guilty; if in the engineer's department and the case be similar, the engineer must answer.
The Old Travelers--those delightful parrots who have "been here before" and know more about the country than Louis Napoleon knows now or ever will know--tell us these things, and we believe them because they are pleasant things to believe and because they
But we love the Old Travelers.
We love to hear them prate and drivel and lie.
We can tell them the moment we see them.
They always throw out a few feelers; they never cast themselves adrift till they have sounded every individual and know that he has not traveled.
Then they open their throttle valves, and how they do brag, and sneer, and swell, and soar, and blaspheme the sacred name of Truth!
Their central idea, their grand aim, is to subjugate you, keep you down, make you feel insignificant and humble in the blaze of their cosmopolitan glory!
They will not let you know anything.
They sneer at your most inoffensive suggestions; they laugh unfeelingly at your treasured dreams of foreign lands; they brand the statements of your traveled aunts and uncles as the stupidest absurdities; they deride your most trusted authors and demolish
But still I love the Old Travelers.
I love them for their witless platitudes, for their supernatural ability to bore, for their delightful asinine vanity, for their luxuriant fertility of imagination, for their startling, their brilliant, their overwhelming mendacity!
By Lyons and the Saone (where we saw the lady of Lyons and thought little of her comeliness), by Villa Franca, Tonnere, venerable Sens, Melun, Fontainebleau, and scores of other beautiful cities, we swept, always noting the absence of hog-wallows, broken
What excellent order they kept about that vast depot!
There was no frantic crowding and jostling, no shouting and swearing, and no swaggering intrusion of services by rowdy hackmen.
These latter gentry stood outside--stood quietly by their long line of vehicles and said never a word.
A kind of hackman general seemed to have the whole matter of transportation in his hands.
He politely received the passengers and ushered them to the kind of conveyance they wanted, and told the driver where to deliver them.
There was no "talking back," no dissatisfaction about overcharging, no grumbling about anything.
In a little while we were speeding through the streets of Paris and delightfully recognizing certain names and places with which books had long ago made us familiar.
It was like meeting an old friend when we read Rue de Rivoli on the street corner; we knew the genuine vast palace of the Louvre as well as we knew its picture; when we passed by the Column of July we needed no one to tell us what it was or to remind us
We secured rooms at the hotel, or rather, we had three beds put into one room, so that we might be together, and then we went out to a restaurant, just after lamplighting, and ate a comfortable, satisfactory, lingering dinner.
It was a pleasure to eat where everything was so tidy, the food so well cooked, the waiters so polite, and the coming and departing company so moustached, so frisky, so affable, so fearfully and wonderfully Frenchy!
All the surroundings were gay and enlivening.
Two hundred people sat at little tables on the sidewalk, sipping wine and coffee; the streets were thronged with light vehicles and with joyous pleasure-seekers; there was music in the air, life and action all about us, and a conflagration of gaslight
After dinner we felt like seeing such Parisian specialties as we might see without distressing exertion, and so we sauntered through the brilliant streets and looked at the dainty trifles in variety stores and jewelry shops.
Occasionally, merely for the pleasure of being cruel, we put unoffending Frenchmen on the rack with questions framed in the incomprehensible jargon of their native language, and while they writhed we impaled them, we peppered them, we scarified them, with
We noticed that in the jewelry stores they had some of the articles marked "gold" and some labeled "imitation".
We wondered at this extravagance of honesty and inquired into the matter.
We were informed that inasmuch as most people are not able to tell false gold from the genuine article, the government compels jewelers to have their gold work assayed and stamped officially according to its fineness and their imitation work duly labeled
They told us the jewelers would not dare to violate this law, and that whatever a stranger bought in one of their stores might be depended upon as being strictly what it was represented to be.
Verily, a wonderful land is France!
Then we hunted for a barber-shop.
From earliest infancy it had been a cherished ambition of mine to be shaved some day in a palatial barber-shop in Paris.
I wished to recline at full length in a cushioned invalid chair, with pictures about me and sumptuous furniture; with frescoed walls and gilded arches above me and vistas of Corinthian columns stretching far before me; with perfumes of Araby to intoxicate
At the end of an hour I would wake up regretfully and find my face as smooth and as soft as an infant's.
Departing, I would lift my hands above that barber's head and say, "Heaven bless you, my son"!
So we searched high and low, for a matter of two hours, but never a barber-shop could we see.
We saw only wig-making establishments, with shocks of dead and repulsive hair bound upon the heads of painted waxen brigands who stared out from glass boxes upon the passer-by with their stony eyes and scared him with the ghostly white of their
We shunned these signs for a time, but finally we concluded that the wig-makers must of necessity be the barbers as well, since we could find no single legitimate representative of the fraternity.
We entered and asked, and found that it was even so.
I said I wanted to be shaved.
The barber inquired where my room was.
I said never mind where my room was, I wanted to be shaved--there, on the spot.
The doctor said he would be shaved also.
Then there was an excitement among those two barbers!
There was a wild consultation, and afterwards a hurrying to and fro and a feverish gathering up of razors from obscure places and a ransacking for soap.
Next they took us into a little mean, shabby back room; they got two ordinary sitting-room chairs and placed us in them with our coats on.
My old, old dream of bliss vanished into thin air!
I sat bolt upright, silent, sad, and solemn.
One of the wig-making villains lathered my face for ten terrible minutes and finished by plastering a mass of suds into my mouth.
I expelled the nasty stuff with a strong English expletive and said, "Foreigner, beware"!
Then this outlaw strapped his razor on his boot, hovered over me ominously for six fearful seconds, and then swooped down upon me like the genius of destruction.
The first rake of his razor loosened the very hide from my face and lifted me out of the chair.
I stormed and raved, and the other boys enjoyed it.
Their beards are not strong and thick.
Let us draw the curtain over this harrowing scene.
Suffice it that I submitted and went through with the cruel infliction of a shave by a French barber; tears of exquisite agony coursed down my cheeks now and then, but I survived.
Then the incipient assassin held a basin of water under my chin and slopped its contents over my face, and into my bosom, and down the back of my neck, with a mean pretense of washing away the soap and blood.
He dried my features with a towel and was going to comb my hair, but I asked to be excused.
I said, with withering irony, that it was sufficient to be skinned--I declined to be scalped.
I went away from there with my handkerchief about my face, and never, never, never desired to dream of palatial Parisian barber-shops anymore.
The truth is, as I believe I have since found out, that they have no barber shops worthy of the name in Paris--and no barbers, either, for that matter.
The impostor who does duty as a barber brings his pans and napkins and implements of torture to your residence and deliberately skins you in your private apartments.
Ah, I have suffered, suffered, suffered, here in Paris, but never mind--the time is coming when I shall have a dark and bloody revenge.
Someday a Parisian barber will come to my room to skin me, and from that day forth that barber will never be heard of more.
At eleven o'clock we alighted upon a sign which manifestly referred to billiards.
Joy!
We had played billiards in the Azores with balls that were not round and on an ancient table that was very little smoother than a brick pavement--one of those wretched old things with dead cushions, and with patches in the faded cloth and invisible
We had played at Gibraltar with balls the size of a walnut, on a table like a public square--and in both instances we achieved far more aggravation than amusement.
We expected to fare better here, but we were mistaken.
The cushions were a good deal higher than the balls, and as the balls had a fashion of always stopping under the cushions, we accomplished very little in the way of caroms.
The cushions were hard and unelastic, and the cues were so crooked that in making a shot you had to allow for the curve or you would infallibly put the "English" on the wrong side of the ball.
Dan was to mark while the doctor and I played.
At the end of an hour neither of us had made a count, and so Dan was tired of keeping tally with nothing to tally, and we were heated and angry and disgusted.
We paid the heavy bill--about six cents--and said we would call around sometime when we had a week to spend, and finish the game.
We adjourned to one of those pretty cafes and took supper and tested the wines of the country, as we had been instructed to do, and found them harmless and unexciting.
They might have been exciting, however, if we had chosen to drink a sufficiency of them.
To close our first day in Paris cheerfully and pleasantly, we now sought our grand room in the Grand Hotel du Louvre and climbed into our sumptuous bed to read and smoke--but alas!
It was pitiful, In a whole city-full, Gas we had none.
No gas to read by--nothing but dismal candles.
It was a shame.
We tried to map out excursions for the morrow; we puzzled over French "guides to Paris"; we talked disjointedly in a vain endeavor to make head or tail of the wild chaos of the day's sights and experiences; we subsided to indolent smoking; we gaped and
CHAPTER XIII.
The next morning we were up and dressed at ten o'clock.
We went to the 'commissionaire' of the hotel--I don't know what a 'commissionaire' is, but that is the man we went to--and told him we wanted a guide.
He said the national Exposition had drawn such multitudes of Englishmen and Americans to Paris that it would be next to impossible to find a good guide unemployed.
He said he usually kept a dozen or two on hand, but he only had three now.
He called them.
One looked so like a very pirate that we let him go at once.
The next one spoke with a simpering precision of pronunciation that was irritating and said: "If ze zhentlemans will to me make ze grande honneur to me rattain in hees serveece, I shall show to him every sing zat is magnifique to look upon in ze beautiful
I speaky ze Angleesh pairfaitemaw".
He would have done well to have stopped there, because he had that much by heart and said it right off without making a mistake.
But his self-complacency seduced him into attempting a flight into regions of unexplored English, and the reckless experiment was his ruin.
Within ten seconds he was so tangled up in a maze of mutilated verbs and torn and bleeding forms of speech that no human ingenuity could ever have gotten him out of it with credit.
It was plain enough that he could not "speaky" the English quite as "pairfaitemaw" as he had pretended he could.
The third man captured us.
He was plainly dressed, but he had a noticeable air of neatness about him.
He wore a high silk hat which was a little old, but had been carefully brushed.
He wore second-hand kid gloves, in good repair, and carried a small rattan cane with a curved handle--a female leg--of ivory.
He stepped as gently and as daintily as a cat crossing a muddy street; and oh, he was urbanity; he was quiet, unobtrusive self-possession; he was deference itself!
He spoke softly and guardedly; and when he was about to make a statement on his sole responsibility or offer a suggestion, he weighed it by drachms and scruples first, with the crook of his little stick placed meditatively to his teeth.
His opening speech was perfect.
It was perfect in construction, in phraseology, in grammar, in emphasis, in pronunciation --everything.
He spoke little and guardedly after that.
We were charmed.
We were more than charmed--we were overjoyed.
We hired him at once.
We never even asked him his price.
This man--our lackey, our servant, our unquestioning slave though he was--was still a gentleman--we could see that--while of the other two one was coarse and awkward and the other was a born pirate.
We asked our man Friday's name.
He drew from his pocketbook a snowy little card and passed it to us with a profound bow: A. BILLFINGER, Guide to Paris, France, Germany, Spain, &c.
, &c.
Grande Hotel du Louvre.
"Billfinger!
Oh, carry me home to die"!
That was an "aside" from Dan.
The atrocious name grated harshly on my ear, too.
The most of us can learn to forgive, and even to like, a countenance that strikes us unpleasantly at first, but few of us, I fancy, become reconciled to a jarring name so easily.
I was almost sorry we had hired this man, his name was so unbearable.
However, no matter.
We were impatient to start.
Billfinger stepped to the door to call a carriage, and then the doctor said: "Well, the guide goes with the barbershop, with the billiard-table, with the gasless room, and may be with many another pretty romance of Paris.
I expected to have a guide named Henri de Montmorency, or Armand de la Chartreuse, or something that would sound grand in letters to the villagers at home, but to think of a Frenchman by the name of Billfinger!
Oh!
This is absurd, you know.
This will never do.
We can't say Billfinger; it is nauseating.
Name him over again; what had we better call him?
Alexis du Caulaincourt"?
"Alphonse Henri Gustave de Hauteville," I suggested.
"Call him Ferguson," said Dan.
That was practical, unromantic good sense.
Without debate, we expunged Billfinger as Billfinger, and called him Ferguson.
The carriage--an open barouche--was ready.
Ferguson mounted beside the driver, and we whirled away to breakfast.
As was proper, Mr. Ferguson stood by to transmit our orders and answer questions.
By and by, he mentioned casually--the artful adventurer--that he would go and get his breakfast as soon as we had finished ours.
He knew we could not get along without him and that we would not want to loiter about and wait for him.
We asked him to sit down and eat with us.
He begged, with many a bow, to be excused.
It was not proper, he said; he would sit at another table.
We ordered him peremptorily to sit down with us.
Here endeth the first lesson.
It was a mistake.
As long as we had that fellow after that, he was always hungry; he was always thirsty.
He came early; he stayed late; he could not pass a restaurant; he looked with a lecherous eye upon every wine shop.
Suggestions to stop, excuses to eat and to drink, were forever on his lips.
We tried all we could to fill him so full that he would have no room to spare for a fortnight, but it was a failure.
He did not hold enough to smother the cravings of his superhuman appetite.
He had another "discrepancy" about him.
He was always wanting us to buy things.
On the shallowest pretenses he would inveigle us into shirt stores, boot stores, tailor shops, glove shops--anywhere under the broad sweep of the heavens that there seemed a chance of our buying anything.
Anyone could have guessed that the shopkeepers paid him a percentage on the sales, but in our blessed innocence we didn't until this feature of his conduct grew unbearably prominent.
One day Dan happened to mention that he thought of buying three or four silk dress patterns for presents.
Ferguson's hungry eye was upon him in an instant.
In the course of twenty minutes the carriage stopped.
"What's this"?
"Zis is ze finest silk magazin in Paris--ze most celebrate".
"What did you come here for?
We told you to take us to the palace of the Louvre".
"I suppose ze gentleman say he wish to buy some silk".
"You are not required to 'suppose' things for the party, Ferguson.
We do not wish to tax your energies too much.
We will bear some of the burden and heat of the day ourselves.
We will endeavor to do such 'supposing' as is really necessary to be done.
Drive on".
So spake the doctor.
Within fifteen minutes the carriage halted again, and before another silk store.
The doctor said: "Ah, the palace of the Louvre--beautiful, beautiful edifice!
Does the Emperor Napoleon live here now, Ferguson"?
"Ah, Doctor!
You do jest; zis is not ze palace; we come there directly.
But since we pass right by zis store, where is such beautiful silk--" "Ah!
I see, I see.
I meant to have told you that we did not wish to purchase any silks to-day, but in my absent-mindedness I forgot it.
I also meant to tell you we wished to go directly to the Louvre, but I forgot that also.
However, we will go there now.
Pardon my seeming carelessness, Ferguson.
Drive on".
Within the half hour we stopped again--in front of another silk store.
We were angry; but the doctor was always serene, always smooth-voiced.
He said: "At last!
How imposing the Louvre is, and yet how small!
How exquisitely fashioned!
How charmingly situated!
--Venerable, venerable pile--" "Pairdon, Doctor, zis is not ze Louvre--it is--" "What is it"?
"I have ze idea--it come to me in a moment--zat ze silk in zis magazin--" "Ferguson, how heedless I am.
I fully intended to tell you that we did not wish to buy any silks to-day, and I also intended to tell you that we yearned to go immediately to the palace of the Louvre, but enjoying the happiness of seeing you devour four breakfasts this morning has so
However, we will proceed now to the Louvre, Ferguson".
"But, doctor," (excitedly,) "it will take not a minute--not but one small minute!
Ze gentleman need not to buy if he not wish to--but only look at ze silk--look at ze beautiful fabric.
[Then pleadingly.
] Sair--just only one leetle moment"!
Dan said, "Confound the idiot!
I don't want to see any silks today, and I won't look at them.
Drive on".
And the doctor: "We need no silks now, Ferguson.
Our hearts yearn for the Louvre.
Let us journey on--let us journey on".
"But doctor!
It is only one moment--one leetle moment.
And ze time will be save--entirely save!
Because zere is nothing to see now--it is too late.
It want ten minute to four and ze Louvre close at four--only one leetle moment, Doctor"!
The treacherous miscreant!
After four breakfasts and a gallon of champagne, to serve us such a scurvy trick.
We got no sight of the countless treasures of art in the Louvre galleries that day, and our only poor little satisfaction was in the reflection that Ferguson sold not a solitary silk dress pattern.
I am writing this chapter partly for the satisfaction of abusing that accomplished knave Billfinger, and partly to show whosoever shall read this how Americans fare at the hands of the Paris guides and what sort of people Paris guides are.
It need not be supposed that we were a stupider or an easier prey than our countrymen generally are, for we were not.
The guides deceive and defraud every American who goes to Paris for the first time and sees its sights alone or in company with others as little experienced as himself.
I shall visit Paris again someday, and then let the guides beware!
I shall go in my war paint--I shall carry my tomahawk along.
I think we have lost but little time in Paris.
We have gone to bed every night tired out.
Of course we visited the renowned International Exposition.
All the world did that.
We went there on our third day in Paris--and we stayed there nearly two hours.
That was our first and last visit.
To tell the truth, we saw at a glance that one would have to spend weeks--yea, even months--in that monstrous establishment to get an intelligible idea of it.
It was a wonderful show, but the moving masses of people of all nations we saw there were a still more wonderful show.
I discovered that if I were to stay there a month, I should still find myself looking at the people instead of the inanimate objects on exhibition.
I got a little interested in some curious old tapestries of the thirteenth century, but a party of Arabs came by, and their dusky faces and quaint costumes called my attention away at once.
I watched a silver swan, which had a living grace about his movements and a living intelligence in his eyes--watched him swimming about as comfortably and as unconcernedly as if he had been born in a morass instead of a jeweler's shop--watched him seize a
Presently I found a revolving pistol several hundred years old which looked strangely like a modern Colt, but just then I heard that the Empress of the French was in another part of the building, and hastened away to see what she might look like.
We heard martial music--we saw an unusual number of soldiers walking hurriedly about--there was a general movement among the people.
We inquired what it was all about and learned that the Emperor of the French and the Sultan of Turkey were about to review twenty-five thousand troops at the Arc de l'Etoile.
We immediately departed.
I had a greater anxiety to see these men than I could have had to see twenty expositions.
We drove away and took up a position in an open space opposite the American minister's house.
A speculator bridged a couple of barrels with a board and we hired standing places on it.
Presently there was a sound of distant music; in another minute a pillar of dust came moving slowly toward us; a moment more and then, with colors flying and a grand crash of military music, a gallant array of cavalrymen emerged from the dust and came down
After them came a long line of artillery; then more cavalry, in splendid uniforms; and then their imperial majesties Napoleon III and Abdul Aziz.
The vast concourse of people swung their hats and shouted--the windows and housetops in the wide vicinity burst into a snowstorm of waving handkerchiefs, and the wavers of the same mingled their cheers with those of the masses below.
It was a stirring spectacle.
But the two central figures claimed all my attention.
Was ever such a contrast set up before a multitude till then?
Napoleon in military uniform--a long-bodied, short-legged man, fiercely moustached, old, wrinkled, with eyes half closed, and such a deep, crafty, scheming expression about them!
--Napoleon, bowing ever so gently to the loud plaudits, and watching everything and everybody with his cat eyes from under his depressed hat brim, as if to discover any sign that those cheers were not heartfelt and cordial.
Abdul Aziz, absolute lord of the Ottoman empire--clad in dark green European clothes, almost without ornament or insignia of rank; a red Turkish fez on his head; a short, stout, dark man, black-bearded, black-eyed, stupid, unprepossessing--a man whose
Napoleon III, the representative of the highest modern civilization, progress, and refinement; Abdul-Aziz, the representative of a people by nature and training filthy, brutish, ignorant, unprogressive, superstitious--and a government whose Three Graces
Here in brilliant Paris, under this majestic Arch of Triumph, the First Century greets the Nineteenth!
NAPOLEON III.
, Emperor of France!
Surrounded by shouting thousands, by military pomp, by the splendors of his capital city, and companioned by kings and princes--this is the man who was sneered at and reviled and called Bastard--yet who was dreaming of a crown and an empire all the while;
a coup d'etat, and surrounded by applauding armies, welcomed by the thunders of cannon, he mounts a throne and waves before an astounded world the sceptre of a mighty empire!
Who talks of the marvels of fiction?
Who speaks of the wonders of romance?
Who prates of the tame achievements of Aladdin and the Magii of Arabia?
ABDUL-AZIZ, Sultan of Turkey, Lord of the Ottoman Empire!
Born to a throne; weak, stupid, ignorant, almost, as his meanest slave; chief of a vast royalty, yet the puppet of his Premier and the obedient child of a tyrannical mother; a man who sits upon a throne--the beck of whose finger moves navies and
Napoleon has augmented the commercial prosperity of France in ten years to such a degree that figures can hardly compute it.
He has rebuilt Paris and has partly rebuilt every city in the state.
He condemns a whole street at a time, assesses the damages, pays them, and rebuilds superbly.
Then speculators buy up the ground and sell, but the original owner is given the first choice by the government at a stated price before the speculator is permitted to purchase.
But above all things, he has taken the sole control of the empire of France into his hands and made it a tolerably free land--for people who will not attempt to go too far in meddling with government affairs.
No country offers greater security to life and property than France, and one has all the freedom he wants, but no license--no license to interfere with anybody or make anyone uncomfortable.
As for the Sultan, one could set a trap any where and catch a dozen abler men in a night.
The bands struck up, and the brilliant adventurer, Napoleon III.
, the genius of Energy, Persistence, Enterprise; and the feeble Abdul-Aziz, the genius of Ignorance, Bigotry, and Indolence, prepared for the Forward --March!
We saw the splendid review, we saw the white-moustached old Crimean soldier, Canrobert, Marshal of France, we saw--well, we saw every thing, and then we went home satisfied.
CHAPTER XIV.
We went to see the Cathedral of Notre Dame.
We had heard of it before.
It surprises me sometimes to think how much we do know and how intelligent we are.
We recognized the brown old Gothic pile in a moment; it was like the pictures.
We stood at a little distance and changed from one point of observation to another and gazed long at its lofty square towers and its rich front, clustered thick with stony, mutilated saints who had been looking calmly down from their perches for ages.
The Patriarch of Jerusalem stood under them in the old days of chivalry and romance, and preached the third Crusade, more than six hundred years ago; and since that day they have stood there and looked quietly down upon the most thrilling scenes, the
These battered and broken-nosed old fellows saw many and many a cavalcade of mail-clad knights come marching home from Holy Land; they heard the bells above them toll the signal for the St. Bartholomew's Massacre, and they saw the slaughter that followed;
I wish these old parties could speak.
They could tell a tale worth the listening to.
They say that a pagan temple stood where Notre Dame now stands, in the old Roman days, eighteen or twenty centuries ago--remains of it are still preserved in Paris; and that a Christian church took its place about A.D. 300; another took the place of that
The ground ought to be measurably sacred by this time, one would think.
One portion of this noble old edifice is suggestive of the quaint fashions of ancient times.
It was built by Jean Sans-Peur, Duke of Burgundy, to set his conscience at rest--he had assassinated the Duke of Orleans.
Alas!
Those good old times are gone when a murderer could wipe the stain from his name and soothe his troubles to sleep simply by getting out his bricks and mortar and building an addition to a church.
The portals of the great western front are bisected by square pillars.
They took the central one away in 1852, on the occasion of thanksgivings for the reinstitution of the presidential power--but precious soon they had occasion to reconsider that motion and put it back again!
And they did.
We loitered through the grand aisles for an hour or two, staring up at the rich stained-glass windows embellished with blue and yellow and crimson saints and martyrs, and trying to admire the numberless great pictures in the chapels, and then we were
We had already seen a large piece of the true cross in a church in the Azores, but no nails.
They showed us likewise the bloody robe which that archbishop of Paris wore who exposed his sacred person and braved the wrath of the insurgents of 1848, to mount the barricades and hold aloft the olive branch of peace in the hope of stopping the
His noble effort cost him his life.
He was shot dead.
They showed us a cast of his face taken after death, the bullet that killed him, and the two vertebrae in which it lodged.
These people have a somewhat singular taste in the matter of relics.
Ferguson told us that the silver cross which the good archbishop wore at his girdle was seized and thrown into the Seine, where it lay embedded in the mud for fifteen years, and then an angel appeared to a priest and told him where to dive for it; he did
Next we went to visit the Morgue, that horrible receptacle for the dead who die mysteriously and leave the manner of their taking off a dismal secret.
We stood before a grating and looked through into a room which was hung all about with the clothing of dead men; coarse blouses, water-soaked; the delicate garments of women and children; patrician vestments, hacked and stabbed and stained with red; a hat
On a slanting stone lay a drowned man, naked, swollen, purple; clasping the fragment of a broken bush with a grip which death had so petrified that human strength could not unloose it --mute witness of the last despairing effort to save the life that was
A stream of water trickled ceaselessly over the hideous face.
We knew that the body and the clothing were there for identification by friends, but still we wondered if anybody could love that repulsive object or grieve for its loss.
We grew meditative and wondered if, some forty years ago, when the mother of that ghastly thing was dandling it upon her knee, and kissing it and petting it and displaying it with satisfied pride to the passers-by, a prophetic vision of this dread ending
I half feared that the mother, or the wife or a brother of the dead man might come while we stood there, but nothing of the kind occurred.
Men and women came, and some looked eagerly in and pressed their faces against the bars; others glanced carelessly at the body and turned away with a disappointed look --people, I thought, who live upon strong excitements and who attend the exhibitions of
When one of these looked in and passed on, I could not help thinking-- "Now this don't afford you any satisfaction--a party with his head shot off is what you need".
One night we went to the celebrated Jardin Mabille, but only staid a little while.
We wanted to see some of this kind of Paris life, however, and therefore the next night we went to a similar place of entertainment in a great garden in the suburb of Asnieres.
We went to the railroad depot, toward evening, and Ferguson got tickets for a second-class carriage.
Such a perfect jam of people I have not often seen--but there was no noise, no disorder, no rowdyism.
Some of the women and young girls that entered the train we knew to be of the demi-monde, but others we were not at all sure about.
The girls and women in our carriage behaved themselves modestly and becomingly all the way out, except that they smoked.
When we arrived at the garden in Asnieres, we paid a franc or two admission and entered a place which had flower beds in it, and grass plots, and long, curving rows of ornamental shrubbery, with here and there a secluded bower convenient for eating ice
We moved along the sinuous gravel walks, with the great concourse of girls and young men, and suddenly a domed and filigreed white temple, starred over and over and over again with brilliant gas jets, burst upon us like a fallen sun.
Nearby was a large, handsome house with its ample front illuminated in the same way, and above its roof floated the Star-Spangled Banner of America.
"Well"!
I said.
"How is this"?
It nearly took my breath away.
Ferguson said an American--a New Yorker--kept the place, and was carrying on quite a stirring opposition to the Jardin Mabille.
Crowds composed of both sexes and nearly all ages were frisking about the garden or sitting in the open air in front of the flagstaff and the temple, drinking wine and coffee or smoking.
The dancing had not begun yet.
Ferguson said there was to be an exhibition.
The famous Blondin was going to perform on a tightrope in another part of the garden.
We went thither.
Here the light was dim, and the masses of people were pretty closely packed together.
And now I made a mistake which any donkey might make, but a sensible man never.
I committed an error which I find myself repeating every day of my life.
Standing right before a young lady, I said: "Dan, just look at this girl, how beautiful she is"!
"I thank you more for the evident sincerity of the compliment, sir, than for the extraordinary publicity you have given to it"!
This in good, pure English.
We took a walk, but my spirits were very, very sadly dampened.
I did not feel right comfortable for some time afterward.
Why will people be so stupid as to suppose themselves the only foreigners among a crowd of ten thousand persons?
But Blondin came out shortly.
He appeared on a stretched cable, far away above the sea of tossing hats and handkerchiefs, and in the glare of the hundreds of rockets that whizzed heavenward by him he looked like a wee insect.
He balanced his pole and walked the length of his rope--two or three hundred feet; he came back and got a man and carried him across; he returned to the center and danced a jig; next he performed some gymnastic and balancing feats too perilous to afford a
The dance had begun, and we adjourned to the temple.
Within it was a drinking saloon, and all around it was a broad circular platform for the dancers.
I backed up against the wall of the temple, and waited.
Twenty sets formed, the music struck up, and then--I placed my hands before my face for very shame.
But I looked through my fingers.
They were dancing the renowned "Can-can".
A handsome girl in the set before me tripped forward lightly to meet the opposite gentleman, tripped back again, grasped her dresses vigorously on both sides with her hands, raised them pretty high, danced an extraordinary jig that had more activity and
It was a mercy he was only six.
That is the can-can.
The idea of it is to dance as wildly, as noisily, as furiously as you can; expose yourself as much as possible if you are a woman; and kick as high as you can, no matter which sex you belong to.
There is no word of exaggeration in this.
Any of the staid, respectable, aged people who were there that night can testify to the truth of that statement.
There were a good many such people present.
I suppose French morality is not of that straight-laced description which is shocked at trifles.
I moved aside and took a general view of the can-can.
Shouts, laughter, furious music, a bewildering chaos of darting and intermingling forms, stormy jerking and snatching of gay dresses, bobbing beads, flying arms, lightning flashes of white-stockinged calves and dainty slippers in the air, and then a grand
Heavens!
Nothing like it has been seen on earth since trembling Tam O'Shanter saw the devil and the witches at their orgies that stormy night in "Alloway's auld haunted kirk".
We visited the Louvre, at a time when we had no silk purchases in view, and looked at its miles of paintings by the old masters.
Some of them were beautiful, but at the same time they carried such evidences about them of the cringing spirit of those great men that we found small pleasure in examining them.
Their nauseous adulation of princely patrons was more prominent to me and chained my attention more surely than the charms of color and expression which are claimed to be in the pictures.
Gratitude for kindnesses is well, but it seems to me that some of those artists carried it so far that it ceased to be gratitude and became worship.
If there is a plausible excuse for the worship of men, then by all means let us forgive Rubens and his brethren.
But I will drop the subject, lest I say something about the old masters that might as well be left unsaid.
Of course we drove in the Bois de Boulogne, that limitless park, with its forests, its lakes, its cascades, and its broad avenues.
There were thousands upon thousands of vehicles abroad, and the scene was full of life and gaiety.
There were very common hacks, with father and mother and all the children in them; conspicuous little open carriages with celebrated ladies of questionable reputation in them; there were Dukes and Duchesses abroad, with gorgeous footmen perched behind, and
But presently the Emperor came along and he outshone them all.
He was preceded by a bodyguard of gentlemen on horseback in showy uniforms, his carriage-horses (there appeared to be somewhere in the remote neighborhood of a thousand of them,) were bestridden by gallant-looking fellows, also in stylish uniforms, and
Everybody got out of the way; everybody bowed to the Emperor and his friend the Sultan; and they went by on a swinging trot and disappeared.
I will not describe the Bois de Boulogne.
I can not do it.
It is simply a beautiful, cultivated, endless, wonderful wilderness.
It is an enchanting place.
It is in Paris now, one may say, but a crumbling old cross in one portion of it reminds one that it was not always so.
The cross marks the spot where a celebrated troubadour was waylaid and murdered in the fourteenth century.
It was in this park that that fellow with an unpronounceable name made the attempt upon the Russian Czar's life last spring with a pistol.
The bullet struck a tree.
Ferguson showed us the place.
Now in America that interesting tree would be chopped down or forgotten within the next five years, but it will be treasured here.
The guides will point it out to visitors for the next eight hundred years, and when it decays and falls down they will put up another there and go on with the same old story just the same.
CHAPTER XV.
One of our pleasantest visits was to Pere la Chaise, the national burying-ground of France, the honored resting-place of some of her greatest and best children, the last home of scores of illustrious men and women who were born to no titles, but achieved
It is a solemn city of winding streets and of miniature marble temples and mansions of the dead gleaming white from out a wilderness of foliage and fresh flowers.
Not every city is so well peopled as this, or has so ample an area within its walls.
Few palaces exist in any city that are so exquisite in design, so rich in art, so costly in material, so graceful, so beautiful.
We had stood in the ancient church of St. Denis, where the marble effigies of thirty generations of kings and queens lay stretched at length upon the tombs, and the sensations invoked were startling and novel; the curious armor, the obsolete costumes, the
It seemed curious enough to be standing face to face, as it were, with old Dagobert I., and Clovis and Charlemagne, those vague, colossal heroes, those shadows, those myths of a thousand years ago!
I touched their dust-covered faces with my finger, but Dagobert was deader than the sixteen centuries that have passed over him, Clovis slept well after his labor for Christ, and old Charlemagne went on dreaming of his paladins, of bloody Roncesvalles, and
The great names of Pere la Chaise impress one, too, but differently.
There the suggestion brought constantly to his mind is, that this place is sacred to a nobler royalty--the royalty of heart and brain.
Every faculty of mind, every noble trait of human nature, every high occupation which men engage in, seems represented by a famous name.
The effect is a curious medley.
Davoust and Massena, who wrought in many a battle tragedy, are here, and so also is Rachel, of equal renown in mimic tragedy on the stage.
The Abbe Sicard sleeps here--the first great teacher of the deaf and dumb--a man whose heart went out to every unfortunate, and whose life was given to kindly offices in their service; and not far off, in repose and peace at last, lies Marshal Ney, whose
The man who originated public gas-lighting, and that other benefactor who introduced the cultivation of the potato and thus blessed millions of his starving countrymen, lie with the Prince of Masserano, and with exiled queens and princes of Further India.
Gay-Lussac the chemist, Laplace the astronomer, Larrey the surgeon, de Suze the advocate, are here, and with them are Talma, Bellini, Rubini; de Balzac, Beaumarchais, Beranger; Moliere and Lafontaine, and scores of other men whose names and whose worthy
But among the thousands and thousands of tombs in Pere la Chaise, there is one that no man, no woman, no youth of either sex, ever passes by without stopping to examine.
Every visitor has a sort of indistinct idea of the history of its dead and comprehends that homage is due there, but not one in twenty thousand clearly remembers the story of that tomb and its romantic occupants.
This is the grave of Abelard and Heloise--a grave which has been more revered, more widely known, more written and sung about and wept over, for seven hundred years, than any other in Christendom save only that of the Saviour.
All visitors linger pensively about it; all young people capture and carry away keepsakes and mementoes of it; all Parisian youths and maidens who are disappointed in love come there to bail out when they are full of tears; yea, many stricken lovers make
Go when you will, you find somebody snuffling over that tomb.
Go when you will, you find it furnished with those bouquets and immortelles.
Go when you will, you find a gravel-train from Marseilles arriving to supply the deficiencies caused by memento-cabbaging vandals whose affections have miscarried.
Yet who really knows the story of Abelard and Heloise?
Precious few people.
The names are perfectly familiar to every body, and that is about all.
With infinite pains I have acquired a knowledge of that history, and I propose to narrate it here, partly for the honest information of the public and partly to show that public that they have been wasting a good deal of marketable sentiment very
STORY OF ABELARD AND HELOISE Heloise was born seven hundred and sixty-six years ago.
She may have had parents.
There is no telling.
She lived with her uncle Fulbert, a canon of the cathedral of Paris.
I do not know what a canon of a cathedral is, but that is what he was.
He was nothing more than a sort of a mountain howitzer, likely, because they had no heavy artillery in those days.
Suffice it, then, that Heloise lived with her uncle the howitzer and was happy.
She spent the most of her childhood in the convent of Argenteuil --never heard of Argenteuil before, but suppose there was really such a place.
She then returned to her uncle, the old gun, or son of a gun, as the case may be, and he taught her to write and speak Latin, which was the language of literature and polite society at that period.
Just at this time, Pierre Abelard, who had already made himself widely famous as a rhetorician, came to found a school of rhetoric in Paris.
The originality of his principles, his eloquence, and his great physical strength and beauty created a profound sensation.
He saw Heloise, and was captivated by her blooming youth, her beauty, and her charming disposition.
He wrote to her; she answered.
He wrote again; she answered again.
He was now in love.
He longed to know her--to speak to her face to face.
His school was near Fulbert's house.
He asked Fulbert to allow him to call.
The good old swivel saw here a rare opportunity: his niece, whom he so much loved, would absorb knowledge from this man, and it would not cost him a cent.
Such was Fulbert--penurious.
Fulbert's first name is not mentioned by any author, which is unfortunate.
However, George W. Fulbert will answer for him as well as any other.
We will let him go at that.
He asked Abelard to teach her.
Abelard was glad enough of the opportunity.
He came often and staid long.
A letter of his shows in its very first sentence that he came under that friendly roof like a cold-hearted villain as he was, with the deliberate intention of debauching a confiding, innocent girl.
This is the letter: "I cannot cease to be astonished at the simplicity of Fulbert; I was as much surprised as if he had placed a lamb in the power of a hungry wolf.
Heloise and I, under pretext of study, gave ourselves up wholly to love, and the solitude that love seeks our studies procured for us.
Books were open before us, but we spoke oftener of love than philosophy, and kisses came more readily from our lips than words".
And so, exulting over an honorable confidence which to his degraded instinct was a ludicrous "simplicity," this unmanly Abelard seduced the niece of the man whose guest he was.
Paris found it out.
Fulbert was told of it--told often--but refused to believe it.
He could not comprehend how a man could be so depraved as to use the sacred protection and security of hospitality as a means for the commission of such a crime as that.
But when he heard the rowdies in the streets singing the love-songs of Abelard to Heloise, the case was too plain--love-songs come not properly within the teachings of rhetoric and philosophy.
He drove Abelard from his house.
Abelard returned secretly and carried Heloise away to Palais, in Brittany, his native country.
Here, shortly afterward, she bore a son, who, from his rare beauty, was surnamed Astrolabe--William G. The girl's flight enraged Fulbert, and he longed for vengeance, but feared to strike lest retaliation visit Heloise--for he still loved her tenderly.
At length Abelard offered to marry Heloise --but on a shameful condition: that the marriage should be kept secret from the world, to the end that (while her good name remained a wreck, as before,) his priestly reputation might be kept untarnished.
It was like that miscreant.
Fulbert saw his opportunity and consented.
He would see the parties married, and then violate the confidence of the man who had taught him that trick; he would divulge the secret and so remove somewhat of the obloquy that attached to his niece's fame.
But the niece suspected his scheme.
She refused the marriage at first; she said Fulbert would betray the secret to save her, and besides, she did not wish to drag down a lover who was so gifted, so honored by the world, and who had such a splendid career before him.
It was noble, self-sacrificing love, and characteristic of the pure-souled Heloise, but it was not good sense.
But she was overruled, and the private marriage took place.
Now for Fulbert!
The heart so wounded should be healed at last; the proud spirit so tortured should find rest again; the humbled head should be lifted up once more.
He proclaimed the marriage in the high places of the city and rejoiced that dishonor had departed from his house.
But lo!
Abelard denied the marriage!
Heloise denied it!
The people, knowing the former circumstances, might have believed Fulbert had only Abelard denied it, but when the person chiefly interested--the girl herself--denied it, they laughed, despairing Fulbert to scorn.
The poor canon of the cathedral of Paris was spiked again.
The last hope of repairing the wrong that had been done his house was gone.
What next?
Human nature suggested revenge.
He compassed it.
The historian says: "Ruffians, hired by Fulbert, fell upon Abelard by night, and inflicted upon him a terrible and nameless mutilation".
I am seeking the last resting place of those "ruffians".
When I find it I shall shed some tears on it, and stack up some bouquets and immortelles, and cart away from it some gravel whereby to remember that howsoever blotted by crime their lives may have been, these ruffians did one just deed, at any rate, albeit
Heloise entered a convent and gave good-bye to the world and its pleasures for all time.
For twelve years she never heard of Abelard --never even heard his name mentioned.
She had become prioress of Argenteuil and led a life of complete seclusion.
She happened one day to see a letter written by him, in which he narrated his own history.
She cried over it and wrote him.
He answered, addressing her as his "sister in Christ".
They continued to correspond, she in the unweighed language of unwavering affection, he in the chilly phraseology of the polished rhetorician.
She poured out her heart in passionate, disjointed sentences; he replied with finished essays, divided deliberately into heads and sub-heads, premises and argument.
She showered upon him the tenderest epithets that love could devise, he addressed her from the North Pole of his frozen heart as the "Spouse of Christ"!
The abandoned villain!
On account of her too easy government of her nuns, some disreputable irregularities were discovered among them, and the Abbot of St. Denis broke up her establishment.
Abelard was the official head of the monastery of St. Gildas de Ruys, at that time, and when he heard of her homeless condition a sentiment of pity was aroused in his breast (it is a wonder the unfamiliar emotion did not blow his head off,) and he placed
She had many privations and sufferings to undergo at first, but her worth and her gentle disposition won influential friends for her, and she built up a wealthy and flourishing nunnery.
She became a great favorite with the heads of the church, and also the people, though she seldom appeared in public.
She rapidly advanced in esteem, in good report, and in usefulness, and Abelard as rapidly lost ground.
The Pope so honored her that he made her the head of her order.
Abelard, a man of splendid talents, and ranking as the first debater of his time, became timid, irresolute, and distrustful of his powers.
He only needed a great misfortune to topple him from the high position he held in the world of intellectual excellence, and it came.
Urged by kings and princes to meet the subtle St. Bernard in debate and crush him, he stood up in the presence of a royal and illustrious assemblage, and when his antagonist had finished he looked about him and stammered a commencement; but his courage
He died a nobody, and was buried at Cluny, A.D., 1144.
They removed his body to the Paraclete afterward, and when Heloise died, twenty years later, they buried her with him, in accordance with her last wish.
He died at the ripe age of 64, and she at 63.
After the bodies had remained entombed three hundred years, they were removed once more.
They were removed again in 1800, and finally, seventeen years afterward, they were taken up and transferred to Pere la Chaise, where they will remain in peace and quiet until it comes time for them to get up and move again.
History is silent concerning the last acts of the mountain howitzer.
Let the world say what it will about him, I, at least, shall always respect the memory and sorrow for the abused trust and the broken heart and the troubled spirit of the old smooth-bore.
Rest and repose be his!
Such is the story of Abelard and Heloise.
Such is the history that Lamartine has shed such cataracts of tears over.
But that man never could come within the influence of a subject in the least pathetic without overflowing his banks.
He ought to be dammed--or leveed, I should more properly say.
Such is the history--not as it is usually told, but as it is when stripped of the nauseous sentimentality that would enshrine for our loving worship a dastardly seducer like Pierre Abelard.
I have not a word to say against the misused, faithful girl, and would not withhold from her grave a single one of those simple tributes which blighted youths and maidens offer to her memory, but I am sorry enough that I have not time and opportunity to
The tons of sentiment I have wasted on that unprincipled humbug in my ignorance!
I shall throttle down my emotions hereafter, about this sort of people, until I have read them up and know whether they are entitled to any tearful attentions or not.
I wish I had my immortelles back, now, and that bunch of radishes.
In Paris we often saw in shop windows the sign "English Spoken Here," just as one sees in the windows at home the sign "Ici on parle francaise".
We always invaded these places at once--and invariably received the information, framed in faultless French, that the clerk who did the English for the establishment had just gone to dinner and would be back in an hour--would Monsieur buy something?
We wondered why those parties happened to take their dinners at such erratic and extraordinary hours, for we never called at a time when an exemplary Christian would be in the least likely to be abroad on such an errand.
The truth was, it was a base fraud--a snare to trap the unwary--chaff to catch fledglings with.
They had no English-murdering clerk.
They trusted to the sign to inveigle foreigners into their lairs, and trusted to their own blandishments to keep them there till they bought something.
We ferreted out another French imposition--a frequent sign to this effect: "ALL MANNER OF AMERICAN DRINKS ARTISTICALLY PREPARED HERE".
We procured the services of a gentleman experienced in the nomenclature of the American bar, and moved upon the works of one of these impostors.
A bowing, aproned Frenchman skipped forward and said: "Que voulez les messieurs"?
I do not know what "Que voulez les messieurs"?
means, but such was his remark.
Our general said, "We will take a whiskey straight".
[A stare from the Frenchman.
] "Well, if you don't know what that is, give us a champagne cock-tail".
[A stare and a shrug.
] "Well, then, give us a sherry cobbler".
The Frenchman was checkmated.
This was all Greek to him.
"Give us a brandy smash"!
The Frenchman began to back away, suspicious of the ominous vigor of the last order--began to back away, shrugging his shoulders and spreading his hands apologetically.
The General followed him up and gained a complete victory.
The uneducated foreigner could not even furnish a Santa Cruz Punch, an Eye-Opener, a Stone-Fence, or an Earthquake.
It was plain that he was a wicked impostor.
An acquaintance of mine said the other day that he was doubtless the only American visitor to the Exposition who had had the high honor of being escorted by the Emperor's bodyguard.
I said with unobtrusive frankness that I was astonished that such a long-legged, lantern-jawed, unprepossessing-looking specter as he should be singled out for a distinction like that, and asked how it came about.
He said he had attended a great military review in the Champ de Mars some time ago, and while the multitude about him was growing thicker and thicker every moment he observed an open space inside the railing.
He left his carriage and went into it.
He was the only person there, and so he had plenty of room, and the situation being central, he could see all the preparations going on about the field.
By and by there was a sound of music, and soon the Emperor of the French and the Emperor of Austria, escorted by the famous Cent Gardes, entered the enclosure.
They seemed not to observe him, but directly, in response to a sign from the commander of the guard, a young lieutenant came toward him with a file of his men following, halted, raised his hand, and gave the military salute, and then said in a low voice
Then this New Jersey phantom rose up and bowed and begged pardon, then with the officer beside him, the file of men marching behind him, and with every mark of respect, he was escorted to his carriage by the imperial Cent Gardes!
The officer saluted again and fell back, the New Jersey sprite bowed in return and had presence of mind enough to pretend that he had simply called on a matter of private business with those emperors, and so waved them an adieu and drove from the field!
Imagine a poor Frenchman ignorantly intruding upon a public rostrum sacred to some six-penny dignitary in America.
The police would scare him to death first with a storm of their elegant blasphemy, and then pull him to pieces getting him away from there.
We are measurably superior to the French in some things, but they are immeasurably our betters in others.
Enough of Paris for the present.
We have done our whole duty by it.
We have seen the Tuileries, the Napoleon Column, the Madeleine, that wonder of wonders the tomb of Napoleon, all the great churches and museums, libraries, imperial palaces, and sculpture and picture galleries, the Pantheon, Jardin des Plantes, the opera,
I had almost forgotten.
They are another romantic fraud.
They were (if you let the books of travel tell it) always so beautiful--so neat and trim, so graceful--so naive and trusting--so gentle, so winning--so faithful to their shop duties, so irresistible to buyers in their prattling importunity--so devoted to
Stuff!
For three or four days I was constantly saying: "Quick, Ferguson!
Is that a grisette"?
And he always said, "No".
He comprehended at last that I wanted to see a grisette.
Then he showed me dozens of them.
They were like nearly all the Frenchwomen I ever saw --homely.
They had large hands, large feet, large mouths; they had pug noses as a general thing, and moustaches that not even good breeding could overlook; they combed their hair straight back without parting; they were ill-shaped, they were not winning, they were
Aroint thee, wench!
I sorrow for the vagabond student of the Latin Quarter now, even more than formerly I envied him.
Thus topples to earth another idol of my infancy.
We have seen every thing, and tomorrow we go to Versailles.
We shall see Paris only for a little while as we come back to take up our line of march for the ship, and so I may as well bid the beautiful city a regretful farewell.
We shall travel many thousands of miles after we leave here and visit many great cities, but we shall find none so enchanting as this.
Some of our party have gone to England, intending to take a roundabout course and rejoin the vessel at Leghorn or Naples several weeks hence.
We came near going to Geneva, but have concluded to return to Marseilles and go up through Italy from Genoa.
I will conclude this chapter with a remark that I am sincerely proud to be able to make--and glad, as well, that my comrades cordially endorse it, to wit: by far the handsomest women we have seen in France were born and reared in America.
I feel now like a man who has redeemed a failing reputation and shed luster upon a dimmed escutcheon, by a single just deed done at the eleventh hour.
Let the curtain fall, to slow music.
CHAPTER XVI.
VERSAILLES!
It is wonderfully beautiful!
You gaze and stare and try to understand that it is real, that it is on the earth, that it is not the Garden of Eden--but your brain grows giddy, stupefied by the world of beauty around you, and you half believe you are the dupe of an exquisite dream.
The scene thrills one like military music!
A noble palace, stretching its ornamented front, block upon block away, till it seemed that it would never end; a grand promenade before it, whereon the armies of an empire might parade; all about it rainbows of flowers, and colossal statues that were
And every where--on the palace steps, and the great promenade, around the fountains, among the trees, and far under the arches of the endless avenues--hundreds and hundreds of people in gay costumes walked or ran or danced, and gave to the fairy picture
It was worth a pilgrimage to see.
Everything is on so gigantic a scale.
Nothing is small--nothing is cheap.
The statues are all large; the palace is grand; the park covers a fair-sized county; the avenues are interminable.
All the distances and all the dimensions about Versailles are vast.
I used to think the pictures exaggerated these distances and these dimensions beyond all reason, and that they made Versailles more beautiful than it was possible for any place in the world to be.
I know now that the pictures never came up to the subject in any respect, and that no painter could represent Versailles on canvas as beautiful as it is in reality.
I used to abuse Louis XIV for spending two hundred millions of dollars in creating this marvelous park, when bread was so scarce with some of his subjects; but I have forgiven him now.
He took a tract of land sixty miles in circumference and set to work to make this park and build this palace and a road to it from Paris.
He kept 36,000 men employed daily on it, and the labor was so unhealthy that they used to die and be hauled off by cartloads every night.
The wife of a nobleman of the time speaks of this as an "inconvenience," but naively remarks that "it does not seem worthy of attention in the happy state of tranquillity we now enjoy".
I always thought ill of people at home who trimmed their shrubbery into pyramids and squares and spires and all manner of unnatural shapes, and when I saw the same thing being practiced in this great park I began to feel dissatisfied.
But I soon saw the idea of the thing and the wisdom of it.
They seek the general effect.
We distort a dozen sickly trees into unaccustomed shapes in a little yard no bigger than a dining room, and then surely they look absurd enough.
But here they take two hundred thousand tall forest trees and set them in a double row; allow no sign of leaf or branch to grow on the trunk lower down than six feet above the ground; from that point the boughs begin to project, and very gradually they
The arch is mathematically precise.
The effect is then very fine.
They make trees take fifty different shapes, and so these quaint effects are infinitely varied and picturesque.
The trees in no two avenues are shaped alike, and consequently the eye is not fatigued with anything in the nature of monotonous uniformity.
I will drop this subject now, leaving it to others to determine how these people manage to make endless ranks of lofty forest trees grow to just a certain thickness of trunk (say a foot and two-thirds); how they make them spring to precisely the same
We walked through the great hall of sculpture and the one hundred and fifty galleries of paintings in the palace of Versailles, and felt that to be in such a place was useless unless one had a whole year at his disposal.
These pictures are all battle scenes, and only one solitary little canvas among them all treats of anything but great French victories.
We wandered, also, through the Grand Trianon and the Petit Trianon, those monuments of royal prodigality, and with histories so mournful--filled, as it is, with souvenirs of Napoleon the First, and three dead kings and as many queens.
In one sumptuous bed they had all slept in succession, but no one occupies it now.
In a large dining room stood the table at which Louis XIV and his mistress Madame Maintenon, and after them Louis XV, and Pompadour, had sat at their meals naked and unattended--for the table stood upon a trapdoor, which descended with it to regions below
In a room of the Petit Trianon stood the furniture, just as poor Marie Antoinette left it when the mob came and dragged her and the King to Paris, never to return.
Near at hand, in the stables, were prodigious carriages that showed no color but gold--carriages used by former kings of France on state occasions, and never used now save when a kingly head is to be crowned or an imperial infant christened.
And with them were some curious sleighs, whose bodies were shaped like lions, swans, tigers, etc.
--vehicles that had once been handsome with pictured designs and fine workmanship, but were dusty and decaying now.
They had their history.
When Louis XIV had finished the Grand Trianon, he told Maintenon he had created a Paradise for her, and asked if she could think of anything now to wish for.
He said he wished the Trianon to be perfection--nothing less.
She said she could think of but one thing--it was summer, and it was balmy France--yet she would like well to sleigh ride in the leafy avenues of Versailles!
The next morning found miles and miles of grassy avenues spread thick with snowy salt and sugar, and a procession of those quaint sleighs waiting to receive the chief concubine of the gaiest and most unprincipled court that France has ever seen!
From sumptuous Versailles, with its palaces, its statues, its gardens, and its fountains, we journeyed back to Paris and sought its antipodes --the Faubourg St. Antoine.
Little, narrow streets; dirty children blockading them; greasy, slovenly women capturing and spanking them; filthy dens on first floors, with rag stores in them (the heaviest business in the Faubourg is the chiffonier's); other filthy dens where whole
Up these little crooked streets they will murder a man for seven dollars and dump the body in the Seine.
And up some other of these streets--most of them, I should say --live lorettes.
All through this Faubourg St. Antoine, misery, poverty, vice, and crime go hand in hand, and the evidences of it stare one in the face from every side.
Here the people live who begin the revolutions.
Whenever there is anything of that kind to be done, they are always ready.
They take as much genuine pleasure in building a barricade as they do in cutting a throat or shoving a friend into the Seine.
It is these savage-looking ruffians who storm the splendid halls of the Tuileries occasionally, and swarm into Versailles when a king is to be called to account.
But they will build no more barricades, they will break no more soldiers' heads with paving-stones.
Louis Napoleon has taken care of all that.
He is annihilating the crooked streets and building in their stead noble boulevards as straight as an arrow--avenues which a cannon ball could traverse from end to end without meeting an obstruction more irresistible than the flesh and bones of
Five of these great thoroughfares radiate from one ample centre--a centre which is exceedingly well adapted to the accommodation of heavy artillery.
The mobs used to riot there, but they must seek another rallying-place in future.
And this ingenious Napoleon paves the streets of his great cities with a smooth, compact composition of asphaltum and sand.
No more barricades of flagstones--no more assaulting his Majesty's troops with cobbles.
I cannot feel friendly toward my quondam fellow-American, Napoleon III.
, especially at this time,--[July, 1867.
]--when in fancy I see his credulous victim, Maximilian, lying stark and stiff in Mexico, and his maniac widow watching eagerly from her French asylum for the form that will never come--but I do admire his nerve, his calm self-reliance, his shrewd good
CHAPTER XVII.
We had a pleasant journey of it seaward again.
We found that for the three past nights our ship had been in a state of war.
The first night the sailors of a British ship, being happy with grog, came down on the pier and challenged our sailors to a free fight.
They accepted with alacrity, repaired to the pier, and gained--their share of a drawn battle.
Several bruised and bloody members of both parties were carried off by the police and imprisoned until the following morning.
The next night the British boys came again to renew the fight, but our men had had strict orders to remain on board and out of sight.
They did so, and the besieging party grew noisy and more and more abusive as the fact became apparent (to them) that our men were afraid to come out.
They went away finally with a closing burst of ridicule and offensive epithets.
The third night they came again and were more obstreperous than ever.
They swaggered up and down the almost deserted pier, and hurled curses, obscenity, and stinging sarcasms at our crew.
It was more than human nature could bear.
The executive officer ordered our men ashore--with instructions not to fight.
They charged the British and gained a brilliant victory.
I probably would not have mentioned this war had it ended differently.
But I travel to learn, and I still remember that they picture no French defeats in the battle-galleries of Versailles.
It was like home to us to step on board the comfortable ship again and smoke and lounge about her breezy decks.
And yet it was not altogether like home, either, because so many members of the family were away.
We missed some pleasant faces which we would rather have found at dinner, and at night there were gaps in the euchre-parties which could not be satisfactorily filled.
"Moult" was in England, Jack in Switzerland, Charley in Spain.
Blucher was gone, none could tell where.
But we were at sea again, and we had the stars and the ocean to look at, and plenty of room to meditate in.
In due time the shores of Italy were sighted, and as we stood gazing from the decks, early in the bright summer morning, the stately city of Genoa rose up out of the sea and flung back the sunlight from her hundred palaces.
Here we rest for the present--or rather, here we have been trying to rest, for some little time, but we run about too much to accomplish a great deal in that line.
I would like to remain here.
I had rather not go any further.
There may be prettier women in Europe, but I doubt it.
The population of Genoa is 120,000; two-thirds of these are women, I think, and at least two-thirds of the women are beautiful.
They are as dressy and as tasteful and as graceful as they could possibly be without being angels.
However, angels are not very dressy, I believe.
At least the angels in pictures are not --they wear nothing but wings.
But these Genoese women do look so charming.
Most of the young demoiselles are robed in a cloud of white from head to foot, though many trick themselves out more elaborately.
Nine-tenths of them wear nothing on their heads but a filmy sort of veil, which falls down their backs like a white mist.
They are very fair, and many of them have blue eyes, but black and dreamy dark brown ones are met with oftenest.
The ladies and gentlemen of Genoa have a pleasant fashion of promenading in a large park on the top of a hill in the center of the city, from six till nine in the evening, and then eating ices in a neighboring garden an hour or two longer.
We went to the park on Sunday evening.
Two thousand persons were present, chiefly young ladies and gentlemen.
The gentlemen were dressed in the very latest Paris fashions, and the robes of the ladies glinted among the trees like so many snowflakes.
The multitude moved round and round the park in a great procession.
The bands played, and so did the fountains; the moon and the gas lamps lit up the scene, and altogether it was a brilliant and an animated picture.
I scanned every female face that passed, and it seemed to me that all were handsome.
I never saw such a freshet of loveliness before.
I did not see how a man of only ordinary decision of character could marry here, because before he could get his mind made up he would fall in love with somebody else.
Never smoke any Italian tobacco.
Never do it on any account.
It makes me shudder to think what it must be made of.
You cannot throw an old cigar "stub" down anywhere, but some vagabond will pounce upon it on the instant.
I like to smoke a good deal, but it wounds my sensibilities to see one of these stub-hunters watching me out of the corners of his hungry eyes and calculating how long my cigar will be likely to last.
It reminded me too painfully of that San Francisco undertaker who used to go to sick-beds with his watch in his hand and time the corpse.
One of these stub-hunters followed us all over the park last night, and we never had a smoke that was worth anything.
We were always moved to appease him with the stub before the cigar was half gone, because he looked so viciously anxious.
He regarded us as his own legitimate prey, by right of discovery, I think, because he drove off several other professionals who wanted to take stock in us.
Now, they surely must chew up those old stubs, and dry and sell them for smoking-tobacco.
Therefore, give your custom to other than Italian brands of the article.
"The Superb" and the "City of Palaces" are names which Genoa has held for centuries.
She is full of palaces, certainly, and the palaces are sumptuous inside, but they are very rusty without and make no pretensions to architectural magnificence.
"Genoa the Superb" would be a felicitous title if it referred to the women.
We have visited several of the palaces--immense thick-walled piles, with great stone staircases, tesselated marble pavements on the floors, (sometimes they make a mosaic work, of intricate designs, wrought in pebbles or little fragments of marble laid in
But, of course, the folks were all out in the country for the summer, and might not have known enough to ask us to dinner if they had been at home, and so all the grand empty salons, with their resounding pavements, their grim pictures of dead ancestors,
We never went up to the eleventh story.
We always began to suspect ghosts.
There was always an undertaker-looking servant along, too, who handed us a program, pointed to the picture that began the list of the salon he was in, and then stood stiff and stark and unsmiling in his petrified livery till we were ready to move on to the
I wasted so much time praying that the roof would fall in on these dispiriting flunkies that I had but little left to bestow upon palace and pictures.
And besides, as in Paris, we had a guide.
Perdition catch all the guides.
This one said he was the most gifted linguist in Genoa, as far as English was concerned, and that only two persons in the city beside himself could talk the language at all.
He showed us the birthplace of Christopher Columbus, and after we had reflected in silent awe before it for fifteen minutes, he said it was not the birthplace of Columbus, but of Columbus' grandmother!
When we demanded an explanation of his conduct he only shrugged his shoulders and answered in barbarous Italian.
I shall speak further of this guide in a future chapter.
All the information we got out of him we shall be able to carry along with us, I think.
I have not been to church so often in a long time as I have in the last few weeks.
The people in these old lands seem to make churches their specialty.
Especially does this seem to be the case with the citizens of Genoa.
I think there is a church every three or four hundred yards all over town.
The streets are sprinkled from end to end with shovel-hatted, long-robed, well-fed priests, and the church bells by dozens are pealing all the day long, nearly.
Every now and then one comes across a friar of orders gray, with shaven head, long, coarse robe, rope girdle and beads, and with feet cased in sandals or entirely bare.
These worthies suffer in the flesh and do penance all their lives, I suppose, but they look like consummate famine-breeders.
They are all fat and serene.
The old Cathedral of San Lorenzo is about as notable a building as we have found in Genoa.
It is vast, and has colonnades of noble pillars, and a great organ, and the customary pomp of gilded moldings, pictures, frescoed ceilings, and so forth.
I cannot describe it, of course--it would require a good many pages to do that.
But it is a curious place.
They said that half of it--from the front door halfway down to the altar --was a Jewish synagogue before the Saviour was born, and that no alteration had been made in it since that time.
We doubted the statement, but did it reluctantly.
We would much rather have believed it.
The place looked in too perfect repair to be so ancient.
The main point of interest about the cathedral is the little Chapel of St. John the Baptist.
They only allow women to enter it on one day in the year, on account of the animosity they still cherish against the sex because of the murder of the Saint to gratify a caprice of Herodias.
In this Chapel is a marble chest, in which, they told us, were the ashes of St. John; and around it was wound a chain, which, they said, had confined him when he was in prison.
We did not desire to disbelieve these statements, and yet we could not feel certain that they were correct --partly because we could have broken that chain, and so could St. John, and partly because we had seen St. John's ashes before, in another church.
We could not bring ourselves to think St. John had two sets of ashes.
They also showed us a portrait of the Madonna which was painted by St. Luke, and it did not look half as old and smoky as some of the pictures by Rubens.
We could not help admiring the Apostle's modesty in never once mentioning in his writings that he could paint.
But isn't this relic matter a little overdone?
We find a piece of the true cross in every old church we go into, and some of the nails that held it together.
I would not like to be positive, but I think we have seen as much as a keg of these nails.
Then there is the crown of thorns; they have part of one in Sainte Chapelle, in Paris, and part of one also in Notre Dame.
And as for bones of St. Denis, I feel certain we have seen enough of them to duplicate him if necessary.
I only meant to write about the churches, but I keep wandering from the subject.
I could say that the Church of the Annunciation is a wilderness of beautiful columns, of statues, gilded moldings, and pictures almost countless, but that would give no one an entirely perfect idea of the thing, and so where is the use?
One family built the whole edifice, and have got money left.
There is where the mystery lies.
We had an idea at first that only a mint could have survived the expense.
These people here live in the heaviest, highest, broadest, darkest, solidest houses one can imagine.
Each one might "laugh a siege to scorn".
A hundred feet front and a hundred high is about the style, and you go up three flights of stairs before you begin to come upon signs of occupancy.
Everything is stone, and stone of the heaviest--floors, stairways, mantels, benches--everything.
The walls are four to five feet thick.
The streets generally are four or five to eight feet wide and as crooked as a corkscrew.
You go along one of these gloomy cracks, and look up and behold the sky like a mere ribbon of light, far above your head, where the tops of the tall houses on either side of the street bend almost together.
You feel as if you were at the bottom of some tremendous abyss, with all the world far above you.
You wind in and out and here and there, in the most mysterious way, and have no more idea of the points of the compass than if you were a blind man.
You can never persuade yourself that these are actually streets, and the frowning, dingy, monstrous houses dwellings, till you see one of these beautiful, prettily dressed women emerge from them--see her emerge from a dark, dreary-looking den that looks
And then you wonder that such a charming moth could come from such a forbidding shell as that.
The streets are wisely made narrow and the houses heavy and thick and stony, in order that the people may be cool in this roasting climate.
And they are cool, and stay so.
And while I think of it--the men wear hats and have very dark complexions, but the women wear no headgear but a flimsy veil like a gossamer's web, and yet are exceedingly fair as a general thing.
Singular, isn't it?
The huge palaces of Genoa are each supposed to be occupied by one family, but they could accommodate a hundred, I should think.
They are relics of the grandeur of Genoa's palmy days--the days when she was a great commercial and maritime power several centuries ago.
These houses, solid marble palaces though they be, are in many cases of a dull pinkish color, outside, and from pavement to eaves are pictured with Genoese battle scenes, with monstrous Jupiters and Cupids, and with familiar illustrations from Grecian
Where the paint has yielded to age and exposure and is peeling off in flakes and patches, the effect is not happy.
A noseless Cupid or a Jupiter with an eye out or a Venus with a fly-blister on her breast, are not attractive features in a picture.
Some of these painted walls reminded me somewhat of the tall van, plastered with fanciful bills and posters, that follows the bandwagon of a circus about a country village.
I have not read or heard that the outsides of the houses of any other European city are frescoed in this way.
I can not conceive of such a thing as Genoa in ruins.
Such massive arches, such ponderous substructions as support these towering broad-winged edifices, we have seldom seen before; and surely the great blocks of stone of which these edifices are built can never decay; walls that are as thick as an ordinary
The republics of Genoa and Pisa were very powerful in the Middle Ages.
Their ships filled the Mediterranean, and they carried on an extensive commerce with Constantinople and Syria.
Their warehouses were the great distributing depots from whence the costly merchandise of the East was sent abroad over Europe.
They were warlike little nations and defied, in those days, governments that overshadow them now as mountains overshadow molehills.
The Saracens captured and pillaged Genoa nine hundred years ago, but during the following century Genoa and Pisa entered into an offensive and defensive alliance and besieged the Saracen colonies in Sardinia and the Balearic Isles with an obstinacy that
They were victorious at last and divided their conquests equably among their great patrician families.
Descendants of some of those proud families still inhabit the palaces of Genoa, and trace in their own features a resemblance to the grim knights whose portraits hang in their stately halls, and to pictured beauties with pouting lips and merry eyes whose
The hotel we live in belonged to one of those great orders of knights of the Cross in the times of the Crusades, and its mailed sentinels once kept watch and ward in its massive turrets and woke the echoes of these halls and corridors with their iron
But Genoa's greatness has degenerated into an unostentatious commerce in velvets and silver filagree-work.
They say that each European town has its specialty.
These filagree things are Genoa's specialty.
Her smiths take silver ingots and work them up into all manner of graceful and beautiful forms.
They make bunches of flowers, from flakes and wires of silver, that counterfeit the delicate creations the frost weaves upon a windowpane; and we were shown a miniature silver temple whose fluted columns, whose Corinthian capitals and rich entablatures,
We are ready to move again, though we are not really tired yet of the narrow passages of this old marble cave.
Cave is a good word--when speaking of Genoa under the stars.
When we have been prowling at midnight through the gloomy crevices they call streets, where no footfalls but ours were echoing, where only ourselves were abroad, and lights appeared only at long intervals and at a distance, and mysteriously disappeared
We are not tired of the endless processions of cheerful, chattering gossipers that throng these courts and streets all day long, either; nor of the coarse-robed monks; nor of the "Asti" wines, which that old doctor (whom we call the Oracle,) with customary
But we must go, nevertheless.
Our last sight was the cemetery (a burial place intended to accommodate 60,000 bodies,) and we shall continue to remember it after we shall have forgotten the palaces.
It is a vast marble collonaded corridor extending around a great unoccupied square of ground; its broad floor is marble, and on every slab is an inscription--for every slab covers a corpse.
On either side, as one walks down the middle of the passage, are monuments, tombs, and sculptured figures that are exquisitely wrought and are full of grace and beauty.
They are new and snowy; every outline is perfect, every feature guiltless of mutilation, flaw, or blemish; and therefore, to us these far-reaching ranks of bewitching forms are a hundred fold more lovely than the damaged and dingy statuary they have saved
Well provided with cigars and other necessaries of life, we are now ready to take the cars for Milan.
CHAPTER XVIII.
All day long we sped through a mountainous country whose peaks were bright with sunshine, whose hillsides were dotted with pretty villas sitting in the midst of gardens and shrubbery, and whose deep ravines were cool and shady and looked ever so inviting
We had plenty of chilly tunnels wherein to check our perspiration, though.
We timed one of them.
We were twenty minutes passing through it, going at the rate of thirty to thirty-five miles an hour.
Beyond Alessandria we passed the battle-field of Marengo.
Toward dusk we drew near Milan and caught glimpses of the city and the blue mountain peaks beyond.
But we were not caring for these things --they did not interest us in the least.
We were in a fever of impatience; we were dying to see the renowned cathedral!
We watched--in this direction and that--all around--everywhere.
We needed no one to point it out--we did not wish any one to point it out--we would recognize it even in the desert of the great Sahara.
At last, a forest of graceful needles, shimmering in the amber sunlight, rose slowly above the pygmy housetops, as one sometimes sees, in the far horizon, a gilded and pinnacled mass of cloud lift itself above the waste of waves, at sea,--the Cathedral!
We knew it in a moment.
Half of that night, and all of the next day, this architectural autocrat was our sole object of interest.
What a wonder it is!
So grand, so solemn, so vast!
And yet so delicate, so airy, so graceful!
A very world of solid weight, and yet it seems in the soft moonlight only a fairy delusion of frost-work that might vanish with a breath!
How sharply its pinnacled angles and its wilderness of spires were cut against the sky, and how richly their shadows fell upon its snowy roof!
It was a vision!
--a miracle!
--an anthem sung in stone, a poem wrought in marble!
Howsoever you look at the great cathedral, it is noble, it is beautiful!
Wherever you stand in Milan or within seven miles of Milan, it is visible and when it is visible, no other object can chain your whole attention.
Leave your eyes unfettered by your will but a single instant and they will surely turn to seek it.
It is the first thing you look for when you rise in the morning, and the last your lingering gaze rests upon at night.
Surely it must be the princeliest creation that ever brain of man conceived.
At nine o'clock in the morning we went and stood before this marble colossus.
The central one of its five great doors is bordered with a bas-relief of birds and fruits and beasts and insects, which have been so ingeniously carved out of the marble that they seem like living creatures--and the figures are so numerous and the design
On the great steeple--surmounting the myriad of spires--inside of the spires--over the doors, the windows--in nooks and corners--every where that a niche or a perch can be found about the enormous building, from summit to base, there is a marble statue,
Raphael, Angelo, Canova--giants like these gave birth to the designs, and their own pupils carved them.
Every face is eloquent with expression, and every attitude is full of grace.
Away above, on the lofty roof, rank on rank of carved and fretted spires spring high in the air, and through their rich tracery one sees the sky beyond.
In their midst the central steeple towers proudly up like the mainmast of some great Indiaman among a fleet of coasters.
We wished to go aloft.
The sacristan showed us a marble stairway (of course it was marble, and of the purest and whitest--there is no other stone, no brick, no wood, among its building materials) and told us to go up one hundred and eighty-two steps and stop till he came.
It was not necessary to say stop--we should have done that any how.
We were tired by the time we got there.
This was the roof.
Here, springing from its broad marble flagstones, were the long files of spires, looking very tall close at hand, but diminishing in the distance like the pipes of an organ.
We could see now that the statue on the top of each was the size of a large man, though they all looked like dolls from the street.
We could see, also, that from the inside of each and every one of these hollow spires, from sixteen to thirty-one beautiful marble statues looked out upon the world below.
From the eaves to the comb of the roof stretched in endless succession great curved marble beams, like the fore-and-aft braces of a steamboat, and along each beam from end to end stood up a row of richly carved flowers and fruits--each separate and
At a little distance these rows seem to close together like the ties of a railroad track, and then the mingling together of the buds and blossoms of this marble garden forms a picture that is very charming to the eye.
We descended and entered.
Within the church, long rows of fluted columns, like huge monuments, divided the building into broad aisles, and on the figured pavement fell many a soft blush from the painted windows above.
I knew the church was very large, but I could not fully appreciate its great size until I noticed that the men standing far down by the altar looked like boys, and seemed to glide, rather than walk.
We loitered about gazing aloft at the monster windows all aglow with brilliantly colored scenes in the lives of the Saviour and his followers.
Some of these pictures are mosaics, and so artistically are their thousand particles of tinted glass or stone put together that the work has all the smoothness and finish of a painting.
We counted sixty panes of glass in one window, and each pane was adorned with one of these master achievements of genius and patience.
The guide showed us a coffee-colored piece of sculpture which he said was considered to have come from the hand of Phidias, since it was not possible that any other artist, of any epoch, could have copied nature with such faultless accuracy.
The figure was that of a man without a skin; with every vein, artery, muscle, every fiber and tendon and tissue of the human frame represented in minute detail.
It looked natural, because somehow it looked as if it were in pain.
A skinned man would be likely to look that way unless his attention were occupied with some other matter.
It was a hideous thing, and yet there was a fascination about it some where.
I am very sorry I saw it, because I shall always see it now.
I shall dream of it sometimes.
I shall dream that it is resting its corded arms on the bed's head and looking down on me with its dead eyes; I shall dream that it is stretched between the sheets with me and touching me with its exposed muscles and its stringy cold legs.
It is hard to forget repulsive things.
I remember yet how I ran off from school once, when I was a boy, and then, pretty late at night, concluded to climb into the window of my father's office and sleep on a lounge, because I had a delicacy about going home and getting thrashed.
As I lay on the lounge and my eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, I fancied I could see a long, dusky, shapeless thing stretched upon the floor.
A cold shiver went through me.
I turned my face to the wall.
That did not answer.
I was afraid that that thing would creep over and seize me in the dark.
I turned back and stared at it for minutes and minutes--they seemed hours.
It appeared to me that the lagging moonlight never, never would get to it.
I turned to the wall and counted twenty, to pass the feverish time away.
I looked--the pale square was nearer.
I turned again and counted fifty--it was almost touching it.
With desperate will I turned again and counted one hundred, and faced about, all in a tremble.
A white human hand lay in the moonlight!
Such an awful sinking at the heart--such a sudden gasp for breath!
I felt--I cannot tell what I felt.
When I recovered strength enough, I faced the wall again.
But no boy could have remained so with that mysterious hand behind him.
I counted again and looked--the most of a naked arm was exposed.
I put my hands over my eyes and counted till I could stand it no longer, and then --the pallid face of a man was there, with the corners of the mouth drawn down, and the eyes fixed and glassy in death!
I raised to a sitting posture and glowered on that corpse till the light crept down the bare breastline by line--inch by inch--past the nipple--and then it disclosed a ghastly stab!
I went away from there.
I do not say that I went away in any sort of a hurry, but I simply went--that is sufficient.
I went out at the window, and I carried the sash along with me.
I did not need the sash, but it was handier to take it than it was to leave it, and so I took it.
--I was not scared, but I was considerably agitated.
When I reached home, they whipped me, but I enjoyed it.
It seemed perfectly delightful.
That man had been stabbed near the office that afternoon, and they carried him in there to doctor him, but he only lived an hour.
I have slept in the same room with him often since then--in my dreams.
Now we will descend into the crypt, under the grand altar of Milan Cathedral, and receive an impressive sermon from lips that have been silent and hands that have been gestureless for three hundred years.
The priest stopped in a small dungeon and held up his candle.
This was the last resting-place of a good man, a warm-hearted, unselfish man; a man whose whole life was given to succoring the poor, encouraging the faint-hearted, visiting the sick; in relieving distress, whenever and wherever he found it.
His heart, his hand, and his purse were always open.
With his story in one's mind he can almost see his benignant countenance moving calmly among the haggard faces of Milan in the days when the plague swept the city, brave where all others were cowards, full of compassion where pity had been crushed out of
This was good St. Charles Borromeo, Bishop of Milan.
The people idolized him; princes lavished uncounted treasures upon him.
We stood in his tomb.
Near by was the sarcophagus, lighted by the dripping candles.
The walls were faced with bas-reliefs representing scenes in his life done in massive silver.
The priest put on a short white lace garment over his black robe, crossed himself, bowed reverently, and began to turn a windlass slowly.
The sarcophagus separated in two parts, lengthwise, and the lower part sank down and disclosed a coffin of rock crystal as clear as the atmosphere.
Within lay the body, robed in costly habiliments covered with gold embroidery and starred with scintillating gems.
The decaying head was black with age, the dry skin was drawn tight to the bones, the eyes were gone, there was a hole in the temple and another in the cheek, and the skinny lips were parted as in a ghastly smile!
Over this dreadful face, its dust and decay and its mocking grin, hung a crown sown thick with flashing brilliants; and upon the breast lay crosses and croziers of solid gold that were splendid with emeralds and diamonds.
How poor, and cheap, and trivial these gew-gaws seemed in presence of the solemnity, the grandeur, the awful majesty of Death!
Think of Milton, Shakespeare, Washington, standing before a reverent world tricked out in the glass beads, the brass ear-rings and tin trumpery of the savages of the plains!
Dead Bartolomeo preached his pregnant sermon, and its burden was: You that worship the vanities of earth--you that long for worldly honor, worldly wealth, worldly fame--behold their worth!
To us it seemed that so good a man, so kind a heart, so simple a nature, deserved rest and peace in a grave sacred from the intrusion of prying eyes, and believed that he himself would have preferred to have it so, but peradventure our wisdom was at fault
As we came out upon the floor of the church again, another priest volunteered to show us the treasures of the church.
What, more?
The furniture of the narrow chamber of death we had just visited weighed six millions of francs in ounces and carats alone, without a penny thrown into the account for the costly workmanship bestowed upon them!
But we followed into a large room filled with tall wooden presses like wardrobes.
He threw them open, and behold, the cargoes of "crude bullion" of the assay offices of Nevada faded out of my memory.
There were Virgins and bishops there, above their natural size, made of solid silver, each worth, by weight, from eight hundred thousand to two millions of francs, and bearing gemmed books in their hands worth eighty thousand; there were bas-reliefs that
It was an Aladdin's palace.
The treasures here, by simple weight, without counting workmanship, were valued at fifty millions of francs!
If I could get the custody of them for a while, I fear me the market price of silver bishops would advance shortly, on account of their exceeding scarcity in the Cathedral of Milan.
The priests showed us two of St. Paul's fingers, and one of St. Peter's; a bone of Judas Iscariot, (it was black,) and also bones of all the other disciples; a handkerchief in which the Saviour had left the impression of his face.
Among the most precious of the relics were a stone from the Holy Sepulchre, part of the crown of thorns, (they have a whole one at Notre Dame,) a fragment of the purple robe worn by the Saviour, a nail from the Cross, and a picture of the Virgin and Child
This is the second of St. Luke's Virgins we have seen.
Once a year all these holy relics are carried in procession through the streets of Milan.
I like to revel in the dryest details of the great cathedral.
The building is five hundred feet long by one hundred and eighty wide, and the principal steeple is in the neighborhood of four hundred feet high.
It has 7,148 marble statues, and will have upwards of three thousand more when it is finished.
In addition it has one thousand five hundred bas-reliefs.
It has one hundred and thirty-six spires--twenty-one more are to be added.
Each spire is surmounted by a statue six and a half feet high.
Every thing about the church is marble, and all from the same quarry; it was bequeathed to the Archbishopric for this purpose centuries ago.
So nothing but the mere workmanship costs; still that is expensive--the bill foots up six hundred and eighty-four millions of francs thus far (considerably over a hundred millions of dollars,) and it is estimated that it will take a hundred and twenty
It looks complete, but is far from being so.
We saw a new statue put in its niche yesterday, alongside of one which had been standing these four hundred years, they said.
There are four staircases leading up to the main steeple, each of which cost a hundred thousand dollars, with the four hundred and eight statues which adorn them.
Marco Compioni was the architect who designed the wonderful structure more than five hundred years ago, and it took him forty-six years to work out the plan and get it ready to hand over to the builders.
He is dead now.
The building was begun a little less than five hundred years ago, and the third generation hence will not see it completed.
The building looks best by moonlight, because the older portions of it, being stained with age, contrast unpleasantly with the newer and whiter portions.
It seems somewhat too broad for its height, but may be familiarity with it might dissipate this impression.
They say that the Cathedral of Milan is second only to St. Peter's at Rome.
I cannot understand how it can be second to anything made by human hands.
We bid it good-bye, now--possibly for all time.
How surely, in some future day, when the memory of it shall have lost its vividness, shall we half believe we have seen it in a wonderful dream, but never with waking eyes!
CHAPTER XIX.
"Do you wis zo haut can be"?
That was what the guide asked when we were looking up at the bronze horses on the Arch of Peace.
It meant, do you wish to go up there?
I give it as a specimen of guide-English.
These are the people that make life a burthen to the tourist.
Their tongues are never still.
They talk forever and forever, and that is the kind of billingsgate they use.
Inspiration itself could hardly comprehend them.
If they would only show you a masterpiece of art, or a venerable tomb, or a prison-house, or a battle-field, hallowed by touching memories or historical reminiscences, or grand traditions, and then step aside and hold still for ten minutes and let you
But they interrupt every dream, every pleasant train of thought, with their tiresome cackling.
Sometimes when I have been standing before some cherished old idol of mine that I remembered years and years ago in pictures in the geography at school, I have thought I would give a whole world if the human parrot at my side would suddenly perish where he
No, we did not "wis zo haut can be".
We wished to go to La Scala, the largest theater in the world, I think they call it.
We did so.
It was a large place.
Seven separate and distinct masses of humanity--six great circles and a monster parquette.
We wished to go to the Ambrosian Library, and we did that also.
We saw a manuscript of Virgil, with annotations in the handwriting of Petrarch, the gentleman who loved another man's Laura, and lavished upon her all through life a love which was a clear waste of the raw material.
It was sound sentiment, but bad judgment.
It brought both parties fame, and created a fountain of commiseration for them in sentimental breasts that is running yet.
But who says a word in behalf of poor Mr. Laura?
(I do not know his other name.
) Who glorifies him?
Who bedews him with tears?
Who writes poetry about him?
Nobody.
How do you suppose he liked the state of things that has given the world so much pleasure?
How did he enjoy having another man following his wife every where and making her name a familiar word in every garlic-exterminating mouth in Italy with his sonnets to her pre-empted eyebrows?
They got fame and sympathy--he got neither.
This is a peculiarly felicitous instance of what is called poetical justice.
It is all very fine; but it does not chime with my notions of right.
It is too one-sided--too ungenerous.
Let the world go on fretting about Laura and Petrarch if it will; but as for me, my tears and my lamentations shall be lavished upon the unsung defendant.
We saw also an autograph letter of Lucrezia Borgia, a lady for whom I have always entertained the highest respect, on account of her rare histrionic capabilities, her opulence in solid gold goblets made of gilded wood, her high distinction as an operatic
We saw one single coarse yellow hair from Lucrezia's head, likewise.
It awoke emotions, but we still live.
In this same library we saw some drawings by Michael Angelo (these Italians call him Mickel Angelo,) and Leonardo da Vinci.
(They spell it Vinci and pronounce it Vinchy; foreigners always spell better than they pronounce.
) We reserve our opinion of these sketches.
In another building they showed us a fresco representing some lions and other beasts drawing chariots; and they seemed to project so far from the wall that we took them to be sculptures.
The artist had shrewdly heightened the delusion by painting dust on the creatures' backs, as if it had fallen there naturally and properly.
Smart fellow--if it be smart to deceive strangers.
Elsewhere we saw a huge Roman amphitheatre, with its stone seats still in good preservation.
Modernized, it is now the scene of more peaceful recreations than the exhibition of a party of wild beasts with Christians for dinner.
Part of the time, the Milanese use it for a race track, and at other seasons they flood it with water and have spirited yachting regattas there.
The guide told us these things, and he would hardly try so hazardous an experiment as the telling of a falsehood, when it is all he can do to speak the truth in English without getting the lock-jaw.
In another place we were shown a sort of summer arbor, with a fence before it.
We said that was nothing.
We looked again, and saw, through the arbor, an endless stretch of garden, and shrubbery, and grassy lawn.
We were perfectly willing to go in there and rest, but it could not be done.
It was only another delusion--a painting by some ingenious artist with little charity in his heart for tired folk.
The deception was perfect.
No one could have imagined the park was not real.
We even thought we smelled the flowers at first.
We got a carriage at twilight and drove in the shaded avenues with the other nobility, and after dinner we took wine and ices in a fine garden with the great public.
The music was excellent, the flowers and shrubbery were pleasant to the eye, the scene was vivacious, everybody was genteel and well-behaved, and the ladies were slightly moustached, and handsomely dressed, but very homely.
We adjourned to a cafe and played billiards an hour, and I made six or seven points by the doctor pocketing his ball, and he made as many by my pocketing my ball.
We came near making a carom sometimes, but not the one we were trying to make.
The table was of the usual European style --cushions dead and twice as high as the balls; the cues in bad repair.
The natives play only a sort of pool on them.
We have never seen any body playing the French three-ball game yet, and I doubt if there is any such game known in France, or that there lives any man mad enough to try to play it on one of these European tables.
We had to stop playing finally because Dan got to sleeping fifteen minutes between the counts and paying no attention to his marking.
Afterward we walked up and down one of the most popular streets for some time, enjoying other people's comfort and wishing we could export some of it to our restless, driving, vitality-consuming marts at home.
Just in this one matter lies the main charm of life in Europe--comfort.
In America, we hurry--which is well; but when the day's work is done, we go on thinking of losses and gains, we plan for the morrow, we even carry our business cares to bed with us, and toss and worry over them when we ought to be restoring our racked
We burn up our energies with these excitements, and either die early or drop into a lean and mean old age at a time of life which they call a man's prime in Europe.
When an acre of ground has produced long and well, we let it lie fallow and rest for a season; we take no man clear across the continent in the same coach he started in--the coach is stabled somewhere on the plains and its heated machinery allowed to cool
We bestow thoughtful care upon inanimate objects, but none upon ourselves.
What a robust people, what a nation of thinkers we might be, if we would only lay ourselves on the shelf occasionally and renew our edges!
I do envy these Europeans the comfort they take.
When the work of the day is done, they forget it.
Some of them go, with wife and children, to a beer hall and sit quietly and genteelly drinking a mug or two of ale and listening to music; others walk the streets, others drive in the avenues; others assemble in the great ornamental squares in the early
They go to bed moderately early, and sleep well.
They are always quiet, always orderly, always cheerful, comfortable, and appreciative of life and its manifold blessings.
One never sees a drunken man among them.
The change that has come over our little party is surprising.
Day by day we lose some of our restlessness and absorb some of the spirit of quietude and ease that is in the tranquil atmosphere about us and in the demeanor of the people.
We grow wise apace.
We begin to comprehend what life is for.
We have had a bath in Milan, in a public bath-house.
They were going to put all three of us in one bath-tub, but we objected.
Each of us had an Italian farm on his back.
We could have felt affluent if we had been officially surveyed and fenced in.
We chose to have three bathtubs, and large ones--tubs suited to the dignity of aristocrats who had real estate, and brought it with them.
After we were stripped and had taken the first chilly dash, we discovered that haunting atrocity that has embittered our lives in so many cities and villages of Italy and France --there was no soap.
I called.
A woman answered, and I barely had time to throw myself against the door--she would have been in, in another second.
I said: "Beware, woman!
Go away from here--go away, now, or it will be the worse for you.
I am an unprotected male, but I will preserve my honor at the peril of my life"!
These words must have frightened her, for she skurried away very fast.
Dan's voice rose on the air: "Oh, bring some soap, why don't you"!
The reply was Italian.
Dan resumed: "Soap, you know--soap.
That is what I want--soap.
S-o-a-p, soap; s-o-p-e, soap; s-o-u-p, soap.
Hurry up!
I don't know how you Irish spell it, but I want it.
Spell it to suit yourself, but fetch it.
I'm freezing".
I heard the doctor say impressively: "Dan, how often have we told you that these foreigners cannot understand English?
Why will you not depend upon us?
Why will you not tell us what you want, and let us ask for it in the language of the country?
It would save us a great deal of the humiliation your reprehensible ignorance causes us.
I will address this person in his mother tongue: 'Here, cospetto!
corpo di Bacco!
Sacramento!
Solferino!
--Soap, you son of a gun!
' Dan, if you would let us talk for you, you would never expose your ignorant vulgarity".
Even this fluent discharge of Italian did not bring the soap at once, but there was a good reason for it.
There was not such an article about the establishment.
It is my belief that there never had been.
They had to send far up town, and to several different places before they finally got it, so they said.
We had to wait twenty or thirty minutes.
The same thing had occurred the evening before, at the hotel.
I think I have divined the reason for this state of things at last.
The English know how to travel comfortably, and they carry soap with them; other foreigners do not use the article.
At every hotel we stop at we always have to send out for soap, at the last moment, when we are grooming ourselves for dinner, and they put it in the bill along with the candles and other nonsense.
In Marseilles they make half the fancy toilet soap we consume in America, but the Marseillaise only have a vague theoretical idea of its use, which they have obtained from books of travel, just as they have acquired an uncertain notion of clean shirts, and
This reminds me of poor Blucher's note to the landlord in Paris: PARIS, le 7 Juillet.
Monsieur le Landlord--Sir: Pourquoi don't you mettez some savon in your bed-chambers?
Est-ce que vous pensez I will steal it?
La nuit passee you charged me pour deux chandelles when I only had one; hier vous avez charged me avec glace when I had none at all; tout les jours you are coming some fresh game or other on me, mais vous ne pouvez pas play this savon dodge on me twice.
Savon is a necessary de la vie to any body but a Frenchman, et je l'aurai hors de cet hotel or make trouble.
You hear me.
Allons.
BLUCHER.
I remonstrated against the sending of this note, because it was so mixed up that the landlord would never be able to make head or tail of it; but Blucher said he guessed the old man could read the French of it and average the rest.
Blucher's French is bad enough, but it is not much worse than the English one finds in advertisements all over Italy every day.
For instance, observe the printed card of the hotel we shall probably stop at on the shores of Lake Como: "NOTISH".
"This hotel which the best it is in Italy and most superb, is handsome locate on the best situation of the lake, with the most splendid view near the Villas Melzy, to the King of Belgian, and Serbelloni.
This hotel have recently enlarge, do offer all commodities on moderate price, at the strangers gentlemen who whish spend the seasons on the Lake Come".
How is that, for a specimen?
In the hotel is a handsome little chapel where an English clergyman is employed to preach to such of the guests of the house as hail from England and America, and this fact is also set forth in barbarous English in the same advertisement.
Wouldn't you have supposed that the adventurous linguist who framed the card would have known enough to submit it to that clergyman before he sent it to the printer?
Here in Milan, in an ancient tumble-down ruin of a church, is the mournful wreck of the most celebrated painting in the world--"The Last Supper," by Leonardo da Vinci.
We are not infallible judges of pictures, but of course we went there to see this wonderful painting, once so beautiful, always so worshipped by masters in art, and forever to be famous in song and story.
And the first thing that occurred was the infliction on us of a placard fairly reeking with wretched English.
Take a morsel of it: "Bartholomew (that is the first figure on the left hand side at the spectator,) uncertain and doubtful about what he thinks to have heard, and upon which he wants to be assured by himself at Christ and by no others".
Good, isn't it?
And then Peter is described as "argumenting in a threatening and angrily condition at Judas Iscariot".
This paragraph recalls the picture.
"The Last Supper" is painted on the dilapidated wall of what was a little chapel attached to the main church in ancient times, I suppose.
It is battered and scarred in every direction, and stained and discolored by time, and Napoleon's horses kicked the legs off most the disciples when they (the horses, not the disciples,) were stabled there more than half a century ago.
I recognized the old picture in a moment--the Saviour with bowed head seated at the centre of a long, rough table with scattering fruits and dishes upon it, and six disciples on either side in their long robes, talking to each other--the picture from which
Perhaps no living man has ever known an attempt to paint the Lord's Supper differently.
The world seems to have become settled in the belief, long ago, that it is not possible for human genius to outdo this creation of da Vinci's.
I suppose painters will go on copying it as long as any of the original is left visible to the eye.
There were a dozen easels in the room, and as many artists transferring the great picture to their canvases.
Fifty proofs of steel engravings and lithographs were scattered around, too.
And as usual, I could not help noticing how superior the copies were to the original, that is, to my inexperienced eye.
Wherever you find a Raphael, a Rubens, a Michelangelo, a Carracci, or a da Vinci (and we see them every day,) you find artists copying them, and the copies are always the handsomest.
Maybe the originals were handsome when they were new, but they are not now.
This picture is about thirty feet long, and ten or twelve high, I should think, and the figures are at least life size.
It is one of the largest paintings in Europe.
The colors are dimmed with age; the countenances are scaled and marred, and nearly all expression is gone from them; the hair is a dead blur upon the wall, and there is no life in the eyes.
Only the attitudes are certain.
People come here from all parts of the world, and glorify this masterpiece.
They stand entranced before it with bated breath and parted lips, and when they speak, it is only in the catchy ejaculations of rapture: "Oh, wonderful"!
"Such expression"!
"Such grace of attitude"!
"Such dignity"!
"Such faultless drawing"!
"Such matchless coloring"!
"Such feeling"!
"What delicacy of touch"!
"What sublimity of conception"!
"A vision!
A vision"!
I only envy these people; I envy them their honest admiration, if it be honest--their delight, if they feel delight.
I harbor no animosity toward any of them.
But at the same time the thought will intrude itself upon me, How can they see what is not visible?
What would you think of a man who looked at some decayed, blind, toothless, pock-marked Cleopatra, and said: "What matchless beauty!
What soul!
What expression"!
What would you think of a man who gazed upon a dingy, foggy sunset, and said: "What sublimity!
What feeling!
What richness of coloring"!
What would you think of a man who stared in ecstasy upon a desert of stumps and said: "Oh, my soul, my beating heart, what a noble forest is here"!
You would think that those men had an astonishing talent for seeing things that had already passed away.
It was what I thought when I stood before "The Last Supper" and heard men apostrophizing wonders, and beauties and perfections which had faded out of the picture and gone, a hundred years before they were born.
We can imagine the beauty that was once in an aged face; we can imagine the forest if we see the stumps; but we can not absolutely see these things when they are not there.
I am willing to believe that the eye of the practiced artist can rest upon the Last Supper and renew a lustre where only a hint of it is left, supply a tint that has faded away, restore an expression that is gone; patch, and color, and add, to the dull
But I can not work this miracle.
Can those other uninspired visitors do it, or do they only happily imagine they do?
After reading so much about it, I am satisfied that the Last Supper was a very miracle of art once.
But it was three hundred years ago.
It vexes me to hear people talk so glibly of "feeling," "expression," "tone," and those other easily acquired and inexpensive technicalities of art that make such a fine show in conversations concerning pictures.
There is not one man in seventy-five hundred that can tell what a pictured face is intended to express.
There is not one man in five hundred that can go into a court-room and be sure that he will not mistake some harmless innocent of a juryman for the black-hearted assassin on trial.
Yet such people talk of "character" and presume to interpret "expression" in pictures.
There is an old story that Matthews, the actor, was once lauding the ability of the human face to express the passions and emotions hidden in the breast.
He said the countenance could disclose what was passing in the heart plainer than the tongue could.
"Now," he said, "observe my face--what does it express"?
"Despair"!
"Bah, it expresses peaceful resignation!
What does this express"?
"Rage"!
"Stuff!
It means terror!
This"!
"Imbecility"!
"Fool!
It is smothered ferocity!
Now this"!
"Joy"!
"Oh, perdition!
Any ass can see it means insanity"!
Expression!
People coolly pretend to read it who would think themselves presumptuous if they pretended to interpret the hieroglyphics on the obelisks of Luxor--yet they are fully as competent to do the one thing as the other.
I have heard two very intelligent critics speak of Murillo's Immaculate Conception (now in the museum at Seville,) within the past few days.
One said: "Oh, the Virgin's face is full of the ecstasy of a joy that is complete --that leaves nothing more to be desired on earth"!
The other said: "Ah, that wonderful face is so humble, so pleading--it says as plainly as words could say it: 'I fear; I tremble; I am unworthy.
But Thy will be done; sustain Thou Thy servant!
'" The reader can see the picture in any drawing-room; it can be easily recognized: the Virgin (the only young and really beautiful Virgin that was ever painted by one of the old masters, some of us think,) stands in the crescent of the new moon, with a
The reader may amuse himself, if he chooses, in trying to determine which of these gentlemen read the Virgin's "expression" aright, or if either of them did it.
Any one who is acquainted with the old masters will comprehend how much "The Last Supper" is damaged when I say that the spectator can not really tell, now, whether the disciples are Hebrews or Italians.
These ancient painters never succeeded in denationalizing themselves.
The Italian artists painted Italian Virgins, the Dutch painted Dutch Virgins, the Virgins of the French painters were Frenchwomen--none of them ever put into the face of the Madonna that indescribable something which proclaims the Jewess, whether you find
I saw in the Sandwich Islands, once, a picture copied by a talented German artist from an engraving in one of the American illustrated papers.
It was an allegory, representing Mr. Davis in the act of signing a secession act or some such document.
Over him hovered the ghost of Washington in warning attitude, and in the background a troop of shadowy soldiers in Continental uniform were limping with shoeless, bandaged feet through a driving snow-storm.
Valley Forge was suggested, of course.
The copy seemed accurate, and yet there was a discrepancy somewhere.
After a long examination I discovered what it was--the shadowy soldiers were all Germans!
Jeff Davis was a German!
even the hovering ghost was a German ghost!
The artist had unconsciously worked his nationality into the picture.
To tell the truth, I am getting a little perplexed about John the Baptist and his portraits.
In France I finally grew reconciled to him as a Frenchman; here he is unquestionably an Italian.
What next?
Can it be possible that the painters make John the Baptist a Spaniard in Madrid and an Irishman in Dublin?
We took an open barouche and drove two miles out of Milan to "see ze echo," as the guide expressed it.
The road was smooth, it was bordered by trees, fields, and grassy meadows, and the soft air was filled with the odor of flowers.
Troops of picturesque peasant girls, coming from work, hooted at us, shouted at us, made all manner of game of us, and entirely delighted me.
My long-cherished judgment was confirmed.
I always did think those frowsy, romantic, unwashed peasant girls I had read so much about in poetry were a glaring fraud.
We enjoyed our jaunt.
It was an exhilarating relief from tiresome sight-seeing.
We distressed ourselves very little about the astonishing echo the guide talked so much about.
We were growing accustomed to encomiums on wonders that too often proved no wonders at all.
And so we were most happily disappointed to find in the sequel that the guide had even failed to rise to the magnitude of his subject.
We arrived at a tumble-down old rookery called the Palazzo Simonetti--a massive hewn-stone affair occupied by a family of ragged Italians.
A good-looking young girl conducted us to a window on the second floor which looked out on a court walled on three sides by tall buildings.
She put her head out at the window and shouted.
The echo answered more times than we could count.
She took a speaking trumpet and through it she shouted, sharp and quick, a single "Ha"!
The echo answered: "Ha!
--ha!
----ha!
--ha!
--ha!
-ha!
ha!
h-a-a-a-a-a"!
and finally went off into a rollicking convulsion of the jolliest laughter that could be imagined.
It was so joyful--so long continued--so perfectly cordial and hearty, that every body was forced to join in.
There was no resisting it.
Then the girl took a gun and fired it.
We stood ready to count the astonishing clatter of reverberations.
We could not say one, two, three, fast enough, but we could dot our notebooks with our pencil points almost rapidly enough to take down a sort of short-hand report of the result.
My page revealed the following account.
I could not keep up, but I did as well as I could.
I set down fifty-two distinct repetitions, and then the echo got the advantage of me.
The doctor set down sixty-four, and thenceforth the echo moved too fast for him, also.
After the separate concussions could no longer be noted, the reverberations dwindled to a wild, long-sustained clatter of sounds such as a watchman's rattle produces.
It is likely that this is the most remarkable echo in the world.
The doctor, in jest, offered to kiss the young girl, and was taken a little aback when she said he might for a franc!
The commonest gallantry compelled him to stand by his offer, and so he paid the franc and took the kiss.
She was a philosopher.
She said a franc was a good thing to have, and she did not care any thing for one paltry kiss, because she had a million left.
Then our comrade, always a shrewd businessman, offered to take the whole cargo at thirty days, but that little financial scheme was a failure.
CHAPTER XX.
We left Milan by rail.
The Cathedral six or seven miles behind us; vast, dreamy, bluish, snow-clad mountains twenty miles in front of us,--these were the accented points in the scenery.
The more immediate scenery consisted of fields and farm-houses outside the car and a monster-headed dwarf and a moustached woman inside it.
These latter were not show-people.
Alas, deformity and female beards are too common in Italy to attract attention.
We passed through a range of wild, picturesque hills, steep, wooded, cone-shaped, with rugged crags projecting here and there, and with dwellings and ruinous castles perched away up toward the drifting clouds.
We lunched at the curious old town of Como, at the foot of the lake, and then took the small steamer and had an afternoon's pleasure excursion to this place,--Bellaggio.
When we walked ashore, a party of policemen (people whose cocked hats and showy uniforms would shame the finest uniform in the military service of the United States,) put us into a little stone cell and locked us in.
We had the whole passenger list for company, but their room would have been preferable, for there was no light, there were no windows, no ventilation.
It was close and hot.
We were much crowded.
It was the Black Hole of Calcutta on a small scale.
Presently a smoke rose about our feet--a smoke that smelled of all the dead things of earth, of all the putrefaction and corruption imaginable.
We were there five minutes, and when we got out it was hard to tell which of us carried the vilest fragrance.
These miserable outcasts called that "fumigating" us, and the term was a tame one indeed.
They fumigated us to guard themselves against the cholera, though we hailed from no infected port.
We had left the cholera far behind us all the time.
However, they must keep epidemics away somehow or other, and fumigation is cheaper than soap.
They must either wash themselves or fumigate other people.
Some of the lower classes had rather die than wash, but the fumigation of strangers causes them no pangs.
They need no fumigation themselves.
Their habits make it unnecessary.
They carry their preventive with them; they sweat and fumigate all the day long.
I trust I am a humble and a consistent Christian.
I try to do what is right.
I know it is my duty to "pray for them that despitefully use me;" and therefore, hard as it is, I shall still try to pray for these fumigating, maccaroni-stuffing organ-grinders.
Our hotel sits at the water's edge--at least its front garden does--and we walk among the shrubbery and smoke at twilight; we look afar off at Switzerland and the Alps, and feel an indolent willingness to look no closer; we go down the steps and swim in
A midnight luncheon in our ample bed-chamber; a final smoke in its contracted veranda facing the water, the gardens, and the mountains; a summing up of the day's events.
Then to bed, with drowsy brains harassed with a mad panorama that mixes up pictures of France, of Italy, of the ship, of the ocean, of home, in grotesque and bewildering disorder.
Then a melting away of familiar faces, of cities, and of tossing waves, into a great calm of forgetfulness and peace.
After which, the nightmare.
Breakfast in the morning, and then the lake.
I did not like it yesterday.
I thought Lake Tahoe was much finer.
I have to confess now, however, that my judgment erred somewhat, though not extravagantly.
I always had an idea that Como was a vast basin of water, like Tahoe, shut in by great mountains.
Well, the border of huge mountains is here, but the lake itself is not a basin.
It is as crooked as any brook, and only from one-quarter to two-thirds as wide as the Mississippi.
There is not a yard of low ground on either side of it --nothing but endless chains of mountains that spring abruptly from the water's edge and tower to altitudes varying from a thousand to two thousand feet.
Their craggy sides are clothed with vegetation, and white specks of houses peep out from the luxuriant foliage everywhere; they are even perched upon jutting and picturesque pinnacles a thousand feet above your head.
Again, for miles along the shores, handsome country seats, surrounded by gardens and groves, sit fairly in the water, sometimes in nooks carved by Nature out of the vine-hung precipices, and with no ingress or egress save by boats.
Some have great broad stone staircases leading down to the water, with heavy stone balustrades ornamented with statuary and fancifully adorned with creeping vines and bright-colored flowers--for all the world like a drop curtain in a theatre, and lacking
A great feature of Como's attractiveness is the multitude of pretty houses and gardens that cluster upon its shores and on its mountain sides.
They look so snug and so homelike, and at eventide when every thing seems to slumber, and the music of the vesper bells comes stealing over the water, one almost believes that nowhere else than on the lake of Como can there be found such a paradise of
From my window here in Bellaggio, I have a view of the other side of the lake now, which is as beautiful as a picture.
A scarred and wrinkled precipice rises to a height of eighteen hundred feet; on a tiny bench half way up its vast wall, sits a little snowflake of a church, no bigger than a martin-box, apparently; skirting the base of the cliff are a hundred orange groves
The surroundings of this picture are fine.
A mile away, a grove-plumed promontory juts far into the lake and glasses its palace in the blue depths; in midstream a boat is cutting the shining surface and leaving a long track behind, like a ray of light; the mountains beyond are veiled in a dreamy
Beyond all question, this is the most voluptuous scene we have yet looked upon.
Last night the scenery was striking and picturesque.
On the other side crags and trees and snowy houses were reflected in the lake with a wonderful distinctness, and streams of light from many a distant window shot far abroad over the still waters.
On this side, near at hand, great mansions, white with moonlight, glared out from the midst of masses of foliage that lay black and shapeless in the shadows that fell from the cliff above--and down in the margin of the lake every feature of the weird
Today we have idled through a wonder of a garden attached to a ducal estate--but enough of description is enough, I judge.
I suspect that this was the same place the gardener's son deceived the Lady of Lyons with, but I do not know.
You may have heard of the passage somewhere: "A deep vale, Shut out by Alpine hills from the rude world, Near a clear lake margined by fruits of gold And whispering myrtles: Glassing softest skies, cloudless, Save with rare and roseate shadows; A palace,
That is all very well, except the "clear" part of the lake.
It certainly is clearer than a great many lakes, but how dull its waters are compared with the wonderful transparence of Lake Tahoe!
I speak of the north shore of Tahoe, where one can count the scales on a trout at a depth of a hundred and eighty feet.
I have tried to get this statement off at par here, but with no success; so I have been obliged to negotiate it at fifty percent discount.
At this rate I find some takers; perhaps the reader will receive it on the same terms--ninety feet instead of one hundred and eighty.
But let it be remembered that those are forced terms--Sheriff's sale prices.
As far as I am privately concerned, I abate not a jot of the original assertion that in those strangely magnifying waters one may count the scales on a trout (a trout of the large kind,) at a depth of a hundred and eighty feet--may see every pebble on the
People talk of the transparent waters of the Mexican Bay of Acapulco, but in my own experience I know they cannot compare with those I am speaking of.
I have fished for trout, in Tahoe, and at a measured depth of eighty-four feet I have seen them put their noses to the bait and I could see their gills open and shut.
I could hardly have seen the trout themselves at that distance in the open air.
As I go back in spirit and recall that noble sea, reposing among the snow-peaks six thousand feet above the ocean, the conviction comes strong upon me again that Como would only seem a bedizened little courtier in that august presence.
Sorrow and misfortune overtake the legislature that still from year to year permits Tahoe to retain its unmusical cognomen!
Tahoe!
It suggests no crystal waters, no picturesque shores, no sublimity.
Tahoe for a sea in the clouds: a sea that has character and asserts it in solemn calms at times, at times in savage storms; a sea whose royal seclusion is guarded by a cordon of sentinel peaks that lift their frosty fronts nine thousand feet above the
Tahoe means grasshoppers.
It means grasshopper soup.
It is Indian, and suggestive of Indians.
They say it is Pi-ute--possibly it is Digger.
I am satisfied it was named by the Diggers--those degraded savages who roast their dead relatives, then mix the human grease and ashes of bones with tar, and "gaum" it thick all over their heads and foreheads and ears, and go caterwauling about the hills
These are the gentry that named the Lake.
People say that Tahoe means "Silver Lake"--"Limpid Water"--"Falling Leaf".
Bosh.
It means grasshopper soup, the favorite dish of the Digger tribe,--and of the Pi-utes as well.
It isn't worth while, in these practical times, for people to talk about Indian poetry--there never was any in them--except in the Fenimore Cooper Indians.
But they are an extinct tribe that never existed.
I know the Noble Red Man.
I have camped with the Indians; I have been on the warpath with them, taken part in the chase with them--for grasshoppers; helped them steal cattle; I have roamed with them, scalped them, had them for breakfast.
I would gladly eat the whole race if I had a chance.
But I am growing unreliable.
I will return to my comparison of the lakes.
Como is a little deeper than Tahoe, if people here tell the truth.
They say it is eighteen hundred feet deep at this point, but it does not look a dead enough blue for that.
Tahoe is one thousand five hundred and twenty-five feet deep in the centre, by the state geologist's measurement.
They say the great peak opposite this town is five thousand feet high: but I feel sure that three thousand feet of that statement is a good honest lie.
The lake is a mile wide, here, and maintains about that width from this point to its northern extremity--which is distant sixteen miles: from here to its southern extremity--say fifteen miles--it is not over half a mile wide in any place, I should think.
Its snow-clad mountains one hears so much about are only seen occasionally, and then in the distance, the Alps.
Tahoe is from ten to eighteen miles wide, and its mountains shut it in like a wall.
Their summits are never free from snow the year round.
One thing about it is very strange: it never has even a skim of ice upon its surface, although lakes in the same range of mountains, lying in a lower and warmer temperature, freeze over in winter.
It is cheerful to meet a shipmate in these out-of-the-way places and compare notes with him.
We have found one of ours here--an old soldier of the war, who is seeking bloodless adventures and rest from his campaigns in these sunny lands.
--[Colonel J. HERON FOSTER, editor of a Pittsburgh journal, and a most estimable gentleman.
As these sheets are being prepared for the press I am pained to learn of his decease shortly after his return home--M.T.] CHAPTER XXI.
We voyaged by steamer down the Lago di Lecco, through wild mountain scenery, and by hamlets and villas, and disembarked at the town of Lecco.
They said it was two hours, by carriage to the ancient city of Bergamo, and that we would arrive there in good season for the railway train.
We got an open barouche and a wild, boisterous driver, and set out.
It was delightful.
We had a fast team and a perfectly smooth road.
There were towering cliffs on our left, and the pretty Lago di Lecco on our right, and every now and then it rained on us.
Just before starting, the driver picked up, in the street, a stump of a cigar an inch long, and put it in his mouth.
When he had carried it thus about an hour, I thought it would be only Christian charity to give him a light.
I handed him my cigar, which I had just lit, and he put it in his mouth and returned his stump to his pocket!
I never saw a more sociable man.
At least I never saw a man who was more sociable on a short acquaintance.
We saw interior Italy, now.
The houses were of solid stone, and not often in good repair.
The peasants and their children were idle, as a general thing, and the donkeys and chickens made themselves at home in drawing-room and bed-chamber and were not molested.
The drivers of each and every one of the slow-moving market-carts we met were stretched in the sun upon their merchandise, sound a sleep.
Every three or four hundred yards, it seemed to me, we came upon the shrine of some saint or other--a rude picture of him built into a huge cross or a stone pillar by the road-side.
--Some of the pictures of the Saviour were curiosities in their way.
They represented him stretched upon the cross, his countenance distorted with agony.
From the wounds of the crown of thorns; from the pierced side; from the mutilated hands and feet; from the scourged body--from every hand-breadth of his person streams of blood were flowing!
Such a gory, ghastly spectacle would frighten the children out of their senses, I should think.
There were some unique auxiliaries to the painting which added to its spirited effect.
These were genuine wooden and iron implements, and were prominently disposed round about the figure: a bundle of nails; the hammer to drive them; the sponge; the reed that supported it; the cup of vinegar; the ladder for the ascent of the cross; the spear
The crown of thorns was made of real thorns, and was nailed to the sacred head.
In some Italian church-paintings, even by the old masters, the Saviour and the Virgin wear silver or gilded crowns that are fastened to the pictured head with nails.
The effect is as grotesque as it is incongruous.
Here and there, on the fronts of roadside inns, we found huge, coarse frescoes of suffering martyrs like those in the shrines.
It could not have diminished their sufferings any to be so uncouthly represented.
We were in the heart and home of priest craft--of a happy, cheerful, contented ignorance, superstition, degradation, poverty, indolence, and everlasting unaspiring worthlessness.
And we said fervently: it suits these people precisely; let them enjoy it, along with the other animals, and Heaven forbid that they be molested.
We feel no malice toward these fumigators.
We passed through the strangest, funniest, undreampt-of old towns, wedded to the customs and steeped in the dreams of the elder ages, and perfectly unaware that the world turns round!
And perfectly indifferent, too, as to whether it turns around or stands still.
They have nothing to do but eat and sleep and sleep and eat, and toil a little when they can get a friend to stand by and keep them awake.
They are not paid for thinking --they are not paid to fret about the world's concerns.
They were not respectable people--they were not worthy people--they were not learned and wise and brilliant people--but in their breasts, all their stupid lives long, resteth a peace that passeth understanding!
How can men, calling themselves men, consent to be so degraded and happy.
We whisked by many a gray old medieval castle, clad thick with ivy that swung its green banners down from towers and turrets where once some old Crusader's flag had floated.
The driver pointed to one of these ancient fortresses, and said, (I translate): "Do you see that great iron hook that projects from the wall just under the highest window in the ruined tower"?
We said we could not see it at such a distance, but had no doubt it was there.
"Well," he said; "there is a legend connected with that iron hook.
Nearly seven hundred years ago, that castle was the property of the noble Count Luigi Gennaro Guido Alphonso di Genova----" "What was his other name"?
said Dan.
"He had no other name.
The name I have spoken was all the name he had.
He was the son of----" "Poor but honest parents--that is all right--never mind the particulars --go on with the legend".
THE LEGEND.
Well, then, all the world, at that time, was in a wild excitement about the Holy Sepulchre.
All the great feudal lords in Europe were pledging their lands and pawning their plate to fit out men-at-arms so that they might join the grand armies of Christendom and win renown in the Holy Wars.
The Count Luigi raised money, like the rest, and one mild September morning, armed with battle-ax, portcullis and thundering culverin, he rode through the greaves and bucklers of his donjon-keep with as gallant a troop of Christian bandits as ever stepped
He had his sword, Excalibur, with him.
His beautiful countess and her young daughter waved him a tearful adieu from the battering-rams and buttresses of the fortress, and he galloped away with a happy heart.
He made a raid on a neighboring baron and completed his outfit with the booty secured.
He then razed the castle to the ground, massacred the family and moved on.
They were hardy fellows in the grand old days of chivalry.
Alas!
Those days will never come again.
Count Luigi grew high in fame in Holy Land.
He plunged into the carnage of a hundred battles, but his good Excalibur always brought him out alive, albeit often sorely wounded.
His face became browned by exposure to the Syrian sun in long marches; he suffered hunger and thirst; he pined in prisons, he languished in loathsome plague-hospitals.
And many and many a time he thought of his loved ones at home, and wondered if all was well with them.
But his heart said, Peace, is not thy brother watching over thy household?
* * * * * * * Forty-two years waxed and waned; the good fight was won; Godfrey reigned in Jerusalem--the Christian hosts reared the banner of the cross above the Holy Sepulchre!
Twilight was approaching.
Fifty harlequins, in flowing robes, approached this castle wearily, for they were on foot, and the dust upon their garments betokened that they had traveled far.
They overtook a peasant, and asked him if it were likely they could get food and a hospitable bed there, for love of Christian charity, and if perchance, a moral parlor entertainment might meet with generous countenance--"for," said they, "this exhibition
"Marry," quoth the peasant, "an' it please your worships, ye had better journey many a good rood hence with your juggling circus than trust your bones in yonder castle".
"How now, sirrah"!
exclaimed the chief monk, "explain thy ribald speech, or by'r Lady it shall go hard with thee".
"Peace, good mountebank, I did but utter the truth that was in my heart.
San Paolo be my witness that did ye but find the stout Count Leonardo in his cups, sheer from the castle's topmost battlements would he hurl ye all!
Alack-a-day, the good Lord Luigi reigns not here in these sad times".
"The good Lord Luigi"?
"Aye, none other, please your worship.
In his day, the poor rejoiced in plenty and the rich he did oppress; taxes were not known, the fathers of the church waxed fat upon his bounty; travelers went and came, with none to interfere; and whosoever would, might tarry in his halls in cordial
But woe is me!
some two and forty years agone the good count rode hence to fight for Holy Cross, and many a year hath flown since word or token have we had of him.
Men say his bones lie bleaching in the fields of Palestine".
"And now"?
"Now!
God 'a mercy, the cruel Leonardo lords it in the castle.
He wrings taxes from the poor; he robs all travelers that journey by his gates; he spends his days in feuds and murders, and his nights in revel and debauch; he roasts the fathers of the church upon his kitchen spits, and enjoyeth the same, calling it
These thirty years Luigi's countess hath not been seen by any in all this land, and many whisper that she pines in the dungeons of the castle for that she will not wed with Leonardo, saying her dear lord still liveth and that she will die ere she prove
They whisper likewise that her daughter is a prisoner as well.
Nay, good jugglers, seek ye refreshment other wheres.
'Twere better that ye perished in a Christian way than that ye plunged from off yon dizzy tower.
Give ye good-day".
"God keep ye, gentle knave--farewell".
But heedless of the peasant's warning, the players moved straightway toward the castle.
Word was brought to Count Leonardo that a company of mountebanks besought his hospitality.
"'Tis well.
Dispose of them in the customary manner.
Yet stay!
I have need of them.
Let them come hither.
Later, cast them from the battlements--or--how many priests have ye on hand"?
"The day's results are meagre, good my lord.
An abbot and a dozen beggarly friars is all we have".
"Hell and furies!
Is the estate going to seed?
Send hither the mountebanks.
Afterward, broil them with the priests".
The robed and close-cowled harlequins entered.
The grim Leonardo sate in state at the head of his council board.
Ranged up and down the hall on either hand stood near a hundred men-at-arms.
"Ha, villains"!
quoth the count, "What can ye do to earn the hospitality ye crave".
"Dread lord and mighty, crowded audiences have greeted our humble efforts with rapturous applause.
Among our body count we the versatile and talented Ugolino; the justly celebrated Rodolpho; the gifted and accomplished Roderigo; the management have spared neither pains nor expense--" "S'death!
What can ye do?
Curb thy prating tongue".
"Good my lord, in acrobatic feats, in practice with the dumb-bells, in balancing and ground and lofty tumbling are we versed--and sith your highness asketh me, I venture here to publish that in the truly marvelous and entertaining Zampillaerostation--"
throttle him!
Body of Bacchus!
am I a dog that I am to be assailed with polysyllabled blasphemy like to this?
But hold!
Lucretia, Isabel, stand forth!
Sirrah, behold this dame, this weeping wench.
The first I marry, within the hour; the other shall dry her tears or feed the vultures.
Thou and thy vagabonds shall crown the wedding with thy merry-makings.
Fetch hither the priest"!
The dame sprang toward the chief player.
"O, save me"!
she cried; "save me from a fate far worse than death!
Behold these sad eyes, these sunken cheeks, this withered frame!
See thou the wreck this fiend hath made, and let thy heart be moved with pity!
Look upon this damosel; note her wasted form, her halting step, her bloomless cheeks where youth should blush and happiness exult in smiles!
Hear us and have compassion.
This monster was my husband's brother.
He who should have been our shield against all harm, hath kept us shut within the noisome caverns of his donjon-keep for lo these thirty years.
And for what crime?
None other than that I would not belie my troth, root out my strong love for him who marches with the legions of the cross in Holy Land, (for O, he is not dead!
) and wed with him!
Save us, O, save thy persecuted suppliants"!
She flung herself at his feet and clasped his knees.
"Ha!
-ha!
-ha"!
shouted the brutal Leonardo.
"Priest, to thy work"!
and he dragged the weeping dame from her refuge.
"Say, once for all, will you be mine?
--for by my halidome, that breath that uttereth thy refusal shall be thy last on earth"!
"NE-VER"?
"Then die"!
and the sword leaped from its scabbard.
Quicker than thought, quicker than the lightning's flash, fifty monkish habits disappeared, and fifty knights in splendid armor stood revealed!
fifty falchions gleamed in air above the men-at-arms, and brighter, fiercer than them all, flamed Excalibur aloft, and cleaving downward struck the brutal Leonardo's weapon from his grasp!
"A Luigi to the rescue!
Whoop"!
"A Leonardo!
'tare an ouns!
'" "Oh, God, Oh, God, my husband"!
"Oh, God, Oh, God, my wife"!
"My father"!
"My precious"!
[Tableau.
] === Count Luigi bound his usurping brother hand and foot.
The practiced knights from Palestine made holyday sport of carving the awkward men-at-arms into chops and steaks.
The victory was complete.
Happiness reigned.
The knights all married the daughter.
Joy!
wassail!
finis!
"But what did they do with the wicked brother"?
"Oh nothing--only hanged him on that iron hook I was speaking of.
By the chin".
"As how"?
"Passed it up through his gills into his mouth".
"Leave him there"?
"Couple of years".
"Ah--is--is he dead"?
"Six hundred and fifty years ago, or such a matter".
"Splendid legend--splendid lie--drive on".
We reached the quaint old fortified city of Bergamo, the renowned in history, some three-quarters of an hour before the train was ready to start.
The place has thirty or forty thousand inhabitants and is remarkable for being the birthplace of harlequin.
When we discovered that, that legend of our driver took to itself a new interest in our eyes.
Rested and refreshed, we took the rail happy and contented.
I shall not tarry to speak of the handsome Lago di Gardi; its stately castle that holds in its stony bosom the secrets of an age so remote that even tradition goeth not back to it; the imposing mountain scenery that ennobles the landscape thereabouts; nor
, but hurry straight to the ancient city of the sea, the widowed bride of the Adriatic.
It was a long, long ride.
But toward evening, as we sat silent and hardly conscious of where we were--subdued into that meditative calm that comes so surely after a conversational storm--some one shouted-- "VENICE"!
And sure enough, afloat on the placid sea a league away, lay a great city, with its towers and domes and steeples drowsing in a golden mist of sunset.
CHAPTER XXII.
This Venice, which was a haughty, invincible, magnificent Republic for nearly fourteen hundred years; whose armies compelled the world's applause whenever and wherever they battled; whose navies well nigh held dominion of the seas, and whose merchant
Six hundred years ago, Venice was the Autocrat of Commerce; her mart was the great commercial centre, the distributing-house from whence the enormous trade of the Orient was spread abroad over the Western world.
To-day her piers are deserted, her warehouses are empty, her merchant fleets are vanished, her armies and her navies are but memories.
Her glory is departed, and with her crumbling grandeur of wharves and palaces about her she sits among her stagnant lagoons, forlorn and beggared, forgotten of the world.
She that in her palmy days commanded the commerce of a hemisphere and made the weal or woe of nations with a beck of her puissant finger, is become the humblest among the peoples of the earth, --a peddler of glass beads for women, and trifling toys and
The venerable Mother of the Republics is scarce a fit subject for flippant speech or the idle gossipping of tourists.
It seems a sort of sacrilege to disturb the glamour of old romance that pictures her to us softly from afar off as through a tinted mist, and curtains her ruin and her desolation from our view.
One ought, indeed, to turn away from her rags, her poverty and her humiliation, and think of her only as she was when she sunk the fleets of Charlemagne; when she humbled Frederick Barbarossa or waved her victorious banners above the battlements of
We reached Venice at eight in the evening, and entered a hearse belonging to the Grand Hotel d'Europe.
At any rate, it was more like a hearse than any thing else, though to speak by the card, it was a gondola.
And this was the storied gondola of Venice!
--the fairy boat in which the princely cavaliers of the olden time were wont to cleave the waters of the moonlit canals and look the eloquence of love into the soft eyes of patrician beauties, while the gay gondolier in silken doublet touched his guitar
This the famed gondola and this the gorgeous gondolier!
--the one an inky, rusty old canoe with a sable hearse-body clapped on to the middle of it, and the other a mangy, barefooted guttersnipe with a portion of his raiment on exhibition which should have been sacred from public scrutiny.
Presently, as he turned a corner and shot his hearse into a dismal ditch between two long rows of towering, untenanted buildings, the gay gondolier began to sing, true to the traditions of his race.
I stood it a little while.
Then I said: "Now, here, Roderigo Gonzales Michael Angelo, I'm a pilgrim, and I'm a stranger, but I am not going to have my feelings lacerated by any such caterwauling as that.
If that goes on, one of us has got to take water.
It is enough that my cherished dreams of Venice have been blighted forever as to the romantic gondola and the gorgeous gondolier; this system of destruction shall go no farther; I will accept the hearse, under protest, and you may fly your flag of truce in
Another yelp, and overboard you go".
I began to feel that the old Venice of song and story had departed forever.
But I was too hasty.
In a few minutes we swept gracefully out into the Grand Canal, and under the mellow moonlight the Venice of poetry and romance stood revealed.
Right from the water's edge rose long lines of stately palaces of marble; gondolas were gliding swiftly hither and thither and disappearing suddenly through unsuspected gates and alleys; ponderous stone bridges threw their shadows athwart the glittering
There was life and motion everywhere, and yet everywhere there was a hush, a stealthy sort of stillness, that was suggestive of secret enterprises of bravoes and of lovers; and clad half in moonbeams and half in mysterious shadows, the grim old mansions of
Music came floating over the waters--Venice was complete.
It was a beautiful picture--very soft and dreamy and beautiful.
But what was this Venice to compare with the Venice of midnight?
Nothing.
There was a fete--a grand fete in honor of some saint who had been instrumental in checking the cholera three hundred years ago, and all Venice was abroad on the water.
It was no common affair, for the Venetians did not know how soon they might need the saint's services again, now that the cholera was spreading every where.
So in one vast space--say a third of a mile wide and two miles long--were collected two thousand gondolas, and every one of them had from two to ten, twenty and even thirty colored lanterns suspended about it, and from four to a dozen occupants.
Just as far as the eye could reach, these painted lights were massed together --like a vast garden of many-colored flowers, except that these blossoms were never still; they were ceaselessly gliding in and out, and mingling together, and seducing you into
Here and there a strong red, green, or blue glare from a rocket that was struggling to get away, splendidly illuminated all the boats around it.
Every gondola that swam by us, with its crescents and pyramids and circles of colored lamps hung aloft, and lighting up the faces of the young and the sweet-scented and lovely below, was a picture; and the reflections of those lights, so long, so slender,
Many and many a party of young ladies and gentlemen had their state gondolas handsomely decorated, and ate supper on board, bringing their swallow-tailed, white-cravatted varlets to wait upon them, and having their tables tricked out as if for a bridal
They had brought along the costly globe lamps from their drawing-rooms, and the lace and silken curtains from the same places, I suppose.
And they had also brought pianos and guitars, and they played and sang operas, while the plebeian paper-lanterned gondolas from the suburbs and the back alleys crowded around to stare and listen.
There was music every where--choruses, string bands, brass bands, flutes, every thing.
I was so surrounded, walled in, with music, magnificence and loveliness, that I became inspired with the spirit of the scene, and sang one tune myself.
However, when I observed that the other gondolas had sailed away, and my gondolier was preparing to go overboard, I stopped.
The fete was magnificent.
They kept it up the whole night long, and I never enjoyed myself better than I did while it lasted.
What a funny old city this Queen of the Adriatic is!
Narrow streets, vast, gloomy marble palaces, black with the corroding damps of centuries, and all partly submerged; no dry land visible any where, and no sidewalks worth mentioning; if you want to go to church, to the theatre, or to the restaurant, you
It must be a paradise for cripples, for verily a man has no use for legs here.
For a day or two the place looked so like an overflowed Arkansas town, because of its currentless waters laving the very doorsteps of all the houses, and the cluster of boats made fast under the windows, or skimming in and out of the alleys and by-ways,
In the glare of day, there is little poetry about Venice, but under the charitable moon her stained palaces are white again, their battered sculptures are hidden in shadows, and the old city seems crowned once more with the grandeur that was hers five
It is easy, then, in fancy, to people these silent canals with plumed gallants and fair ladies--with Shylocks in gaberdine and sandals, venturing loans upon the rich argosies of Venetian commerce--with Othellos and Desdemonas, with Iagos and
In the treacherous sunlight we see Venice decayed, forlorn, poverty-stricken, and commerceless--forgotten and utterly insignificant.
But in the moonlight, her fourteen centuries of greatness fling their glories about her, and once more is she the princeliest among the nations of the earth.
"There is a glorious city in the sea; The sea is in the broad, the narrow streets, Ebbing and flowing; and the salt-sea weed Clings to the marble of her palaces.
No track of men, no footsteps to and fro, Lead to her gates!
The path lies o'er the sea, Invisible: and from the land we went, As to a floating city--steering in, And gliding up her streets, as in a dream, So smoothly, silently--by many a dome, Mosque-like, and many a stately portico, The statues ranged along an
What would one naturally wish to see first in Venice?
The Bridge of Sighs, of course--and next the Church and the Great Square of St. Mark, the Bronze Horses, and the famous Lion of St. Mark.
We intended to go to the Bridge of Sighs, but happened into the Ducal Palace first--a building which necessarily figures largely in Venetian poetry and tradition.
In the Senate Chamber of the ancient Republic we wearied our eyes with staring at acres of historical paintings by Tintoretto and Paul Veronese, but nothing struck us forcibly except the one thing that strikes all strangers forcibly--a black square in the
In one long row, around the great hall, were painted the portraits of the Doges of Venice (venerable fellows, with flowing white beards, for of the three hundred Senators eligible to the office, the oldest was usually chosen Doge,) and each had its
It seemed cruel to keep that pitiless inscription still staring from the walls after the unhappy wretch had been in his grave five hundred years.
At the head of the Giant's Staircase, where Marino Faliero was beheaded, and where the Doges were crowned in ancient times, two small slits in the stone wall were pointed out--two harmless, insignificant orifices that would never attract a stranger's
The heads were gone (knocked off by the French during their occupation of Venice,) but these were the throats, down which went the anonymous accusation, thrust in secretly at dead of night by an enemy, that doomed many an innocent man to walk the Bridge of
This was in the old days when the Patricians alone governed Venice--the common herd had no vote and no voice.
There were one thousand five hundred Patricians; from these, three hundred Senators were chosen; from the Senators a Doge and a Council of Ten were selected, and by secret ballot the Ten chose from their own number a Council of Three.
All these were Government spies, then, and every spy was under surveillance himself--men spoke in whispers in Venice, and no man trusted his neighbor--not always his own brother.
No man knew who the Council of Three were--not even the Senate, not even the Doge; the members of that dread tribunal met at night in a chamber to themselves, masked, and robed from head to foot in scarlet cloaks, and did not even know each other, unless
It was their duty to judge heinous political crimes, and from their sentence there was no appeal.
A nod to the executioner was sufficient.
The doomed man was marched down a hall and out at a door-way into the covered Bridge of Sighs, through it and into the dungeon and unto his death.
At no time in his transit was he visible to any save his conductor.
If a man had an enemy in those old days, the cleverest thing he could do was to slip a note for the Council of Three into the Lion's mouth, saying "This man is plotting against the Government".
If the awful Three found no proof, ten to one they would drown him anyhow, because he was a deep rascal, since his plots were unsolvable.
Masked judges and masked executioners, with unlimited power, and no appeal from their judgements, in that hard, cruel age, were not likely to be lenient with men they suspected yet could not convict.
We walked through the hall of the Council of Ten, and presently entered the infernal den of the Council of Three.
The table around which they had sat was there still, and likewise the stations where the masked inquisitors and executioners formerly stood, frozen, upright and silent, till they received a bloody order, and then, without a word, moved off like the
The frescoes on the walls were startlingly suited to the place.
In all the other saloons, the halls, the great state chambers of the palace, the walls and ceilings were bright with gilding, rich with elaborate carving, and resplendent with gallant pictures of Venetian victories in war, and Venetian display in foreign
--not a living figure but was writhing in torture, not a dead one but was smeared with blood, gashed with wounds, and distorted with the agonies that had taken away its life!
From the palace to the gloomy prison is but a step--one might almost jump across the narrow canal that intervenes.
The ponderous stone Bridge of Sighs crosses it at the second story--a bridge that is a covered tunnel --you can not be seen when you walk in it.
It is partitioned lengthwise, and through one compartment walked such as bore light sentences in ancient times, and through the other marched sadly the wretches whom the Three had doomed to lingering misery and utter oblivion in the dungeons, or to sudden
Down below the level of the water, by the light of smoking torches, we were shown the damp, thick-walled cells where many a proud patrician's life was eaten away by the long-drawn miseries of solitary imprisonment--without light, air, books; naked,
Many and many a sorrowful story like this these stony walls could tell if they could but speak.
In a little narrow corridor, near by, they showed us where many a prisoner, after lying in the dungeons until he was forgotten by all save his persecutors, was brought by masked executioners and garroted, or sewed up in a sack, passed through a little
They used to show to visitors the implements of torture wherewith the Three were wont to worm secrets out of the accused--villainous machines for crushing thumbs; the stocks where a prisoner sat immovable while water fell drop by drop upon his head till
It bore the stains of blood that had trickled through its joints long ago, and on one side it had a projection whereon the torturer rested his elbow comfortably and bent down his ear to catch the moanings of the sufferer perishing within.
Of course we went to see the venerable relic of the ancient glory of Venice, with its pavements worn and broken by the passing feet of a thousand years of plebeians and patricians--The Cathedral of St. Mark.
It is built entirely of precious marbles, brought from the Orient --nothing in its composition is domestic.
Its hoary traditions make it an object of absorbing interest to even the most careless stranger, and thus far it had interest for me; but no further.
I could not go into ecstasies over its coarse mosaics, its unlovely Byzantine architecture, or its five hundred curious interior columns from as many distant quarries.
Every thing was worn out--every block of stone was smooth and almost shapeless with the polishing hands and shoulders of loungers who devoutly idled here in by-gone centuries and have died and gone to the dev--no, simply died, I mean.
Under the altar repose the ashes of St. Mark--and Matthew, Luke and John, too, for all I know.
Venice reveres those relics above all things earthly.
For fourteen hundred years St. Mark has been her patron saint.
Every thing about the city seems to be named after him or so named as to refer to him in some way--so named, or some purchase rigged in some way to scrape a sort of hurrahing acquaintance with him.
That seems to be the idea.
To be on good terms with St. Mark, seems to be the very summit of Venetian ambition.
They say St. Mark had a tame lion, and used to travel with him--and every where that St. Mark went, the lion was sure to go.
It was his protector, his friend, his librarian.
And so the Winged Lion of St. Mark, with the open Bible under his paw, is a favorite emblem in the grand old city.
It casts its shadow from the most ancient pillar in Venice, in the Grand Square of St. Mark, upon the throngs of free citizens below, and has so done for many a long century.
The winged lion is found every where--and doubtless here, where the winged lion is, no harm can come.
St. Mark died at Alexandria, in Egypt.
He was martyred, I think.
However, that has nothing to do with my legend.
About the founding of the city of Venice--say four hundred and fifty years after Christ--(for Venice is much younger than any other Italian city,) a priest dreamed that an angel told him that until the remains of St. Mark were brought to Venice, the city
The priest proclaimed his dream, and forthwith Venice set about procuring the corpse of St. Mark.
One expedition after another tried and failed, but the project was never abandoned during four hundred years.
At last it was secured by stratagem, in the year eight hundred and something.
The commander of a Venetian expedition disguised himself, stole the bones, separated them, and packed them in vessels filled with lard.
The religion of Mahomet causes its devotees to abhor anything that is in the nature of pork, and so when the Christian was stopped by the officers at the gates of the city, they only glanced once into his precious baskets, then turned up their noses at the
The bones were buried in the vaults of the grand cathedral, which had been waiting long years to receive them, and thus the safety and the greatness of Venice were secured.
And to this day there be those in Venice who believe that if those holy ashes were stolen away, the ancient city would vanish like a dream, and its foundations be buried forever in the unremembering sea.
CHAPTER XXIII.
The Venetian gondola is as free and graceful, in its gliding movement, as a serpent.
It is twenty or thirty feet long, and is narrow and deep, like a canoe; its sharp bow and stern sweep upward from the water like the horns of a crescent with the abruptness of the curve slightly modified.
The bow is ornamented with a steel comb with a battle-ax attachment which threatens to cut passing boats in two occasionally, but never does.
The gondola is painted black because in the zenith of Venetian magnificence the gondolas became too gorgeous altogether, and the Senate decreed that all such display must cease, and a solemn, unembellished black be substituted.
If the truth were known, it would doubtless appear that rich plebeians grew too prominent in their affectation of patrician show on the Grand Canal, and required a wholesome snubbing.
Reverence for the hallowed Past and its traditions keeps the dismal fashion in force now that the compulsion exists no longer.
So let it remain.
It is the color of mourning.
Venice mourns.
The stern of the boat is decked over and the gondolier stands there.
He uses a single oar--a long blade, of course, for he stands nearly erect.
A wooden peg, a foot and a half high, with two slight crooks or curves in one side of it and one in the other, projects above the starboard gunwale.
Against that peg the gondolier takes a purchase with his oar, changing it at intervals to the other side of the peg or dropping it into another of the crooks, as the steering of the craft may demand--and how in the world he can back and fill, shoot
I am afraid I study the gondolier's marvelous skill more than I do the sculptured palaces we glide among.
He cuts a corner so closely, now and then, or misses another gondola by such an imperceptible hair-breadth that I feel myself "scrooching," as the children say, just as one does when a buggy wheel grazes his elbow.
But he makes all his calculations with the nicest precision, and goes darting in and out among a Broadway confusion of busy craft with the easy confidence of the educated hackman.
He never makes a mistake.
Sometimes we go flying down the great canals at such a gait that we can get only the merest glimpses into front doors, and again, in obscure alleys in the suburbs, we put on a solemnity suited to the silence, the mildew, the stagnant waters, the clinging
The gondolier is a picturesque rascal for all he wears no satin harness, no plumed bonnet, no silken tights.
His attitude is stately; he is lithe and supple; all his movements are full of grace.
When his long canoe, and his fine figure, towering from its high perch on the stern, are cut against the evening sky, they make a picture that is very novel and striking to a foreign eye.
We sit in the cushioned carriage-body of a cabin, with the curtains drawn, and smoke, or read, or look out upon the passing boats, the houses, the bridges, the people, and enjoy ourselves much more than we could in a buggy jolting over our cobble-stone
This is the gentlest, pleasantest locomotion we have ever known.
But it seems queer--ever so queer--to see a boat doing duty as a private carriage.
We see business men come to the front door, step into a gondola, instead of a street car, and go off down town to the counting-room.
We see visiting young ladies stand on the stoop, and laugh, and kiss good-bye, and flirt their fans and say "Come soon--now do--you've been just as mean as ever you can be--mother's dying to see you--and we've moved into the new house, O such a love of a
--so convenient to the post office and the church, and the Young Men's Christian Association; and we do have such fishing, and such carrying on, and such swimming-matches in the back yard--Oh, you must come--no distance at all, and if you go down through
and then the little humbug trips down the steps, jumps into the gondola, says, under her breath, "Disagreeable old thing, I hope she won't"!
goes skimming away, round the corner; and the other girl slams the street door and says, "Well, that infliction's over, any way, --but I suppose I've got to go and see her--tiresome stuck-up thing"!
Human nature appears to be just the same, all over the world.
We see the diffident young man, mild of moustache, affluent of hair, indigent of brain, elegant of costume, drive up to her father's mansion, tell his hackman to bail out and wait, start fearfully up the steps and meet "the old gentleman" right on the
--hear him ask what street the new British Bank is in--as if that were what he came for--and then bounce into his boat and skurry away with his coward heart in his boots!
--see him come sneaking around the corner again, directly, with a crack of the curtain open toward the old gentleman's disappearing gondola, and out scampers his Susan with a flock of little Italian endearments fluttering from her lips, and goes to drive
We see the ladies go out shopping, in the most natural way, and flit from street to street and from store to store, just in the good old fashion, except that they leave the gondola, instead of a private carriage, waiting at the curbstone a couple of hours
And they always have their purchases sent home just in the good old way.
Human nature is very much the same all over the world; and it is so like my dear native home to see a Venetian lady go into a store and buy ten cents' worth of blue ribbon and have it sent home in a scow.
Ah, it is these little touches of nature that move one to tears in these far-off foreign lands.
We see little girls and boys go out in gondolas with their nurses, for an airing.
We see staid families, with prayer-book and beads, enter the gondola dressed in their Sunday best, and float away to church.
And at midnight we see the theatre break up and discharge its swarm of hilarious youth and beauty; we hear the cries of the hackman-gondoliers, and behold the struggling crowd jump aboard, and the black multitude of boats go skimming down the moonlit
And over all broods that mysterious stillness, that stealthy quiet, that befits so well this old dreaming Venice.
We have been pretty much every where in our gondola.
We have bought beads and photographs in the stores, and wax matches in the Great Square of St. Mark.
The last remark suggests a digression.
Every body goes to this vast square in the evening.
The military bands play in the centre of it and countless couples of ladies and gentlemen promenade up and down on either side, and platoons of them are constantly drifting away toward the old Cathedral, and by the venerable column with the Winged Lion of
Between the promenaders and the side-walks are seated hundreds and hundreds of people at small tables, smoking and taking granita, (a first cousin to ice-cream;) on the side-walks are more employing themselves in the same way.
The shops in the first floor of the tall rows of buildings that wall in three sides of the square are brilliantly lighted, the air is filled with music and merry voices, and altogether the scene is as bright and spirited and full of cheerfulness as any man
We enjoy it thoroughly.
Very many of the young women are exceedingly pretty and dress with rare good taste.
We are gradually and laboriously learning the ill-manners of staring them unflinchingly in the face--not because such conduct is agreeable to us, but because it is the custom of the country and they say the girls like it.
We wish to learn all the curious, outlandish ways of all the different countries, so that we can "show off" and astonish people when we get home.
We wish to excite the envy of our untraveled friends with our strange foreign fashions which we can't shake off.
All our passengers are paying strict attention to this thing, with the end in view which I have mentioned.
The gentle reader will never, never know what a consummate ass he can become, until he goes abroad.
I speak now, of course, in the supposition that the gentle reader has not been abroad, and therefore is not already a consummate ass.
If the case be otherwise, I beg his pardon and extend to him the cordial hand of fellowship and call him brother.
I shall always delight to meet an ass after my own heart when I shall have finished my travels.
On this subject let me remark that there are Americans abroad in Italy who have actually forgotten their mother tongue in three months--forgot it in France.
They can not even write their address in English in a hotel register.
I append these evidences, which I copied verbatim from the register of a hotel in a certain Italian city: "John P. Whitcomb, Etats Unis.
"Wm.
L. Ainsworth, travailleur (he meant traveler, I suppose,) Etats Unis.
"George P. Morton et fils, d'Amerique.
"Lloyd B. Williams, et trois amis, ville de Boston, Amerique.
"J.
Ellsworth Baker, tout de suite de France, place de naissance Amerique, destination la Grand Bretagne".
I love this sort of people.
A lady passenger of ours tells of a fellow-citizen of hers who spent eight weeks in Paris and then returned home and addressed his dearest old bosom friend Herbert as Mr. "Er-bare"!
He apologized, though, and said, "'Pon my soul it is aggravating, but I cahn't help it--I have got so used to speaking nothing but French, my dear Erbare--damme there it goes again!
--got so used to French pronunciation that I cahn't get rid of it--it is positively annoying, I assure you".
This entertaining idiot, whose name was Gordon, allowed himself to be hailed three times in the street before he paid any attention, and then begged a thousand pardons and said he had grown so accustomed to hearing himself addressed as "M'sieu Gor-r-dong,"
He wore a rose in his button-hole; he gave the French salutation--two flips of the hand in front of the face; he called Paris Pairree in ordinary English conversation; he carried envelopes bearing foreign postmarks protruding from his breast-pocket; he
Think of our Whitcombs, and our Ainsworths and our Williamses writing themselves down in dilapidated French in foreign hotel registers!
We laugh at Englishmen, when we are at home, for sticking so sturdily to their national ways and customs, but we look back upon it from abroad very forgivingly.
It is not pleasant to see an American thrusting his nationality forward obtrusively in a foreign land, but Oh, it is pitiable to see him making of himself a thing that is neither male nor female, neither fish, flesh, nor fowl--a poor, miserable,
Among a long list of churches, art galleries, and such things, visited by us in Venice, I shall mention only one--the church of Santa Maria dei Frari.
It is about five hundred years old, I believe, and stands on twelve hundred thousand piles.
In it lie the body of Canova and the heart of Titian, under magnificent monuments.
Titian died at the age of almost one hundred years.
A plague which swept away fifty thousand lives was raging at the time, and there is notable evidence of the reverence in which the great painter was held, in the fact that to him alone the state permitted a public funeral in all that season of terror and
In this church, also, is a monument to the doge Foscari, whose name a once resident of Venice, Lord Byron, has made permanently famous.
The monument to the doge Giovanni Pesaro, in this church, is a curiosity in the way of mortuary adornment.
It is eighty feet high and is fronted like some fantastic pagan temple.
Against it stand four colossal Nubians, as black as night, dressed in white marble garments.
The black legs are bare, and through rents in sleeves and breeches, the skin, of shiny black marble, shows.
The artist was as ingenious as his funeral designs were absurd.
There are two bronze skeletons bearing scrolls, and two great dragons uphold the sarcophagus.
On high, amid all this grotesqueness, sits the departed doge.
In the conventual buildings attached to this church are the state archives of Venice.
We did not see them, but they are said to number millions of documents.
"They are the records of centuries of the most watchful, observant and suspicious government that ever existed--in which every thing was written down and nothing spoken out".
They fill nearly three hundred rooms.
Among them are manuscripts from the archives of nearly two thousand families, monasteries and convents.
The secret history of Venice for a thousand years is here--its plots, its hidden trials, its assassinations, its commissions of hireling spies and masked bravoes--food, ready to hand, for a world of dark and mysterious romances.
Yes, I think we have seen all of Venice.
We have seen, in these old churches, a profusion of costly and elaborate sepulchre ornamentation such as we never dreampt of before.
We have stood in the dim religious light of these hoary sanctuaries, in the midst of long ranks of dusty monuments and effigies of the great dead of Venice, until we seemed drifting back, back, back, into the solemn past, and looking upon the scenes and
We have been in a half-waking sort of dream all the time.
I do not know how else to describe the feeling.
A part of our being has remained still in the nineteenth century, while another part of it has seemed in some unaccountable way walking among the phantoms of the tenth.
We have seen famous pictures until our eyes are weary with looking at them and refuse to find interest in them any longer.
And what wonder, when there are twelve hundred pictures by Palma the Younger in Venice and fifteen hundred by Tintoretto?
And behold there are Titians and the works of other artists in proportion.
We have seen Titian's celebrated Cain and Abel, his David and Goliah, his Abraham's Sacrifice.
We have seen Tintoretto's monster picture, which is seventy-four feet long and I do not know how many feet high, and thought it a very commodious picture.
We have seen pictures of martyrs enough, and saints enough, to regenerate the world.
I ought not to confess it, but still, since one has no opportunity in America to acquire a critical judgment in art, and since I could not hope to become educated in it in Europe in a few short weeks, I may therefore as well acknowledge with such apologies
They all have a marked family resemblance to each other, they dress alike, in coarse monkish robes and sandals, they are all bald headed, they all stand in about the same attitude, and without exception they are gazing heavenward with countenances which
To me there is nothing tangible about these imaginary portraits, nothing that I can grasp and take a living interest in.
If great Titian had only been gifted with prophecy, and had skipped a martyr, and gone over to England and painted a portrait of Shakspeare, even as a youth, which we could all have confidence in now, the world down to the latest generations would have
I think posterity could have spared one more martyr for the sake of a great historical picture of Titian's time and painted by his brush--such as Columbus returning in chains from the discovery of a world, for instance.
The old masters did paint some Venetian historical pictures, and these we did not tire of looking at, notwithstanding representations of the formal introduction of defunct doges to the Virgin Mary in regions beyond the clouds clashed rather harshly with
But humble as we are, and unpretending, in the matter of art, our researches among the painted monks and martyrs have not been wholly in vain.
We have striven hard to learn.
We have had some success.
We have mastered some things, possibly of trifling import in the eyes of the learned, but to us they give pleasure, and we take as much pride in our little acquirements as do others who have learned far more, and we love to display them full as well.
When we see a monk going about with a lion and looking tranquilly up to heaven, we know that that is St. Mark.
When we see a monk with a book and a pen, looking tranquilly up to heaven, trying to think of a word, we know that that is St. Matthew.
When we see a monk sitting on a rock, looking tranquilly up to heaven, with a human skull beside him, and without other baggage, we know that that is St. Jerome.
Because we know that he always went flying light in the matter of baggage.
When we see a party looking tranquilly up to heaven, unconscious that his body is shot through and through with arrows, we know that that is St. Sebastian.
When we see other monks looking tranquilly up to heaven, but having no trade-mark, we always ask who those parties are.
We do this because we humbly wish to learn.
We have seen thirteen thousand St. Jeromes, and twenty-two thousand St. Marks, and sixteen thousand St. Matthews, and sixty thousand St. Sebastians, and four millions of assorted monks, undesignated, and we feel encouraged to believe that when we have seen
Now it does give me real pain to speak in this almost unappreciative way of the old masters and their martyrs, because good friends of mine in the ship--friends who do thoroughly and conscientiously appreciate them and are in every way competent to
I believe that what I have written and may still write about pictures will give them pain, and I am honestly sorry for it.
I even promised that I would hide my uncouth sentiments in my own breast.
But alas!
I never could keep a promise.
I do not blame myself for this weakness, because the fault must lie in my physical organization.
It is likely that such a very liberal amount of space was given to the organ which enables me to make promises, that the organ which should enable me to keep them was crowded out.
But I grieve not.
I like no half-way things.
I had rather have one faculty nobly developed than two faculties of mere ordinary capacity.
I certainly meant to keep that promise, but I find I can not do it.
It is impossible to travel through Italy without speaking of pictures, and can I see them through others' eyes?
If I did not so delight in the grand pictures that are spread before me every day of my life by that monarch of all the old masters, Nature, I should come to believe, sometimes, that I had in me no appreciation of the beautiful, whatsoever.
It seems to me that whenever I glory to think that for once I have discovered an ancient painting that is beautiful and worthy of all praise, the pleasure it gives me is an infallible proof that it is not a beautiful picture and not in any wise worthy of
This very thing has occurred more times than I can mention, in Venice.
In every single instance the guide has crushed out my swelling enthusiasm with the remark: "It is nothing--it is of the Renaissance".
I did not know what in the mischief the Renaissance was, and so always I had to simply say, "Ah!
so it is--I had not observed it before".
I could not bear to be ignorant before a cultivated negro, the offspring of a South Carolina slave.
But it occurred too often for even my self-complacency, did that exasperating "It is nothing--it is of the Renaissance".
I said at last: "Who is this Renaissance?
Where did he come from?
Who gave him permission to cram the Republic with his execrable daubs"?
We learned, then, that Renaissance was not a man; that renaissance was a term used to signify what was at best but an imperfect rejuvenation of art.
The guide said that after Titian's time and the time of the other great names we had grown so familiar with, high art declined; then it partially rose again--an inferior sort of painters sprang up, and these shabby pictures were the work of their hands.
Then I said, in my heat, that I "wished to goodness high art had declined five hundred years sooner".
The Renaissance pictures suit me very well, though sooth to say its school were too much given to painting real men and did not indulge enough in martyrs.
The guide I have spoken of is the only one we have had yet who knew any thing.
He was born in South Carolina, of slave parents.
They came to Venice while he was an infant.
He has grown up here.
He is well educated.
He reads, writes, and speaks English, Italian, Spanish, and French, with perfect facility; is a worshipper of art and thoroughly conversant with it; knows the history of Venice by heart and never tires of talking of her illustrious career.
He dresses better than any of us, I think, and is daintily polite.
Negroes are deemed as good as white people, in Venice, and so this man feels no desire to go back to his native land.
His judgment is correct.
I have had another shave.
I was writing in our front room this afternoon and trying hard to keep my attention on my work and refrain from looking out upon the canal.
I was resisting the soft influences of the climate as well as I could, and endeavoring to overcome the desire to be indolent and happy.
The boys sent for a barber.
They asked me if I would be shaved.
I reminded them of my tortures in Genoa, Milan, Como; of my declaration that I would suffer no more on Italian soil.
I said "Not any for me, if you please".
I wrote on.
The barber began on the doctor.
I heard him say: "Dan, this is the easiest shave I have had since we left the ship".
He said again, presently: "Why Dan, a man could go to sleep with this man shaving him".
Dan took the chair.
Then he said: "Why this is Titian.
This is one of the old masters".
I wrote on.
Directly Dan said: "Doctor, it is perfect luxury.
The ship's barber isn't any thing to him".
My rough beard wee distressing me beyond measure.
The barber was rolling up his apparatus.
The temptation was too strong.
I said: "Hold on, please.
Shave me also".
I sat down in the chair and closed my eyes.
The barber soaped my face, and then took his razor and gave me a rake that well nigh threw me into convulsions.
I jumped out of the chair: Dan and the doctor were both wiping blood off their faces and laughing.
I said it was a mean, disgraceful fraud.
They said that the misery of this shave had gone so far beyond any thing they had ever experienced before, that they could not bear the idea of losing such a chance of hearing a cordial opinion from me on the subject.
It was shameful.
But there was no help for it.
The skinning was begun and had to be finished.
The tears flowed with every rake, and so did the fervent execrations.
The barber grew confused, and brought blood every time.
I think the boys enjoyed it better than any thing they have seen or heard since they left home.
We have seen the Campanile, and Byron's house and Balbi's the geographer, and the palaces of all the ancient dukes and doges of Venice, and we have seen their effeminate descendants airing their nobility in fashionable French attire in the Grand Square of
We have seen no bravoes with poisoned stilettos, no masks, no wild carnival; but we have seen the ancient pride of Venice, the grim Bronze Horses that figure in a thousand legends.
Venice may well cherish them, for they are the only horses she ever had.
It is said there are hundreds of people in this curious city who never have seen a living horse in their lives.
It is entirely true, no doubt.
And so, having satisfied ourselves, we depart to-morrow, and leave the venerable Queen of the Republics to summon her vanished ships, and marshal her shadowy armies, and know again in dreams the pride of her old renown.
CHAPTER XXIV.
Some of the Quaker City's passengers had arrived in Venice from Switzerland and other lands before we left there, and others were expected every day.
We heard of no casualties among them, and no sickness.
We were a little fatigued with sight seeing, and so we rattled through a good deal of country by rail without caring to stop.
I took few notes.
I find no mention of Bologna in my memorandum book, except that we arrived there in good season, but saw none of the sausages for which the place is so justly celebrated.
Pistoia awoke but a passing interest.
Florence pleased us for a while.
I think we appreciated the great figure of David in the grand square, and the sculptured group they call the Rape of the Sabines.
We wandered through the endless collections of paintings and statues of the Pitti and Ufizzi galleries, of course.
I make that statement in self-defense; there let it stop.
I could not rest under the imputation that I visited Florence and did not traverse its weary miles of picture galleries.
We tried indolently to recollect something about the Guelphs and Ghibelines and the other historical cut-throats whose quarrels and assassinations make up so large a share of Florentine history, but the subject was not attractive.
We had been robbed of all the fine mountain scenery on our little journey by a system of railroading that had three miles of tunnel to a hundred yards of daylight, and we were not inclined to be sociable with Florence.
We had seen the spot, outside the city somewhere, where these people had allowed the bones of Galileo to rest in unconsecrated ground for an age because his great discovery that the world turned around was regarded as a damning heresy by the church; and we
That we had lived to see his dust in honored sepulture in the church of Santa Croce we owed to a society of literati, and not to Florence or her rulers.
We saw Dante's tomb in that church, also, but we were glad to know that his body was not in it; that the ungrateful city that had exiled him and persecuted him would give much to have it there, but need not hope to ever secure that high honor to herself.
Medicis are good enough for Florence.
Let her plant Medicis and build grand monuments over them to testify how gratefully she was wont to lick the hand that scourged her.
Magnanimous Florence!
Her jewelry marts are filled with artists in mosaic.
Florentine mosaics are the choicest in all the world.
Florence loves to have that said.
Florence is proud of it.
Florence would foster this specialty of hers.
She is grateful to the artists that bring to her this high credit and fill her coffers with foreign money, and so she encourages them with pensions.
With pensions!
Think of the lavishness of it.
She knows that people who piece together the beautiful trifles die early, because the labor is so confining, and so exhausting to hand and brain, and so she has decreed that all these people who reach the age of sixty shall have a pension after that!
I have not heard that any of them have called for their dividends yet.
One man did fight along till he was sixty, and started after his pension, but it appeared that there had been a mistake of a year in his family record, and so he gave it up and died.
These artists will take particles of stone or glass no larger than a mustard seed, and piece them together on a sleeve button or a shirt stud, so smoothly and with such nice adjustment of the delicate shades of color the pieces bear, as to form a pigmy
They will counterfeit a fly, or a high-toned bug, or the ruined Coliseum, within the cramped circle of a breastpin, and do it so deftly and so neatly that any man might think a master painted it.
I saw a little table in the great mosaic school in Florence--a little trifle of a centre table--whose top was made of some sort of precious polished stone, and in the stone was inlaid the figure of a flute, with bell-mouth and a mazy complication of keys.
No painting in the world could have been softer or richer; no shading out of one tint into another could have been more perfect; no work of art of any kind could have been more faultless than this flute, and yet to count the multitude of little fragments
I do not think one could have seen where two particles joined each other with eyes of ordinary shrewdness.
Certainly we could detect no such blemish.
This table-top cost the labor of one man for ten long years, so they said, and it was for sale for thirty-five thousand dollars.
We went to the Church of Santa Croce, from time to time, in Florence, to weep over the tombs of Michael Angelo, Raphael and Machiavelli, (I suppose they are buried there, but it may be that they reside elsewhere and rent their tombs to other parties--such
It is popular to admire the Arno.
It is a great historical creek with four feet in the channel and some scows floating around.
It would be a very plausible river if they would pump some water into it.
They all call it a river, and they honestly think it is a river, do these dark and bloody Florentines.
They even help out the delusion by building bridges over it.
I do not see why they are too good to wade.
How the fatigues and annoyances of travel fill one with bitter prejudices sometimes!
I might enter Florence under happier auspices a month hence and find it all beautiful, all attractive.
But I do not care to think of it now, at all, nor of its roomy shops filled to the ceiling with snowy marble and alabaster copies of all the celebrated sculptures in Europe --copies so enchanting to the eye that I wonder how they can really be shaped like
I got lost in Florence at nine o'clock, one night, and staid lost in that labyrinth of narrow streets and long rows of vast buildings that look all alike, until toward three o'clock in the morning.
It was a pleasant night and at first there were a good many people abroad, and there were cheerful lights about.
Later, I grew accustomed to prowling about mysterious drifts and tunnels and astonishing and interesting myself with coming around corners expecting to find the hotel staring me in the face, and not finding it doing any thing of the kind.
Later still, I felt tired.
I soon felt remarkably tired.
But there was no one abroad, now --not even a policeman.
I walked till I was out of all patience, and very hot and thirsty.
At last, somewhere after one o'clock, I came unexpectedly to one of the city gates.
I knew then that I was very far from the hotel.
The soldiers thought I wanted to leave the city, and they sprang up and barred the way with their muskets.
I said: "Hotel d'Europe"!
It was all the Italian I knew, and I was not certain whether that was Italian or French.
The soldiers looked stupidly at each other and at me, and shook their heads and took me into custody.
I said I wanted to go home.
They did not understand me.
They took me into the guard-house and searched me, but they found no sedition on me.
They found a small piece of soap (we carry soap with us, now,) and I made them a present of it, seeing that they regarded it as a curiosity.
I continued to say Hotel d'Europe, and they continued to shake their heads, until at last a young soldier nodding in the corner roused up and said something.
He said he knew where the hotel was, I suppose, for the officer of the guard sent him away with me.
We walked a hundred or a hundred and fifty miles, it appeared to me, and then he got lost.
He turned this way and that, and finally gave it up and signified that he was going to spend the remainder of the morning trying to find the city gate again.
At that moment it struck me that there was something familiar about the house over the way.
It was the hotel!
It was a happy thing for me that there happened to be a soldier there that knew even as much as he did; for they say that the policy of the government is to change the soldiery from one place to another constantly and from country to city, so that they can
My experiences of Florence were chiefly unpleasant.
I will change the subject.
At Pisa we climbed up to the top of the strangest structure the world has any knowledge of--the Leaning Tower.
As every one knows, it is in the neighborhood of one hundred and eighty feet high--and I beg to observe that one hundred and eighty feet reach to about the hight of four ordinary three-story buildings piled one on top of the other, and is a very
It is seven hundred years old, but neither history or tradition say whether it was built as it is, purposely, or whether one of its sides has settled.
There is no record that it ever stood straight up.
It is built of marble.
It is an airy and a beautiful structure, and each of its eight stories is encircled by fluted columns, some of marble and some of granite, with Corinthian capitals that were handsome when they were new.
It is a bell tower, and in its top hangs a chime of ancient bells.
The winding staircase within is dark, but one always knows which side of the tower he is on because of his naturally gravitating from one side to the other of the staircase with the rise or dip of the tower.
Some of the stone steps are foot-worn only on one end; others only on the other end; others only in the middle.
To look down into the tower from the top is like looking down into a tilted well.
A rope that hangs from the centre of the top touches the wall before it reaches the bottom.
Standing on the summit, one does not feel altogether comfortable when he looks down from the high side; but to crawl on your breast to the verge on the lower side and try to stretch your neck out far enough to see the base of the tower, makes your flesh
You handle yourself very carefully, all the time, under the silly impression that if it is not falling, your trifling weight will start it unless you are particular not to "bear down" on it.
The Duomo, close at hand, is one of the finest cathedrals in Europe.
It is eight hundred years old.
Its grandeur has outlived the high commercial prosperity and the political importance that made it a necessity, or rather a possibility.
Surrounded by poverty, decay and ruin, it conveys to us a more tangible impression of the former greatness of Pisa than books could give us.
The Baptistery, which is a few years older than the Leaning Tower, is a stately rotunda, of huge dimensions, and was a costly structure.
In it hangs the lamp whose measured swing suggested to Galileo the pendulum.
It looked an insignificant thing to have conferred upon the world of science and mechanics such a mighty extension of their dominions as it has.
Pondering, in its suggestive presence, I seemed to see a crazy universe of swinging disks, the toiling children of this sedate parent.
He appeared to have an intelligent expression about him of knowing that he was not a lamp at all; that he was a Pendulum; a pendulum disguised, for prodigious and inscrutable purposes of his own deep devising, and not a common pendulum either, but the old
This Baptistery is endowed with the most pleasing echo of all the echoes we have read of.
The guide sounded two sonorous notes, about half an octave apart; the echo answered with the most enchanting, the most melodious, the richest blending of sweet sounds that one can imagine.
It was like a long-drawn chord of a church organ, infinitely softened by distance.
I may be extravagant in this matter, but if this be the case my ear is to blame--not my pen.
I am describing a memory--and one that will remain long with me.
The peculiar devotional spirit of the olden time, which placed a higher confidence in outward forms of worship than in the watchful guarding of the heart against sinful thoughts and the hands against sinful deeds, and which believed in the protecting
The tombs are set in soil brought in ships from the Holy Land ages ago.
To be buried in such ground was regarded by the ancient Pisans as being more potent for salvation than many masses purchased of the church and the vowing of many candles to the Virgin.
Pisa is believed to be about three thousand years old.
It was one of the twelve great cities of ancient Etruria, that commonwealth which has left so many monuments in testimony of its extraordinary advancement, and so little history of itself that is tangible and comprehensible.
A Pisan antiquarian gave me an ancient tear-jug which he averred was full four thousand years old.
It was found among the ruins of one of the oldest of the Etruscan cities.
He said it came from a tomb, and was used by some bereaved family in that remote age when even the Pyramids of Egypt were young, Damascus a village, Abraham a prattling infant and ancient Troy not yet [dreampt] of, to receive the tears wept for some lost
It spoke to us in a language of its own; and with a pathos more tender than any words might bring, its mute eloquence swept down the long roll of the centuries with its tale of a vacant chair, a familiar footstep missed from the threshold, a pleasant voice
--a tale which is always so new to us, so startling, so terrible, so benumbing to the senses, and behold how threadbare and old it is!
No shrewdly-worded history could have brought the myths and shadows of that old dreamy age before us clothed with human flesh and warmed with human sympathies so vividly as did this poor little unsentient vessel of pottery.
Pisa was a republic in the middle ages, with a government of her own, armies and navies of her own and a great commerce.
She was a warlike power, and inscribed upon her banners many a brilliant fight with Genoese and Turks.
It is said that the city once numbered a population of four hundred thousand; but her sceptre has passed from her grasp, now, her ships and her armies are gone, her commerce is dead.
Her battle-flags bear the mold and the dust of centuries, her marts are deserted, she has shrunken far within her crumbling walls, and her great population has diminished to twenty thousand souls.
She has but one thing left to boast of, and that is not much, viz: she is the second city of Tuscany.
We reached Leghorn in time to see all we wished to see of it long before the city gates were closed for the evening, and then came on board the ship.
We felt as though we had been away from home an age.
We never entirely appreciated, before, what a very pleasant den our state-room is; nor how jolly it is to sit at dinner in one's own seat in one's own cabin, and hold familiar conversation with friends in one's own language.
Oh, the rare happiness of comprehending every single word that is said, and knowing that every word one says in return will be understood as well!
We would talk ourselves to death, now, only there are only about ten passengers out of the sixty-five to talk to.
The others are wandering, we hardly know where.
We shall not go ashore in Leghorn.
We are surfeited with Italian cities for the present, and much prefer to walk the familiar quarterdeck and view this one from a distance.
The stupid magnates of this Leghorn government can not understand that so large a steamer as ours could cross the broad Atlantic with no other purpose than to indulge a party of ladies and gentlemen in a pleasure excursion.
It looks too improbable.
It is suspicious, they think.
Something more important must be hidden behind it all.
They can not understand it, and they scorn the evidence of the ship's papers.
They have decided at last that we are a battalion of incendiary, blood-thirsty Garibaldians in disguise!
And in all seriousness they have set a gun-boat to watch the vessel night and day, with orders to close down on any revolutionary movement in a twinkling!
Police boats are on patrol duty about us all the time, and it is as much as a sailor's liberty is worth to show himself in a red shirt.
These policemen follow the executive officer's boat from shore to ship and from ship to shore and watch his dark maneuvres with a vigilant eye.
They will arrest him yet unless he assumes an expression of countenance that shall have less of carnage, insurrection and sedition in it.
A visit paid in a friendly way to General Garibaldi yesterday (by cordial invitation,) by some of our passengers, has gone far to confirm the dread suspicions the government harbors toward us.
It is thought the friendly visit was only the cloak of a bloody conspiracy.
These people draw near and watch us when we bathe in the sea from the ship's side.
Do they think we are communing with a reserve force of rascals at the bottom?
It is said that we shall probably be quarantined at Naples.
Two or three of us prefer not to run this risk.
Therefore, when we are rested, we propose to go in a French steamer to Civita and from thence to Rome, and by rail to Naples.
They do not quarantine the cars, no matter where they got their passengers from.
CHAPTER XXV.
There are a good many things about this Italy which I do not understand --and more especially I can not understand how a bankrupt Government can have such palatial railroad depots and such marvels of turnpikes.
Why, these latter are as hard as adamant, as straight as a line, as smooth as a floor, and as white as snow.
When it is too dark to see any other object, one can still see the white turnpikes of France and Italy; and they are clean enough to eat from, without a table-cloth.
And yet no tolls are charged.
As for the railways--we have none like them.
The cars slide as smoothly along as if they were on runners.
The depots are vast palaces of cut marble, with stately colonnades of the same royal stone traversing them from end to end, and with ample walls and ceilings richly decorated with frescoes.
The lofty gateways are graced with statues, and the broad floors are all laid in polished flags of marble.
These things win me more than Italy's hundred galleries of priceless art treasures, because I can understand the one and am not competent to appreciate the other.
In the turnpikes, the railways, the depots, and the new boulevards of uniform houses in Florence and other cities here, I see the genius of Louis Napoleon, or rather, I see the works of that statesman imitated.
But Louis has taken care that in France there shall be a foundation for these improvements--money.
He has always the wherewithal to back up his projects; they strengthen France and never weaken her.
Her material prosperity is genuine.
But here the case is different.
This country is bankrupt.
There is no real foundation for these great works.
The prosperity they would seem to indicate is a pretence.
There is no money in the treasury, and so they enfeeble her instead of strengthening.
Italy has achieved the dearest wish of her heart and become an independent State--and in so doing she has drawn an elephant in the political lottery.
She has nothing to feed it on.
Inexperienced in government, she plunged into all manner of useless expenditure, and swamped her treasury almost in a day.
She squandered millions of francs on a navy which she did not need, and the first time she took her new toy into action she got it knocked higher than Gilderoy's kite--to use the language of the Pilgrims.
But it is an ill-wind that blows nobody good.
A year ago, when Italy saw utter ruin staring her in the face and her greenbacks hardly worth the paper they were printed on, her Parliament ventured upon a 'coup de main' that would have appalled the stoutest of her statesmen under less desperate
They, in a manner, confiscated the domains of the Church!
This in priest-ridden Italy!
This in a land which has groped in the midnight of priestly superstition for sixteen hundred years!
It was a rare good fortune for Italy, the stress of weather that drove her to break from this prison-house.
They do not call it confiscating the church property.
That would sound too harshly yet.
But it amounts to that.
There are thousands of churches in Italy, each with untold millions of treasures stored away in its closets, and each with its battalion of priests to be supported.
And then there are the estates of the Church--league on league of the richest lands and the noblest forests in all Italy--all yielding immense revenues to the Church, and none paying a cent in taxes to the State.
In some great districts the Church owns all the property--lands, watercourses, woods, mills and factories.
They buy, they sell, they manufacture, and since they pay no taxes, who can hope to compete with them?
Well, the Government has seized all this in effect, and will yet seize it in rigid and unpoetical reality, no doubt.
Something must be done to feed a starving treasury, and there is no other resource in all Italy --none but the riches of the Church.
So the Government intends to take to itself a great portion of the revenues arising from priestly farms, factories, etc.
, and also intends to take possession of the churches and carry them on, after its own fashion and upon its own responsibility.
In a few instances it will leave the establishments of great pet churches undisturbed, but in all others only a handful of priests will be retained to preach and pray, a few will be pensioned, and the balance turned adrift.
Pray glance at some of these churches and their embellishments, and see whether the Government is doing a righteous thing or not.
In Venice, today, a city of a hundred thousand inhabitants, there are twelve hundred priests.
Heaven only knows how many there were before the Parliament reduced their numbers.
There was the great Jesuit Church.
Under the old regime it required sixty priests to engineer it--the Government does it with five, now, and the others are discharged from service.
All about that church wretchedness and poverty abound.
At its door a dozen hats and bonnets were doffed to us, as many heads were humbly bowed, and as many hands extended, appealing for pennies--appealing with foreign words we could not understand, but appealing mutely, with sad eyes, and sunken cheeks, and
Then we passed within the great doors, and it seemed that the riches of the world were before us!
Huge columns carved out of single masses of marble, and inlaid from top to bottom with a hundred intricate figures wrought in costly verde antique; pulpits of the same rich materials, whose draperies hung down in many a pictured fold, the stony fabric
In the midst of all this magnificence, the solid gold and silver furniture of the altar seemed cheap and trivial.
Even the floors and ceilings cost a princely fortune.
Now, where is the use of allowing all those riches to lie idle, while half of that community hardly know, from day to day, how they are going to keep body and soul together?
And, where is the wisdom in permitting hundreds upon hundreds of millions of francs to be locked up in the useless trumpery of churches all over Italy, and the people ground to death with taxation to uphold a perishing Government?
As far as I can see, Italy, for fifteen hundred years, has turned all her energies, all her finances, and all her industry to the building up of a vast array of wonderful church edifices, and starving half her citizens to accomplish it.
She is to-day one vast museum of magnificence and misery.
All the churches in an ordinary American city put together could hardly buy the jeweled frippery in one of her hundred cathedrals.
And for every beggar in America, Italy can show a hundred--and rags and vermin to match.
It is the wretchedest, princeliest land on earth.
Look at the grand Duomo of Florence--a vast pile that has been sapping the purses of her citizens for five hundred years, and is not nearly finished yet.
Like all other men, I fell down and worshipped it, but when the filthy beggars swarmed around me the contrast was too striking, too suggestive, and I said, "O, sons of classic Italy, is the spirit of enterprise, of self-reliance, of noble endeavor, utterly
Curse your indolent worthlessness, why don't you rob your church"?
Three hundred happy, comfortable priests are employed in that Cathedral.
And now that my temper is up, I may as well go on and abuse every body I can think of.
They have a grand mausoleum in Florence, which they built to bury our Lord and Saviour and the Medici family in.
It sounds blasphemous, but it is true, and here they act blasphemy.
The dead and damned Medicis who cruelly tyrannized over Florence and were her curse for over two hundred years, are salted away in a circle of costly vaults, and in their midst the Holy Sepulchre was to have been set up.
The expedition sent to Jerusalem to seize it got into trouble and could not accomplish the burglary, and so the centre of the mausoleum is vacant now.
They say the entire mausoleum was intended for the Holy Sepulchre, and was only turned into a family burying place after the Jerusalem expedition failed--but you will excuse me.
Some of those Medicis would have smuggled themselves in sure.
--What they had not the effrontery to do, was not worth doing.
Why, they had their trivial, forgotten exploits on land and sea pictured out in grand frescoes (as did also the ancient Doges of Venice) with the Saviour and the Virgin throwing bouquets to them out of the clouds, and the Deity himself applauding from his
And who painted these things?
Why, Titian, Tintoretto, Paul Veronese, Raphael--none other than the world's idols, the "old masters".
Andrea del Sarto glorified his princes in pictures that must save them for ever from the oblivion they merited, and they let him starve.
Served him right.
Raphael pictured such infernal villains as Catherine and Marie de Medicis seated in heaven and conversing familiarly with the Virgin Mary and the angels, (to say nothing of higher personages,) and yet my friends abuse me because I am a little prejudiced
I can not help but see it, now and then, but I keep on protesting against the groveling spirit that could persuade those masters to prostitute their noble talents to the adulation of such monsters as the French, Venetian and Florentine Princes of two and
I am told that the old masters had to do these shameful things for bread, the princes and potentates being the only patrons of art.
If a grandly gifted man may drag his pride and his manhood in the dirt for bread rather than starve with the nobility that is in him untainted, the excuse is a valid one.
It would excuse theft in Washingtons and Wellingtons, and unchastity in women as well.
But somehow, I can not keep that Medici mausoleum out of my memory.
It is as large as a church; its pavement is rich enough for the pavement of a King's palace; its great dome is gorgeous with frescoes; its walls are made of--what?
Marble?
--plaster?
--wood?
--paper?
No.
Red porphyry --verde antique--jasper--oriental agate--alabaster--mother-of-pearl --chalcedony--red coral--lapis lazuli!
All the vast walls are made wholly of these precious stones, worked in, and in and in together in elaborate pattern s and figures, and polished till they glow like great mirrors with the pictured splendors reflected from the dome overhead.
And before a statue of one of those dead Medicis reposes a crown that blazes with diamonds and emeralds enough to buy a ship-of-the-line, almost.
These are the things the Government has its evil eye upon, and a happy thing it will be for Italy when they melt away in the public treasury.
And now----.
However, another beggar approaches.
I will go out and destroy him, and then come back and write another chapter of vituperation.
Having eaten the friendless orphan--having driven away his comrades --having grown calm and reflective at length--I now feel in a kindlier mood.
I feel that after talking so freely about the priests and the churches, justice demands that if I know any thing good about either I ought to say it.
I have heard of many things that redound to the credit of the priesthood, but the most notable matter that occurs to me now is the devotion one of the mendicant orders showed during the prevalence of the cholera last year.
I speak of the Dominican friars--men who wear a coarse, heavy brown robe and a cowl, in this hot climate, and go barefoot.
They live on alms altogether, I believe.
They must unquestionably love their religion, to suffer so much for it.
When the cholera was raging in Naples; when the people were dying by hundreds and hundreds every day; when every concern for the public welfare was swallowed up in selfish private interest, and every citizen made the taking care of himself his sole object,
Their noble efforts cost many of them their lives.
They laid them down cheerfully, and well they might.
Creeds mathematically precise, and hair-splitting niceties of doctrine, are absolutely necessary for the salvation of some kinds of souls, but surely the charity, the purity, the unselfishness that are in the hearts of men like these would save their souls
One of these fat bare-footed rascals came here to Civita Vecchia with us in the little French steamer.
There were only half a dozen of us in the cabin.
He belonged in the steerage.
He was the life of the ship, the bloody-minded son of the Inquisition!
He and the leader of the marine band of a French man-of-war played on the piano and sang opera turn about; they sang duets together; they rigged impromptu theatrical costumes and gave us extravagant farces and pantomimes.
We got along first-rate with the friar, and were excessively conversational, albeit he could not understand what we said, and certainly he never uttered a word that we could guess the meaning of.
This Civita Vecchia is the finest nest of dirt, vermin and ignorance we have found yet, except that African perdition they call Tangier, which is just like it.
The people here live in alleys two yards wide, which have a smell about them which is peculiar but not entertaining.
It is well the alleys are not wider, because they hold as much smell now as a person can stand, and of course, if they were wider they would hold more, and then the people would die.
These alleys are paved with stone, and carpeted with deceased cats, and decayed rags, and decomposed vegetable-tops, and remnants of old boots, all soaked with dish-water, and the people sit around on stools and enjoy it.
They are indolent, as a general thing, and yet have few pastimes.
They work two or three hours at a time, but not hard, and then they knock off and catch flies.
This does not require any talent, because they only have to grab--if they do not get the one they are after, they get another.
It is all the same to them.
They have no partialities.
Whichever one they get is the one they want.
They have other kinds of insects, but it does not make them arrogant.
They are very quiet, unpretending people.
They have more of these kind of things than other communities, but they do not boast.
They are very uncleanly--these people--in face, in person and dress.
When they see any body with a clean shirt on, it arouses their scorn.
The women wash clothes, half the day, at the public tanks in the streets, but they are probably somebody else's.
Or may be they keep one set to wear and another to wash; because they never put on any that have ever been washed.
When they get done washing, they sit in the alleys and nurse their cubs.
They nurse one ash-cat at a time, and the others scratch their backs against the door-post and are happy.
All this country belongs to the Papal States.
They do not appear to have any schools here, and only one billiard table.
Their education is at a very low stage.
One portion of the men go into the military, another into the priesthood, and the rest into the shoe-making business.
They keep up the passport system here, but so they do in Turkey.
This shows that the Papal States are as far advanced as Turkey.
This fact will be alone sufficient to silence the tongues of malignant calumniators.
I had to get my passport vised for Rome in Florence, and then they would not let me come ashore here until a policeman had examined it on the wharf and sent me a permit.
They did not even dare to let me take my passport in my hands for twelve hours, I looked so formidable.
They judged it best to let me cool down.
They thought I wanted to take the town, likely.
Little did they know me.
I wouldn't have it.
They examined my baggage at the depot.
They took one of my ablest jokes and read it over carefully twice and then read it backwards.
But it was too deep for them.
They passed it around, and every body speculated on it awhile, but it mastered them all.
It was no common joke.
At length a veteran officer spelled it over deliberately and shook his head three or four times and said that in his opinion it was seditious.
That was the first time I felt alarmed.
I immediately said I would explain the document, and they crowded around.
And so I explained and explained and explained, and they took notes of all I said, but the more I explained the more they could not understand it, and when they desisted at last, I could not even understand it myself.
They said they believed it was an incendiary document, leveled at the government.
I declared solemnly that it was not, but they only shook their heads and would not be satisfied.
Then they consulted a good while; and finally they confiscated it.
I was very sorry for this, because I had worked a long time on that joke, and took a good deal of pride in it, and now I suppose I shall never see it any more.
I suppose it will be sent up and filed away among the criminal archives of Rome, and will always be regarded as a mysterious infernal machine which would have blown up like a mine and scattered the good Pope all around, but for a miraculous providential
And I suppose that all the time I am in Rome the police will dog me about from place to place because they think I am a dangerous character.
It is fearfully hot in Civita Vecchia.
The streets are made very narrow and the houses built very solid and heavy and high, as a protection against the heat.
This is the first Italian town I have seen which does not appear to have a patron saint.
I suppose no saint but the one that went up in the chariot of fire could stand the climate.
There is nothing here to see.
They have not even a cathedral, with eleven tons of solid silver archbishops in the back room; and they do not show you any moldy buildings that are seven thousand years old; nor any smoke-dried old fire-screens which are chef d'oeuvres of Reubens or
We are going to Rome.
There is nothing to see here.
CHAPTER XXVI.
What is it that confers the noblest delight?
What is that which swells a man's breast with pride above that which any other experience can bring to him?
Discovery!
To know that you are walking where none others have walked; that you are beholding what human eye has not seen before; that you are breathing a virgin atmosphere.
To give birth to an idea--to discover a great thought--an intellectual nugget, right under the dust of a field that many a brain--plow had gone over before.
To find a new planet, to invent a new hinge, to find the way to make the lightnings carry your messages.
To be the first--that is the idea.
To do something, say something, see something, before any body else--these are the things that confer a pleasure compared with which other pleasures are tame and commonplace, other ecstasies cheap and trivial.
Morse, with his first message, brought by his servant, the lightning; Fulton, in that long-drawn century of suspense, when he placed his hand upon the throttle-valve and lo, the steamboat moved; Jenner, when his patient with the cow's virus in his blood,
These are the men who have really lived--who have actually comprehended what pleasure is--who have crowded long lifetimes of ecstasy into a single moment.
What is there in Rome for me to see that others have not seen before me?
What is there for me to touch that others have not touched?
What is there for me to feel, to learn, to hear, to know, that shall thrill me before it pass to others?
What can I discover?
--Nothing.
Nothing whatsoever.
One charm of travel dies here.
But if I were only a Roman!
--If, added to my own I could be gifted with modern Roman sloth, modern Roman superstition, and modern Roman boundlessness of ignorance, what bewildering worlds of unsuspected wonders I would discover!
Ah, if I were only a habitant of the Campagna five and twenty miles from Rome!
Then I would travel.
I would go to America, and see, and learn, and return to the Campagna and stand before my countrymen an illustrious discoverer.
I would say: "I saw there a country which has no overshadowing Mother Church, and yet the people survive.
I saw a government which never was protected by foreign soldiers at a cost greater than that required to carry on the government itself.
I saw common men and common women who could read; I even saw small children of common country people reading from books; if I dared think you would believe it, I would say they could write, also.
"In the cities I saw people drinking a delicious beverage made of chalk and water, but never once saw goats driven through their Broadway or their Pennsylvania Avenue or their Montgomery street and milked at the doors of the houses.
I saw real glass windows in the houses of even the commonest people.
Some of the houses are not of stone, nor yet of bricks; I solemnly swear they are made of wood.
Houses there will take fire and burn, sometimes--actually burn entirely down, and not leave a single vestige behind.
I could state that for a truth, upon my death-bed.
And as a proof that the circumstance is not rare, I aver that they have a thing which they call a fire-engine, which vomits forth great streams of water, and is kept always in readiness, by night and by day, to rush to houses that are burning.
You would think one engine would be sufficient, but some great cities have a hundred; they keep men hired, and pay them by the month to do nothing but put out fires.
For a certain sum of money other men will insure that your house shall not burn down; and if it burns they will pay you for it.
There are hundreds and thousands of schools, and any body may go and learn to be wise, like a priest.
In that singular country if a rich man dies a sinner, he is damned; he can not buy salvation with money for masses.
There is really not much use in being rich, there.
Not much use as far as the other world is concerned, but much, very much use, as concerns this; because there, if a man be rich, he is very greatly honored, and can become a legislator, a governor, a general, a senator, no matter how ignorant an ass he
There, if a man be rich, they give him costly presents, they ask him to feasts, they invite him to drink complicated beverages; but if he be poor and in debt, they require him to do that which they term to 'settle.
' The women put on a different dress almost every day; the dress is usually fine, but absurd in shape; the very shape and fashion of it changes twice in a hundred years; and did I but covet to be called an extravagant falsifier, I would say it changed even
Hair does not grow upon the American women's heads; it is made for them by cunning workmen in the shops, and is curled and frizzled into scandalous and ungodly forms.
Some persons wear eyes of glass which they see through with facility perhaps, else they would not use them; and in the mouths of some are teeth made by the sacrilegious hand of man.
The dress of the men is laughably grotesque.
They carry no musket in ordinary life, nor no long-pointed pole; they wear no wide green-lined cloak; they wear no peaked black felt hat, no leathern gaiters reaching to the knee, no goat-skin breeches with the hair side out, no hob-nailed shoes, no
They wear a conical hat termed a 'nail-keg;' a coat of saddest black; a shirt which shows dirt so easily that it has to be changed every month, and is very troublesome; things called pantaloons, which are held up by shoulder straps, and on their feet they
Yet dressed in this fantastic garb, these people laughed at my costume.
In that country, books are so common that it is really no curiosity to see one.
Newspapers also.
They have a great machine which prints such things by thousands every hour.
"I saw common men, there--men who were neither priests nor princes--who yet absolutely owned the land they tilled.
It was not rented from the church, nor from the nobles.
I am ready to take my oath of this.
In that country you might fall from a third story window three several times, and not mash either a soldier or a priest.
--The scarcity of such people is astonishing.
In the cities you will see a dozen civilians for every soldier, and as many for every priest or preacher.
Jews, there, are treated just like human beings, instead of dogs.
They can work at any business they please; they can sell brand new goods if they want to; they can keep drug-stores; they can practice medicine among Christians; they can even shake hands with Christians if they choose; they can associate with them, just
Ah, it is wonderful.
The common people there know a great deal; they even have the effrontery to complain if they are not properly governed, and to take hold and help conduct the government themselves; if they had laws like ours, which give one dollar of every three a crop
They are curious people.
They do not know when they are well off.
Mendicant priests do not prowl among them with baskets begging for the church and eating up their substance.
One hardly ever sees a minister of the gospel going around there in his bare feet, with a basket, begging for subsistence.
In that country the preachers are not like our mendicant orders of friars--they have two or three suits of clothing, and they wash sometimes.
In that land are mountains far higher than the Alban mountains; the vast Roman Campagna, a hundred miles long and full forty broad, is really small compared to the United States of America; the Tiber, that celebrated river of ours, which stretches its
In America the people are absolutely wiser and know much more than their grandfathers did.
They do not plow with a sharpened stick, nor yet with a three-cornered block of wood that merely scratches the top of the ground.
We do that because our fathers did, three thousand years ago, I suppose.
But those people have no holy reverence for their ancestors.
They plow with a plow that is a sharp, curved blade of iron, and it cuts into the earth full five inches.
And this is not all.
They cut their grain with a horrid machine that mows down whole fields in a day.
If I dared, I would say that sometimes they use a blasphemous plow that works by fire and vapor and tears up an acre of ground in a single hour--but --but--I see by your looks that you do not believe the things I am telling you.
Alas, my character is ruined, and I am a branded speaker of untruths"!
Of course we have been to the monster Church of St. Peter, frequently.
I knew its dimensions.
I knew it was a prodigious structure.
I knew it was just about the length of the capitol at Washington--say seven hundred and thirty feet.
I knew it was three hundred and sixty-four feet wide, and consequently wider than the capitol.
I knew that the cross on the top of the dome of the church was four hundred and thirty-eight feet above the ground, and therefore about a hundred or may be a hundred and twenty-five feet higher than the dome of the capitol.
--Thus I had one gauge.
I wished to come as near forming a correct idea of how it was going to look, as possible; I had a curiosity to see how much I would err.
I erred considerably.
St. Peter's did not look nearly so large as the capitol, and certainly not a twentieth part as beautiful, from the outside.
When we reached the door, and stood fairly within the church, it was impossible to comprehend that it was a very large building.
I had to cipher a comprehension of it.
I had to ransack my memory for some more similes.
St. Peter's is bulky.
Its height and size would represent two of the Washington capitol set one on top of the other--if the capitol were wider; or two blocks or two blocks and a half of ordinary buildings set one on top of the other.
St. Peter's was that large, but it could and would not look so.
The trouble was that every thing in it and about it was on such a scale of uniform vastness that there were no contrasts to judge by--none but the people, and I had not noticed them.
They were insects.
The statues of children holding vases of holy water were immense, according to the tables of figures, but so was every thing else around them.
The mosaic pictures in the dome were huge, and were made of thousands and thousands of cubes of glass as large as the end of my little finger, but those pictures looked smooth, and gaudy of color, and in good proportion to the dome.
Evidently they would not answer to measure by.
Away down toward the far end of the church (I thought it was really clear at the far end, but discovered afterward that it was in the centre, under the dome,) stood the thing they call the baldacchino--a great bronze pyramidal frame-work like that which
It only looked like a considerably magnified bedstead--nothing more.
Yet I knew it was a good deal more than half as high as Niagara Falls.
It was overshadowed by a dome so mighty that its own height was snubbed.
The four great square piers or pillars that stand equidistant from each other in the church, and support the roof, I could not work up to their real dimensions by any method of comparison.
I knew that the faces of each were about the width of a very large dwelling-house front, (fifty or sixty feet,) and that they were twice as high as an ordinary three-story dwelling, but still they looked small.
I tried all the different ways I could think of to compel myself to understand how large St. Peter's was, but with small success.
The mosaic portrait of an Apostle who was writing with a pen six feet long seemed only an ordinary Apostle.
But the people attracted my attention after a while.
To stand in the door of St. Peter's and look at men down toward its further extremity, two blocks away, has a diminishing effect on them; surrounded by the prodigious pictures and statues, and lost in the vast spaces, they look very much smaller than they
I "averaged" a man as he passed me and watched him as he drifted far down by the baldacchino and beyond--watched him dwindle to an insignificant school-boy, and then, in the midst of the silent throng of human pigmies gliding about him, I lost him.
The church had lately been decorated, on the occasion of a great ceremony in honor of St. Peter, and men were engaged, now, in removing the flowers and gilt paper from the walls and pillars.
As no ladders could reach the great heights, the men swung themselves down from balustrades and the capitals of pilasters by ropes, to do this work.
The upper gallery which encircles the inner sweep of the dome is two hundred and forty feet above the floor of the church--very few steeples in America could reach up to it.
Visitors always go up there to look down into the church because one gets the best idea of some of the heights and distances from that point.
While we stood on the floor one of the workmen swung loose from that gallery at the end of a long rope.
I had not supposed, before, that a man could look so much like a spider.
He was insignificant in size, and his rope seemed only a thread.
Seeing that he took up so little space, I could believe the story, then, that ten thousand troops went to St. Peter's, once, to hear mass, and their commanding officer came afterward, and not finding them, supposed they had not yet arrived.
But they were in the church, nevertheless--they were in one of the transepts.
Nearly fifty thousand persons assembled in St. Peter's to hear the publishing of the dogma of the Immaculate Conception.
It is estimated that the floor of the church affords standing room for--for a large number of people; I have forgotten the exact figures.
But it is no matter--it is near enough.
They have twelve small pillars, in St. Peter's, which came from Solomon's Temple.
They have, also--which was far more interesting to me--a piece of the true cross, and some nails, and a part of the crown of thorns.
Of course we ascended to the summit of the dome, and of course we also went up into the gilt copper ball which is above it.
--There was room there for a dozen persons, with a little crowding, and it was as close and hot as an oven.
Some of those people who are so fond of writing their names in prominent places had been there before us--a million or two, I should think.
From the dome of St. Peter's one can see every notable object in Rome, from the Castle of St. Angelo to the Coliseum.
He can discern the seven hills upon which Rome is built.
He can see the Tiber, and the locality of the bridge which Horatius kept "in the brave days of old" when Lars Porsena attempted to cross it with his invading host.
He can see the spot where the Horatii and the Curatii fought their famous battle.
He can see the broad green Campagna, stretching away toward the mountains, with its scattered arches and broken aqueducts of the olden time, so picturesque in their gray ruin, and so daintily festooned with vines.
He can see the Alban Mountains, the Appenines, the Sabine Hills, and the blue Mediterranean.
He can see a panorama that is varied, extensive, beautiful to the eye, and more illustrious in history than any other in Europe.
--About his feet is spread the remnant of a city that once had a population of four million souls; and among its massed edifices stand the ruins of temples, columns, and triumphal arches that knew the Caesars, and the noonday of Roman splendor; and close
The Appian Way is here yet, and looking much as it did, perhaps, when the triumphal processions of the Emperors moved over it in other days bringing fettered princes from the confines of the earth.
We can not see the long array of chariots and mail-clad men laden with the spoils of conquest, but we can imagine the pageant, after a fashion.
We look out upon many objects of interest from the dome of St. Peter's; and last of all, almost at our feet, our eyes rest upon the building which was once the Inquisition.
How times changed, between the older ages and the new!
Some seventeen or eighteen centuries ago, the ignorant men of Rome were wont to put Christians in the arena of the Coliseum yonder, and turn the wild beasts in upon them for a show.
It was for a lesson as well.
It was to teach the people to abhor and fear the new doctrine the followers of Christ were teaching.
The beasts tore the victims limb from limb and made poor mangled corpses of them in the twinkling of an eye.
But when the Christians came into power, when the holy Mother Church became mistress of the barbarians, she taught them the error of their ways by no such means.
No, she put them in this pleasant Inquisition and pointed to the Blessed Redeemer, who was so gentle and so merciful toward all men, and they urged the barbarians to love him; and they did all they could to persuade them to love and honor him--first by
They always convinced those barbarians.
The true religion, properly administered, as the good Mother Church used to administer it, is very, very soothing.
It is wonderfully persuasive, also.
There is a great difference between feeding parties to wild beasts and stirring up their finer feelings in an Inquisition.
One is the system of degraded barbarians, the other of enlightened, civilized people.
It is a great pity the playful Inquisition is no more.
I prefer not to describe St. Peter's.
It has been done before.
The ashes of Peter, the disciple of the Saviour, repose in a crypt under the baldacchino.
We stood reverently in that place; so did we also in the Mamertine Prison, where he was confined, where he converted the soldiers, and where tradition says he caused a spring of water to flow in order that he might baptize them.
But when they showed us the print of Peter's face in the hard stone of the prison wall and said he made that by falling up against it, we doubted.
And when, also, the monk at the church of San Sebastian showed us a paving-stone with two great footprints in it and said that Peter's feet made those, we lacked confidence again.
Such things do not impress one.
The monk said that angels came and liberated Peter from prison by night, and he started away from Rome by the Appian Way.
The Saviour met him and told him to go back, which he did.
Peter left those footprints in the stone upon which he stood at the time.
It was not stated how it was ever discovered whose footprints they were, seeing the interview occurred secretly and at night.
The print of the face in the prison was that of a man of common size; the footprints were those of a man ten or twelve feet high.
The discrepancy confirmed our unbelief.
We necessarily visited the Forum, where Caesar was assassinated, and also the Tarpeian Rock.
We saw the Dying Gladiator at the Capitol, and I think that even we appreciated that wonder of art; as much, perhaps, as we did that fearful story wrought in marble, in the Vatican--the Laocoon.
And then the Coliseum.
Every body knows the picture of the Coliseum; every body recognizes at once that "looped and windowed" band-box with a side bitten out.
Being rather isolated, it shows to better advantage than any other of the monuments of ancient Rome.
Even the beautiful Pantheon, whose pagan altars uphold the cross, now, and whose Venus, tricked out in consecrated gimcracks, does reluctant duty as a Virgin Mary to-day, is built about with shabby houses and its stateliness sadly marred.
But the monarch of all European ruins, the Coliseum, maintains that reserve and that royal seclusion which is proper to majesty.
Weeds and flowers spring from its massy arches and its circling seats, and vines hang their fringes from its lofty walls.
An impressive silence broods over the monstrous structure where such multitudes of men and women were wont to assemble in other days.
The butterflies have taken the places of the queens of fashion and beauty of eighteen centuries ago, and the lizards sun themselves in the sacred seat of the Emperor.
More vividly than all the written histories, the Coliseum tells the story of Rome's grandeur and Rome's decay.
It is the worthiest type of both that exists.
Moving about the Rome of to-day, we might find it hard to believe in her old magnificence and her millions of population; but with this stubborn evidence before us that she was obliged to have a theatre with sitting room for eighty thousand persons and
The Coliseum is over one thousand six hundred feet long, seven hundred and fifty wide, and one hundred and sixty-five high.
Its shape is oval.
In America we make convicts useful at the same time that we punish them for their crimes.
We farm them out and compel them to earn money for the State by making barrels and building roads.
Thus we combine business with retribution, and all things are lovely.
But in ancient Rome they combined religious duty with pleasure.
Since it was necessary that the new sect called Christians should be exterminated, the people judged it wise to make this work profitable to the State at the same time, and entertaining to the public.
In addition to the gladiatorial combats and other shows, they sometimes threw members of the hated sect into the arena of the Coliseum and turned wild beasts in upon them.
It is estimated that seventy thousand Christians suffered martyrdom in this place.
This has made the Coliseum holy ground, in the eyes of the followers of the Saviour.
And well it might; for if the chain that bound a saint, and the footprints a saint has left upon a stone he chanced to stand upon, be holy, surely the spot where a man gave up his life for his faith is holy.
Seventeen or eighteen centuries ago this Coliseum was the theatre of Rome, and Rome was mistress of the world.
Splendid pageants were exhibited here, in presence of the Emperor, the great ministers of State, the nobles, and vast audiences of citizens of smaller consequence.
Gladiators fought with gladiators and at times with warrior prisoners from many a distant land.
It was the theatre of Rome--of the world--and the man of fashion who could not let fall in a casual and unintentional manner something about "my private box at the Coliseum" could not move in the first circles.
When the clothing-store merchant wished to consume the corner grocery man with envy, he bought secured seats in the front row and let the thing be known.
When the irresistible dry goods clerk wished to blight and destroy, according to his native instinct, he got himself up regardless of expense and took some other fellow's young lady to the Coliseum, and then accented the affront by cramming her with ice
The Roman swell was in his true element only when he stood up against a pillar and fingered his moustache unconscious of the ladies; when he viewed the bloody combats through an opera-glass two inches long; when he excited the envy of provincials by
handles his sword like an apprentice brigand!
he'll do for the country, may be, but he don't answer for the metropolis"!
Glad was the contraband that had a seat in the pit at the Saturday matinee, and happy the Roman street-boy who ate his peanuts and guyed the gladiators from the dizzy gallery.
For me was reserved the high honor of discovering among the rubbish of the ruined Coliseum the only playbill of that establishment now extant.
There was a suggestive smell of mint-drops about it still, a corner of it had evidently been chewed, and on the margin, in choice Latin, these words were written in a delicate female hand: "Meet me on the Tarpeian Rock tomorrow evening, dear, at sharp
Mother will be absent on a visit to her friends in the Sabine Hills.
CLAUDIA".
Ah, where is that lucky youth to-day, and where the little hand that wrote those dainty lines?
Dust and ashes these seventeen hundred years!
Thus reads the bill: ROMAN COLISEUM.
UNPARALLELED ATTRACTION!
NEW PROPERTIES!
NEW LIONS!
NEW GLADIATORS!
Engagement of the renowned MARCUS MARCELLUS VALERIAN!
FOR SIX NIGHTS ONLY!
The management beg leave to offer to the public an entertainment surpassing in magnificence any thing that has heretofore been attempted on any stage.
No expense has been spared to make the opening season one which shall be worthy the generous patronage which the management feel sure will crown their efforts.
The management beg leave to state that they have succeeded in securing the services of a GALAXY OF TALENT!
such as has not been beheld in Rome before.
The performance will commence this evening with a GRAND BROADSWORD COMBAT!
between two young and promising amateurs and a celebrated Parthian gladiator who has just arrived a prisoner from the Camp of Verus.
This will be followed by a grand moral BATTLE-AX ENGAGEMENT!
between the renowned Valerian (with one hand tied behind him,) and two gigantic savages from Britain.
After which the renowned Valerian (if he survive,) will fight with the broad-sword, LEFT HANDED!
against six Sophomores and a Freshman from the Gladiatorial College!
A long series of brilliant engagements will follow, in which the finest talent of the Empire will take part After which the celebrated Infant Prodigy known as "THE YOUNG ACHILLES," will engage four tiger whelps in combat, armed with no other weapon than
The whole to conclude with a chaste and elegant GENERAL SLAUGHTER!
In which thirteen African Lions and twenty-two Barbarian Prisoners will war with each other until all are exterminated.
BOX OFFICE NOW OPEN.
Dress Circle One Dollar; Children and Servants half price.
An efficient police force will be on hand to preserve order and keep the wild beasts from leaping the railings and discommoding the audience.
Doors open at 7; performance begins at 8.
POSITIVELY NO FREE LIST.
Diodorus Job Press.
It was as singular as it was gratifying that I was also so fortunate as to find among the rubbish of the arena, a stained and mutilated copy of the Roman Daily Battle-Ax, containing a critique upon this very performance.
It comes to hand too late by many centuries to rank as news, and therefore I translate and publish it simply to show how very little the general style and phraseology of dramatic criticism has altered in the ages that have dragged their slow length along
--COLISEUM.
--Notwithstanding the inclemency of the weather, quite a respectable number of the rank and fashion of the city assembled last night to witness the debut upon metropolitan boards of the young tragedian who has of late been winning such golden opinions in
Some sixty thousand persons were present, and but for the fact that the streets were almost impassable, it is fair to presume that the house would have been full.
His august Majesty, the Emperor Aurelius, occupied the imperial box, and was the cynosure of all eyes.
Many illustrious nobles and generals of the Empire graced the occasion with their presence, and not the least among them was the young patrician lieutenant whose laurels, won in the ranks of the "Thundering Legion," are still so green upon his brow.
The cheer which greeted his entrance was heard beyond the Tiber!
"The late repairs and decorations add both to the comeliness and the comfort of the Coliseum.
The new cushions are a great improvement upon the hard marble seats we have been so long accustomed to.
The present management deserve well of the public.
They have restored to the Coliseum the gilding, the rich upholstery and the uniform magnificence which old Coliseum frequenters tell us Rome was so proud of fifty years ago.
"The opening scene last night--the broadsword combat between two young amateurs and a famous Parthian gladiator who was sent here a prisoner--was very fine.
The elder of the two young gentlemen handled his weapon with a grace that marked the possession of extraordinary talent.
His feint of thrusting, followed instantly by a happily delivered blow which unhelmeted the Parthian, was received with hearty applause.
He was not thoroughly up in the backhanded stroke, but it was very gratifying to his numerous friends to know that, in time, practice would have overcome this defect.
However, he was killed.
His sisters, who were present, expressed considerable regret.
His mother left the Coliseum.
The other youth maintained the contest with such spirit as to call forth enthusiastic bursts of applause.
When at last he fell a corpse, his aged mother ran screaming, with hair disheveled and tears streaming from her eyes, and swooned away just as her hands were clutching at the railings of the arena.
She was promptly removed by the police.
Under the circumstances the woman's conduct was pardonable, perhaps, but we suggest that such exhibitions interfere with the decorum which should be preserved during the performances, and are highly improper in the presence of the Emperor.
The Parthian prisoner fought bravely and well; and well he might, for he was fighting for both life and liberty.
His wife and children were there to nerve his arm with their love, and to remind him of the old home he should see again if he conquered.
When his second assailant fell, the woman clasped her children to her breast and wept for joy.
But it was only a transient happiness.
The captive staggered toward her and she saw that the liberty he had earned was earned too late.
He was wounded unto death.
Thus the first act closed in a manner which was entirely satisfactory.
The manager was called before the curtain and returned his thanks for the honor done him, in a speech which was replete with wit and humor, and closed by hoping that his humble efforts to afford cheerful and instructive entertainment would continue to meet
Marcus Marcellus Valerian (stage name--his real name is Smith,) is a splendid specimen of physical development, and an artist of rare merit.
His management of the battle-ax is wonderful.
His gayety and his playfulness are irresistible, in his comic parts, and yet they are inferior to his sublime conceptions in the grave realm of tragedy.
When his ax was describing fiery circles about the heads of the bewildered barbarians, in exact time with his springing body and his prancing legs, the audience gave way to uncontrollable bursts of laughter; but when the back of his weapon broke the skull
If he has a fault, (and we are sorry to even intimate that he has,) it is that of glancing at the audience, in the midst of the most exciting moments of the performance, as if seeking admiration.
The pausing in a fight to bow when bouquets are thrown to him is also in bad taste.
In the great left-handed combat he appeared to be looking at the audience half the time, instead of carving his adversaries; and when he had slain all the sophomores and was dallying with the freshman, he stooped and snatched a bouquet as it fell, and
Such levity is proper enough in the provinces, we make no doubt, but it ill suits the dignity of the metropolis.
We trust our young friend will take these remarks in good part, for we mean them solely for his benefit.
All who know us are aware that although we are at times justly severe upon tigers and martyrs, we never intentionally offend gladiators.
"The Infant Prodigy performed wonders.
He overcame his four tiger whelps with ease, and with no other hurt than the loss of a portion of his scalp.
The General Slaughter was rendered with a faithfulness to details which reflects the highest credit upon the late participants in it.
"Upon the whole, last night's performances shed honor not only upon the management but upon the city that encourages and sustains such wholesome and instructive entertainments.
We would simply suggest that the practice of vulgar young boys in the gallery of shying peanuts and paper pellets at the tigers, and saying "Hi-yi"!
and manifesting approbation or dissatisfaction by such observations as "Bully for the lion"!
"Go it, Gladdy"!
"Boots"!
"Speech"!
"Take a walk round the block"!
and so on, are extremely reprehensible, when the Emperor is present, and ought to be stopped by the police.
Several times last night, when the supernumeraries entered the arena to drag out the bodies, the young ruffians in the gallery shouted, "Supe!
supe"!
and also, "Oh, what a coat"!
and "Why don't you pad them shanks"?
and made use of various other remarks expressive of derision.
These things are very annoying to the audience.
"A matinee for the little folks is promised for this afternoon, on which occasion several martyrs will be eaten by the tigers.
The regular performance will continue every night till further notice.
Material change of programme every evening.
Benefit of Valerian, Tuesday, 29th, if he lives".
I have been a dramatic critic myself, in my time, and I was often surprised to notice how much more I knew about Hamlet than Forrest did; and it gratifies me to observe, now, how much better my brethren of ancient times knew how a broad sword battle ought
CHAPTER XXVII.
So far, good.
If any man has a right to feel proud of himself, and satisfied, surely it is I. For I have written about the Coliseum, and the gladiators, the martyrs, and the lions, and yet have never once used the phrase "butchered to make a Roman holiday".
I am the only free white man of mature age, who has accomplished this since Byron originated the expression.
Butchered to make a Roman holiday sounds well for the first seventeen or eighteen hundred thousand times one sees it in print, but after that it begins to grow tiresome.
I find it in all the books concerning Rome--and here latterly it reminds me of Judge Oliver.
Oliver was a young lawyer, fresh from the schools, who had gone out to the deserts of Nevada to begin life.
He found that country, and our ways of life, there, in those early days, different from life in New England or Paris.
But he put on a woollen shirt and strapped a navy revolver to his person, took to the bacon and beans of the country, and determined to do in Nevada as Nevada did.
Oliver accepted the situation so completely that although he must have sorrowed over many of his trials, he never complained--that is, he never complained but once.
He, two others, and myself, started to the new silver mines in the Humboldt mountains--he to be Probate Judge of Humboldt county, and we to mine.
The distance was two hundred miles.
It was dead of winter.
We bought a two-horse wagon and put eighteen hundred pounds of bacon, flour, beans, blasting-powder, picks and shovels in it; we bought two sorry-looking Mexican "plugs," with the hair turned the wrong way and more corners on their bodies than there are on
It was a dreadful trip.
But Oliver did not complain.
The horses dragged the wagon two miles from town and then gave out.
Then we three pushed the wagon seven miles, and Oliver moved ahead and pulled the horses after him by the bits.
We complained, but Oliver did not.
The ground was frozen, and it froze our backs while we slept; the wind swept across our faces and froze our noses.
Oliver did not complain.
Five days of pushing the wagon by day and freezing by night brought us to the bad part of the journey--the Forty Mile Desert, or the Great American Desert, if you please.
Still, this mildest-mannered man that ever was, had not complained.
We started across at eight in the morning, pushing through sand that had no bottom; toiling all day long by the wrecks of a thousand wagons, the skeletons of ten thousand oxen; by wagon-tires enough to hoop the Washington Monument to the top, and ox-chains
Awakened two or three nights afterward at midnight, in a narrow canon, by the snow falling on our faces, and appalled at the imminent danger of being "snowed in," we harnessed up and pushed on till eight in the morning, passed the "Divide" and knew we were
No complaints.
Fifteen days of hardship and fatigue brought us to the end of the two hundred miles, and the Judge had not complained.
We wondered if any thing could exasperate him.
We built a Humboldt house.
It is done in this way.
You dig a square in the steep base of the mountain, and set up two uprights and top them with two joists.
Then you stretch a great sheet of "cotton domestic" from the point where the joists join the hill-side down over the joists to the ground; this makes the roof and the front of the mansion; the sides and back are the dirt walls your digging has left.
A chimney is easily made by turning up one corner of the roof.
Oliver was sitting alone in this dismal den, one night, by a sage-brush fire, writing poetry; he was very fond of digging poetry out of himself --or blasting it out when it came hard.
He heard an animal's footsteps close to the roof; a stone or two and some dirt came through and fell by him.
He grew uneasy and said "Hi!
--clear out from there, can't you"!
--from time to time.
But by and by he fell asleep where he sat, and pretty soon a mule fell down the chimney!
The fire flew in every direction, and Oliver went over backwards.
About ten nights after that, he recovered confidence enough to go to writing poetry again.
Again he dozed off to sleep, and again a mule fell down the chimney.
This time, about half of that side of the house came in with the mule.
Struggling to get up, the mule kicked the candle out and smashed most of the kitchen furniture, and raised considerable dust.
These violent awakenings must have been annoying to Oliver, but he never complained.
He moved to a mansion on the opposite side of the canon, because he had noticed the mules did not go there.
One night about eight o'clock he was endeavoring to finish his poem, when a stone rolled in--then a hoof appeared below the canvas--then part of a cow--the after part.
He leaned back in dread, and shouted "Hooy!
hooy!
get out of this"!
and the cow struggled manfully--lost ground steadily--dirt and dust streamed down, and before Oliver could get well away, the entire cow crashed through on to the table and made a shapeless wreck of every thing!
Then, for the first time in his life, I think, Oliver complained.
He said, "This thing is growing monotonous"!
Then he resigned his judgeship and left Humboldt county.
"Butchered to make a Roman holyday" has grown monotonous to me.
In this connection I wish to say one word about Michael Angelo Buonarotti.
I used to worship the mighty genius of Michael Angelo--that man who was great in poetry, painting, sculpture, architecture--great in every thing he undertook.
But I do not want Michael Angelo for breakfast--for luncheon--for dinner--for tea--for supper--for between meals.
I like a change, occasionally.
In Genoa, he designed every thing; in Milan he or his pupils designed every thing; he designed the Lake of Como; in Padua, Verona, Venice, Bologna, who did we ever hear of, from guides, but Michael Angelo?
In Florence, he painted every thing, designed every thing, nearly, and what he did not design he used to sit on a favorite stone and look at, and they showed us the stone.
In Pisa he designed every thing but the old shot-tower, and they would have attributed that to him if it had not been so awfully out of the perpendicular.
He designed the piers of Leghorn and the custom house regulations of Civita Vecchia.
But, here--here it is frightful.
He designed St. Peter's; he designed the Pope; he designed the Pantheon, the uniform of the Pope's soldiers, the Tiber, the Vatican, the Coliseum, the Capitol, the Tarpeian Rock, the Barberini Palace, St. John Lateran, the Campagna, the Appian Way, the
Dan said the other day to the guide, "Enough, enough, enough!
Say no more!
Lump the whole thing!
say that the Creator made Italy from designs by Michael Angelo"!
I never felt so fervently thankful, so soothed, so tranquil, so filled with a blessed peace, as I did yesterday when I learned that Michael Angelo was dead.
But we have taken it out of this guide.
He has marched us through miles of pictures and sculpture in the vast corridors of the Vatican; and through miles of pictures and sculpture in twenty other palaces; he has shown us the great picture in the Sistine Chapel, and frescoes enough to frescoe the
So with him we have played that game which has vanquished so many guides for us --imbecility and idiotic questions.
These creatures never suspect--they have no idea of a sarcasm.
He shows us a figure and says: "Statoo brunzo".
(Bronze statue.
) We look at it indifferently and the doctor asks: "By Michael Angelo"?
"No--not know who".
Then he shows us the ancient Roman Forum.
The doctor asks: "Michael Angelo"?
A stare from the guide.
"No--thousan' year before he is born".
Then an Egyptian obelisk.
Again: "Michael Angelo"?
"Oh, mon dieu, genteelmen!
Zis is two thousan' year before he is born"!
He grows so tired of that unceasing question sometimes, that he dreads to show us any thing at all.
The wretch has tried all the ways he can think of to make us comprehend that Michael Angelo is only responsible for the creation of a part of the world, but somehow he has not succeeded yet.
Relief for overtasked eyes and brain from study and sightseeing is necessary, or we shall become idiotic sure enough.
Therefore this guide must continue to suffer.
If he does not enjoy it, so much the worse for him.
We do.
In this place I may as well jot down a chapter concerning those necessary nuisances, European guides.
Many a man has wished in his heart he could do without his guide; but knowing he could not, has wished he could get some amusement out of him as a remuneration for the affliction of his society.
We accomplished this latter matter, and if our experience can be made useful to others they are welcome to it.
Guides know about enough English to tangle every thing up so that a man can make neither head or tail of it.
They know their story by heart--the history of every statue, painting, cathedral or other wonder they show you.
They know it and tell it as a parrot would--and if you interrupt, and throw them off the track, they have to go back and begin over again.
All their lives long, they are employed in showing strange things to foreigners and listening to their bursts of admiration.
It is human nature to take delight in exciting admiration.
It is what prompts children to say "smart" things, and do absurd ones, and in other ways "show off" when company is present.
It is what makes gossips turn out in rain and storm to go and be the first to tell a startling bit of news.
Think, then, what a passion it becomes with a guide, whose privilege it is, every day, to show to strangers wonders that throw them into perfect ecstasies of admiration!
He gets so that he could not by any possibility live in a soberer atmosphere.
After we discovered this, we never went into ecstasies any more--we never admired any thing--we never showed any but impassible faces and stupid indifference in the presence of the sublimest wonders a guide had to display.
We had found their weak point.
We have made good use of it ever since.
We have made some of those people savage, at times, but we have never lost our own serenity.
The doctor asks the questions, generally, because he can keep his countenance, and look more like an inspired idiot, and throw more imbecility into the tone of his voice than any man that lives.
It comes natural to him.
The guides in Genoa are delighted to secure an American party, because Americans so much wonder, and deal so much in sentiment and emotion before any relic of Columbus.
Our guide there fidgeted about as if he had swallowed a spring mattress.
He was full of animation--full of impatience.
He said: "Come wis me, genteelmen!
--come!
I show you ze letter writing by Christopher Colombo!
--write it himself!
--write it wis his own hand!
--come"!
He took us to the municipal palace.
After much impressive fumbling of keys and opening of locks, the stained and aged document was spread before us.
The guide's eyes sparkled.
He danced about us and tapped the parchment with his finger: "What I tell you, genteelmen!
Is it not so?
See!
handwriting Christopher Colombo!
--write it himself"!
We looked indifferent--unconcerned.
The doctor examined the document very deliberately, during a painful pause.
--Then he said, without any show of interest: "Ah--Ferguson--what--what did you say was the name of the party who wrote this"?
"Christopher Colombo!
ze great Christopher Colombo"!
Another deliberate examination.
"Ah--did he write it himself; or--or how"?
"He write it himself!
--Christopher Colombo!
He's own hand-writing, write by himself"!
Then the doctor laid the document down and said: "Why, I have seen boys in America only fourteen years old that could write better than that".
"But zis is ze great Christo--" "I don't care who it is!
It's the worst writing I ever saw.
Now you musn't think you can impose on us because we are strangers.
We are not fools, by a good deal.
If you have got any specimens of penmanship of real merit, trot them out!
--and if you haven't, drive on"!
We drove on.
The guide was considerably shaken up, but he made one more venture.
He had something which he thought would overcome us.
He said: "Ah, genteelmen, you come wis me!
I show you beautiful, O, magnificent bust Christopher Colombo!
--splendid, grand, magnificent"!
He brought us before the beautiful bust--for it was beautiful--and sprang back and struck an attitude: "Ah, look, genteelmen!
--beautiful, grand,--bust Christopher Colombo!
--beautiful bust, beautiful pedestal"!
The doctor put up his eye-glass--procured for such occasions: "Ah--what did you say this gentleman's name was"?
"Christopher Colombo!
--ze great Christopher Colombo"!
"Christopher Colombo--the great Christopher Colombo.
Well, what did he do"?
"Discover America!
--discover America, Oh, ze devil"!
"Discover America.
No--that statement will hardly wash.
We are just from America ourselves.
We heard nothing about it.
Christopher Colombo --pleasant name--is--is he dead"?
"Oh, corpo di Baccho!
--three hundred year"!
"What did he die of"?
"I do not know!
--I can not tell".
"Small-pox, think"?
"I do not know, genteelmen!
--I do not know what he die of"!
"Measles, likely"?
"May be--may be--I do not know--I think he die of somethings".
"Parents living"?
"Im-poseeeble"!
"Ah--which is the bust and which is the pedestal"?
"Santa Maria!
--zis ze bust!
--zis ze pedestal"!
"Ah, I see, I see--happy combination--very happy combination, indeed.
Is--is this the first time this gentleman was ever on a bust"?
That joke was lost on the foreigner--guides can not master the subtleties of the American joke.
We have made it interesting for this Roman guide.
Yesterday we spent three or four hours in the Vatican, again, that wonderful world of curiosities.
We came very near expressing interest, sometimes--even admiration--it was very hard to keep from it.
We succeeded though.
Nobody else ever did, in the Vatican museums.
The guide was bewildered --non-plussed.
He walked his legs off, nearly, hunting up extraordinary things, and exhausted all his ingenuity on us, but it was a failure; we never showed any interest in any thing.
He had reserved what he considered to be his greatest wonder till the last--a royal Egyptian mummy, the best preserved in the world, perhaps.
He took us there.
He felt so sure, this time, that some of his old enthusiasm came back to him: "See, genteelmen!
--Mummy!
Mummy"!
The eye-glass came up as calmly, as deliberately as ever.
"Ah,--Ferguson--what did I understand you to say the gentleman's name was"?
"Name?
--he got no name!
--Mummy!
--'Gyptian mummy"!
"Yes, yes.
Born here"?
"No!
'Gyptian mummy"!
"Ah, just so.
Frenchman, I presume"?
"No!
--not Frenchman, not Roman!
--born in Egypta"!
"Born in Egypta.
Never heard of Egypta before.
Foreign locality, likely.
Mummy--mummy.
How calm he is--how self-possessed.
Is, ah--is he dead"?
"Oh, sacre bleu, been dead three thousan' year"!
The doctor turned on him savagely: "Here, now, what do you mean by such conduct as this!
Playing us for Chinamen because we are strangers and trying to learn!
Trying to impose your vile second-hand carcasses on us!
--thunder and lightning, I've a notion to--to--if you've got a nice fresh corpse, fetch him out!
--or by George we'll brain you"!
We make it exceedingly interesting for this Frenchman.
However, he has paid us back, partly, without knowing it.
He came to the hotel this morning to ask if we were up, and he endeavored as well as he could to describe us, so that the landlord would know which persons he meant.
He finished with the casual remark that we were lunatics.
The observation was so innocent and so honest that it amounted to a very good thing for a guide to say.
There is one remark (already mentioned,) which never yet has failed to disgust these guides.
We use it always, when we can think of nothing else to say.
After they have exhausted their enthusiasm pointing out to us and praising the beauties of some ancient bronze image or broken-legged statue, we look at it stupidly and in silence for five, ten, fifteen minutes--as long as we can hold out, in fact--and
That conquers the serenest of them.
It is not what they are looking for --especially a new guide.
Our Roman Ferguson is the most patient, unsuspecting, long-suffering subject we have had yet.
We shall be sorry to part with him.
We have enjoyed his society very much.
We trust he has enjoyed ours, but we are harassed with doubts.
We have been in the catacombs.
It was like going down into a very deep cellar, only it was a cellar which had no end to it.
The narrow passages are roughly hewn in the rock, and on each hand as you pass along, the hollowed shelves are carved out, from three to fourteen deep; each held a corpse once.
There are names, and Christian symbols, and prayers, or sentences expressive of Christian hopes, carved upon nearly every sarcophagus.
The dates belong away back in the dawn of the Christian era, of course.
Here, in these holes in the ground, the first Christians sometimes burrowed to escape persecution.
They crawled out at night to get food, but remained under cover in the day time.
The priest told us that St. Sebastian lived under ground for some time while he was being hunted; he went out one day, and the soldiery discovered and shot him to death with arrows.
Five or six of the early Popes--those who reigned about sixteen hundred years ago--held their papal courts and advised with their clergy in the bowels of the earth.
During seventeen years--from A.D. 235 to A.D. 252--the Popes did not appear above ground.
Four were raised to the great office during that period.
Four years apiece, or thereabouts.
It is very suggestive of the unhealthiness of underground graveyards as places of residence.
One Pope afterward spent his entire pontificate in the catacombs--eight years.
Another was discovered in them and murdered in the episcopal chair.
There was no satisfaction in being a Pope in those days.
There were too many annoyances.
There are one hundred and sixty catacombs under Rome, each with its maze of narrow passages crossing and recrossing each other and each passage walled to the top with scooped graves its entire length.
A careful estimate makes the length of the passages of all the catacombs combined foot up nine hundred miles, and their graves number seven millions.
We did not go through all the passages of all the catacombs.
We were very anxious to do it, and made the necessary arrangements, but our too limited time obliged us to give up the idea.
So we only groped through the dismal labyrinth of St. Callixtus, under the Church of St. Sebastian.
In the various catacombs are small chapels rudely hewn in the stones, and here the early Christians often held their religious services by dim, ghostly lights.
Think of mass and a sermon away down in those tangled caverns under ground!
In the catacombs were buried St. Cecilia, St. Agnes, and several other of the most celebrated of the saints.
In the catacomb of St. Callixtus, St. Bridget used to remain long hours in holy contemplation, and St. Charles Borromeo was wont to spend whole nights in prayer there.
It was also the scene of a very marvelous thing.
"Here the heart of St. Philip Neri was so inflamed with divine love as to burst his ribs".
I find that grave statement in a book published in New York in 1808, and written by "Rev.
William H. Neligan, LL.D., M. A., Trinity College, Dublin; Member of the Archaeological Society of Great Britain".
Therefore, I believe it.
Otherwise, I could not.
Under other circumstances I should have felt a curiosity to know what Philip had for dinner.
This author puts my credulity on its mettle every now and then.
He tells of one St. Joseph Calasanctius whose house in Rome he visited; he visited only the house--the priest has been dead two hundred years.
He says the Virgin Mary appeared to this saint.
Then he continues: "His tongue and his heart, which were found after nearly a century to be whole, when the body was disinterred before his canonization, are still preserved in a glass case, and after two centuries the heart is still whole.
When the French troops came to Rome, and when Pius VII.
was carried away prisoner, blood dropped from it".
To read that in a book written by a monk far back in the Middle Ages, would surprise no one; it would sound natural and proper; but when it is seriously stated in the middle of the nineteenth century, by a man of finished education, an LL.D., M. A., and an
Still, I would gladly change my unbelief for Neligan's faith, and let him make the conditions as hard as he pleased.
The old gentleman's undoubting, unquestioning simplicity has a rare freshness about it in these matter-of-fact railroading and telegraphing days.
Hear him, concerning the church of Ara Coeli: "In the roof of the church, directly above the high altar, is engraved, 'Regina Coeli laetare Alleluia.
' In the sixth century Rome was visited by a fearful pestilence.
Gregory the Great urged the people to do penance, and a general procession was formed.
It was to proceed from Ara Coeli to St. Peter's.
As it passed before the mole of Adrian, now the Castle of St. Angelo, the sound of heavenly voices was heard singing (it was Easter morn,) 'Regina Coeli, laetare!
alleluia!
quia quem meruisti portare, alleluia!
resurrexit sicut dixit; alleluia!
' The Pontiff, carrying in his hands the portrait of the Virgin, (which is over the high altar and is said to have been painted by St. Luke,) answered, with the astonished people, 'Ora pro nobis Deum, alleluia!
' At the same time an angel was seen to put up a sword in a scabbard, and the pestilence ceased on the same day.
There are four circumstances which 'CONFIRM'--[The italics are mine--M.
T.]--this miracle: the annual procession which takes place in the western church on the feast of St Mark; the statue of St. Michael, placed on the mole of Adrian, which has since that time been called the Castle of St. Angelo; the antiphon Regina Coeli
CHAPTER XXVIII.
From the sanguinary sports of the Holy Inquisition; the slaughter of the Coliseum; and the dismal tombs of the Catacombs, I naturally pass to the picturesque horrors of the Capuchin Convent.
We stopped a moment in a small chapel in the church to admire a picture of St. Michael vanquishing Satan--a picture which is so beautiful that I can not but think it belongs to the reviled "Renaissance," notwithstanding I believe they told us one of the
Here was a spectacle for sensitive nerves!
Evidently the old masters had been at work in this place.
There were six divisions in the apartment, and each division was ornamented with a style of decoration peculiar to itself--and these decorations were in every instance formed of human bones!
There were shapely arches, built wholly of thigh bones; there were startling pyramids, built wholly of grinning skulls; there were quaint architectural structures of various kinds, built of shin bones and the bones of the arm; on the wall were elaborate
Every lasting portion of the human frame was represented in these intricate designs (they were by Michael Angelo, I think,) and there was a careful finish about the work, and an attention to details that betrayed the artist's love of his labors as well as
I asked the good-natured monk who accompanied us, who did this?
And he said, "We did it"--meaning himself and his brethren up stairs.
I could see that the old friar took a high pride in his curious show.
We made him talkative by exhibiting an interest we never betrayed to guides.
"Who were these people"?
"We--up stairs--Monks of the Capuchin order--my brethren".
"How many departed monks were required to upholster these six parlors"?
"These are the bones of four thousand".
"It took a long time to get enough"?
"Many, many centuries".
"Their different parts are well separated--skulls in one room, legs in another, ribs in another--there would be stirring times here for a while if the last trump should blow.
Some of the brethren might get hold of the wrong leg, in the confusion, and the wrong skull, and find themselves limping, and looking through eyes that were wider apart or closer together than they were used to.
You can not tell any of these parties apart, I suppose"?
"Oh, yes, I know many of them".
He put his finger on a skull.
"This was Brother Anselmo--dead three hundred years--a good man".
He touched another.
"This was Brother Alexander--dead two hundred and eighty years.
This was Brother Carlo--dead about as long".
Then he took a skull and held it in his hand, and looked reflectively upon it, after the manner of the grave-digger when he discourses of Yorick.
"This," he said, "was Brother Thomas.
He was a young prince, the scion of a proud house that traced its lineage back to the grand old days of Rome well nigh two thousand years ago.
He loved beneath his estate.
His family persecuted him; persecuted the girl, as well.
They drove her from Rome; he followed; he sought her far and wide; he found no trace of her.
He came back and offered his broken heart at our altar and his weary life to the service of God.
But look you.
Shortly his father died, and likewise his mother.
The girl returned, rejoicing.
She sought every where for him whose eyes had used to look tenderly into hers out of this poor skull, but she could not find him.
At last, in this coarse garb we wear, she recognized him in the street.
He knew her.
It was too late.
He fell where he stood.
They took him up and brought him here.
He never spoke afterward.
Within the week he died.
You can see the color of his hair--faded, somewhat--by this thin shred that clings still to the temple.
This, [taking up a thigh bone,] was his.
The veins of this leaf in the decorations over your head, were his finger-joints, a hundred and fifty years ago".
This business-like way of illustrating a touching story of the heart by laying the several fragments of the lover before us and naming them, was as grotesque a performance, and as ghastly, as any I ever witnessed.
I hardly knew whether to smile or shudder.
There are nerves and muscles in our frames whose functions and whose methods of working it seems a sort of sacrilege to describe by cold physiological names and surgical technicalities, and the monk's talk suggested to me something of this kind.
Fancy a surgeon, with his nippers lifting tendons, muscles and such things into view, out of the complex machinery of a corpse, and observing, "Now this little nerve quivers--the vibration is imparted to this muscle--from here it is passed to this fibrous
Thus, by this simple and beautiful process, the party is informed that his mother is dead, and he weeps".
Horrible!
I asked the monk if all the brethren up stairs expected to be put in this place when they died.
He answered quietly: "We must all lie here at last".
See what one can accustom himself to.
--The reflection that he must some day be taken apart like an engine or a clock, or like a house whose owner is gone, and worked up into arches and pyramids and hideous frescoes, did not distress this monk in the least.
I thought he even looked as if he were thinking, with complacent vanity, that his own skull would look well on top of the heap and his own ribs add a charm to the frescoes which possibly they lacked at present.
Here and there, in ornamental alcoves, stretched upon beds of bones, lay dead and dried-up monks, with lank frames dressed in the black robes one sees ordinarily upon priests.
We examined one closely.
The skinny hands were clasped upon the breast; two lustreless tufts of hair stuck to the skull; the skin was brown and sunken; it stretched tightly over the cheek bones and made them stand out sharply; the crisp dead eyes were deep in the sockets; the
It was the jolliest laugh, but yet the most dreadful, that one can imagine.
Surely, I thought, it must have been a most extraordinary joke this veteran produced with his latest breath, that he has not got done laughing at it yet.
At this moment I saw that the old instinct was strong upon the boys, and I said we had better hurry to St. Peter's.
They were trying to keep from asking, "Is--is he dead"?
It makes me dizzy, to think of the Vatican--of its wilderness of statues, paintings, and curiosities of every description and every age.
The "old masters" (especially in sculpture,) fairly swarm, there.
I can not write about the Vatican.
I think I shall never remember any thing I saw there distinctly but the mummies, and the Transfiguration, by Raphael, and some other things it is not necessary to mention now.
I shall remember the Transfiguration partly because it was placed in a room almost by itself; partly because it is acknowledged by all to be the first oil painting in the world; and partly because it was wonderfully beautiful.
The colors are fresh and rich, the "expression," I am told, is fine, the "feeling" is lively, the "tone" is good, the "depth" is profound, and the width is about four and a half feet, I should judge.
It is a picture that really holds one's attention; its beauty is fascinating.
It is fine enough to be a Renaissance.
A remark I made a while ago suggests a thought--and a hope.
Is it not possible that the reason I find such charms in this picture is because it is out of the crazy chaos of the galleries?
If some of the others were set apart, might not they be beautiful?
If this were set in the midst of the tempest of pictures one finds in the vast galleries of the Roman palaces, would I think it so handsome?
If, up to this time, I had seen only one "old master" in each palace, instead of acres and acres of walls and ceilings fairly papered with them, might I not have a more civilized opinion of the old masters than I have now?
I think so.
When I was a school-boy and was to have a new knife, I could not make up my mind as to which was the prettiest in the show-case, and I did not think any of them were particularly pretty; and so I chose with a heavy heart.
But when I looked at my purchase, at home, where no glittering blades came into competition with it, I was astonished to see how handsome it was.
To this day my new hats look better out of the shop than they did in it with other new hats.
It begins to dawn upon me, now, that possibly, what I have been taking for uniform ugliness in the galleries may be uniform beauty after all.
I honestly hope it is, to others, but certainly it is not to me.
Perhaps the reason I used to enjoy going to the Academy of Fine Arts in New York was because there were but a few hundred paintings in it, and it did not surfeit me to go through the list.
I suppose the Academy was bacon and beans in the Forty-Mile Desert, and a European gallery is a state dinner of thirteen courses.
One leaves no sign after him of the one dish, but the thirteen frighten away his appetite and give him no satisfaction.
There is one thing I am certain of, though.
With all the Michael Angelos, the Raphaels, the Guidos and the other old masters, the sublime history of Rome remains unpainted!
They painted Virgins enough, and popes enough and saintly scarecrows enough, to people Paradise, almost, and these things are all they did paint.
"Nero fiddling o'er burning Rome," the assassination of Caesar, the stirring spectacle of a hundred thousand people bending forward with rapt interest, in the coliseum, to see two skillful gladiators hacking away each others' lives, a tiger springing upon
They did paint, and they did carve in marble, one historical scene, and one only, (of any great historical consequence.
) And what was it and why did they choose it, particularly?
It was the Rape of the Sabines, and they chose it for the legs and busts.
I like to look at statues, however, and I like to look at pictures, also --even of monks looking up in sacred ecstacy, and monks looking down in meditation, and monks skirmishing for something to eat--and therefore I drop ill nature to thank the papal
I thank the Holy Father right heartily, and I wish him long life and plenty of happiness.
The Popes have long been the patrons and preservers of art, just as our new, practical Republic is the encourager and upholder of mechanics.
In their Vatican is stored up all that is curious and beautiful in art; in our Patent Office is hoarded all that is curious or useful in mechanics.
When a man invents a new style of horse-collar or discovers a new and superior method of telegraphing, our government issues a patent to him that is worth a fortune; when a man digs up an ancient statue in the Campagna, the Pope gives him a fortune in gold
We can make something of a guess at a man's character by the style of nose he carries on his face.
The Vatican and the Patent Office are governmental noses, and they bear a deal of character about them.
The guide showed us a colossal statue of Jupiter, in the Vatican, which he said looked so damaged and rusty--so like the God of the Vagabonds --because it had but recently been dug up in the Campagna.
He asked how much we supposed this Jupiter was worth?
I replied, with intelligent promptness, that he was probably worth about four dollars--may be four and a half.
"A hundred thousand dollars"!
Ferguson said.
Ferguson said, further, that the Pope permits no ancient work of this kind to leave his dominions.
He appoints a commission to examine discoveries like this and report upon the value; then the Pope pays the discoverer one-half of that assessed value and takes the statue.
He said this Jupiter was dug from a field which had just been bought for thirty-six thousand dollars, so the first crop was a good one for the new farmer.
I do not know whether Ferguson always tells the truth or not, but I suppose he does.
I know that an exorbitant export duty is exacted upon all pictures painted by the old masters, in order to discourage the sale of those in the private collections.
I am satisfied, also, that genuine old masters hardly exist at all, in America, because the cheapest and most insignificant of them are valued at the price of a fine farm.
I proposed to buy a small trifle of a Raphael, myself, but the price of it was eighty thousand dollars, the export duty would have made it considerably over a hundred, and so I studied on it awhile and concluded not to take it.
I wish here to mention an inscription I have seen, before I forget it: "Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth TO MEN OF GOOD WILL"!
It is not good scripture, but it is sound Catholic and human nature.
This is in letters of gold around the apsis of a mosaic group at the side of the 'scala santa', church of St. John Lateran, the Mother and Mistress of all the Catholic churches of the world.
The group represents the Saviour, St. Peter, Pope Leo, St. Silvester, Constantine and Charlemagne.
Peter is giving the pallium to the Pope, and a standard to Charlemagne.
The Saviour is giving the keys to St. Silvester, and a standard to Constantine.
No prayer is offered to the Saviour, who seems to be of little importance any where in Rome; but an inscription below says, "Blessed Peter, give life to Pope Leo and victory to king Charles".
It does not say, "Intercede for us, through the Saviour, with the Father, for this boon," but "Blessed Peter, give it us".
In all seriousness--without meaning to be frivolous--without meaning to be irreverent, and more than all, without meaning to be blasphemous,--I state as my simple deduction from the things I have seen and the things I have heard, that the Holy Personages
Second--The Deity.
Third--Peter.
Fourth--Some twelve or fifteen canonized Popes and martyrs.
Fifth--Jesus Christ the Saviour--(but always as an infant in arms.
) I may be wrong in this--my judgment errs often, just as is the case with other men's--but it is my judgment, be it good or bad.
Just here I will mention something that seems curious to me.
There are no "Christ's Churches" in Rome, and no "Churches of the Holy Ghost," that I can discover.
There are some four hundred churches, but about a fourth of them seem to be named for the Madonna and St. Peter.
There are so many named for Mary that they have to be distinguished by all sorts of affixes, if I understand the matter rightly.
Then we have churches of St. Louis; St. Augustine; St. Agnes; St. Calixtus; St. Lorenzo in Lucina; St. Lorenzo in Damaso; St. Cecilia; St. Athanasius; St. Philip Neri; St. Catherine, St. Dominico, and a multitude of lesser saints whose names are not
Day after day and night after night we have wandered among the crumbling wonders of Rome; day after day and night after night we have fed upon the dust and decay of five-and-twenty centuries--have brooded over them by day and dreampt of them by night till
But the surest way to stop writing about Rome is to stop.
I wished to write a real "guide-book" chapter on this fascinating city, but I could not do it, because I have felt all the time like a boy in a candy-shop --there was every thing to choose from, and yet no choice.
I have drifted along hopelessly for a hundred pages of manuscript without knowing where to commence.
I will not commence at all.
Our passports have been examined.
We will go to Naples.
CHAPTER XXIX.
The ship is lying here in the harbor of Naples--quarantined.
She has been here several days and will remain several more.
We that came by rail from Rome have escaped this misfortune.
Of course no one is allowed to go on board the ship, or come ashore from her.
She is a prison, now.
The passengers probably spend the long, blazing days looking out from under the awnings at Vesuvius and the beautiful city--and in swearing.
Think of ten days of this sort of pastime!
--We go out every day in a boat and request them to come ashore.
It soothes them.
We lie ten steps from the ship and tell them how splendid the city is; and how much better the hotel fare is here than any where else in Europe; and how cool it is; and what frozen continents of ice cream there are; and what a time we are having cavorting
This tranquilizes them.
ASCENT OF VESUVIUS.
I shall remember our trip to Vesuvius for many a day--partly because of its sight-seeing experiences, but chiefly on account of the fatigue of the journey.
Two or three of us had been resting ourselves among the tranquil and beautiful scenery of the island of Ischia, eighteen miles out in the harbor, for two days; we called it "resting," but I do not remember now what the resting consisted of, for when we got
We were just about to go to bed early in the evening, and catch up on some of the sleep we had lost, when we heard of this Vesuvius expedition.
There was to be eight of us in the party, and we were to leave Naples at midnight.
We laid in some provisions for the trip, engaged carriages to take us to Annunciation, and then moved about the city, to keep awake, till twelve.
We got away punctually, and in the course of an hour and a half arrived at the town of Annunciation.
Annunciation is the very last place under the sun.
In other towns in Italy the people lie around quietly and wait for you to ask them a question or do some overt act that can be charged for--but in Annunciation they have lost even that fragment of delicacy; they seize a lady's shawl from a chair and hand
And so they go.
They crowd you --infest you--swarm about you, and sweat and smell offensively, and look sneaking and mean, and obsequious.
There is no office too degrading for them to perform, for money.
I have had no opportunity to find out any thing about the upper classes by my own observation, but from what I hear said about them I judge that what they lack in one or two of the bad traits the canaille have, they make up in one or two others that are
How the people beg!
--many of them very well dressed, too.
I said I knew nothing against the upper classes by personal observation.
I must recall it!
I had forgotten.
What I saw their bravest and their fairest do last night, the lowest multitude that could be scraped up out of the purlieus of Christendom would blush to do, I think.
They assembled by hundreds, and even thousands, in the great Theatre of San Carlo, to do--what?
Why, simply, to make fun of an old woman--to deride, to hiss, to jeer at an actress they once worshipped, but whose beauty is faded now and whose voice has lost its former richness.
Every body spoke of the rare sport there was to be.
They said the theatre would be crammed, because Frezzolini was going to sing.
It was said she could not sing well, now, but then the people liked to see her, anyhow.
And so we went.
And every time the woman sang they hissed and laughed--the whole magnificent house--and as soon as she left the stage they called her on again with applause.
Once or twice she was encored five and six times in succession, and received with hisses when she appeared, and discharged with hisses and laughter when she had finished--then instantly encored and insulted again!
And how the high-born knaves enjoyed it!
White-kidded gentlemen and ladies laughed till the tears came, and clapped their hands in very ecstacy when that unhappy old woman would come meekly out for the sixth time, with uncomplaining patience, to meet a storm of hisses!
It was the cruelest exhibition--the most wanton, the most unfeeling.
The singer would have conquered an audience of American rowdies by her brave, unflinching tranquillity (for she answered encore after encore, and smiled and bowed pleasantly, and sang the best she possibly could, and went bowing off, through all the jeers
Think what a multitude of small souls were crowded into that theatre last night.
If the manager could have filled his theatre with Neapolitan souls alone, without the bodies, he could not have cleared less than ninety millions of dollars.
What traits of character must a man have to enable him to help three thousand miscreants to hiss, and jeer, and laugh at one friendless old woman, and shamefully humiliate her?
He must have all the vile, mean traits there are.
My observation persuades me (I do not like to venture beyond my own personal observation,) that the upper classes of Naples possess those traits of character.
Otherwise they may be very good people; I can not say.
ASCENT OF VESUVIUS--CONTINUED.
In this city of Naples, they believe in and support one of the wretchedest of all the religious impostures one can find in Italy--the miraculous liquefaction of the blood of St. Januarius.
Twice a year the priests assemble all the people at the Cathedral, and get out this vial of clotted blood and let them see it slowly dissolve and become liquid --and every day for eight days, this dismal farce is repeated, while the priests go among the
The first day, the blood liquefies in forty-seven minutes--the church is crammed, then, and time must be allowed the collectors to get around: after that it liquefies a little quicker and a little quicker, every day, as the houses grow smaller, till on the
And here, also, they used to have a grand procession, of priests, citizens, soldiers, sailors, and the high dignitaries of the City Government, once a year, to shave the head of a made-up Madonna--a stuffed and painted image, like a milliner's dummy--whose
They still kept up this shaving procession as late as four or five years ago.
It was a source of great profit to the church that possessed the remarkable effigy, and the ceremony of the public barbering of her was always carried out with the greatest possible eclat and display--the more the better, because the more excitement there
There we have two specimens of these Neapolitans--two of the silliest possible frauds, which half the population religiously and faithfully believed, and the other half either believed also or else said nothing about, and thus lent themselves to the
I am very well satisfied to think the whole population believed in those poor, cheap miracles--a people who want two cents every time they bow to you, and who abuse a woman, are capable of it, I think.
ASCENT OF VESUVIUS--CONTINUED.
These Neapolitans always ask four times as much money as they intend to take, but if you give them what they first demand, they feel ashamed of themselves for aiming so low, and immediately ask more.
When money is to be paid and received, there is always some vehement jawing and gesticulating about it.
One can not buy and pay for two cents' worth of clams without trouble and a quarrel.
One "course," in a two-horse carriage, costs a franc--that is law--but the hackman always demands more, on some pretence or other, and if he gets it he makes a new demand.
It is said that a stranger took a one-horse carriage for a course --tariff, half a franc.
He gave the man five francs, by way of experiment.
He demanded more, and received another franc.
Again he demanded more, and got a franc--demanded more, and it was refused.
He grew vehement --was again refused, and became noisy.
The stranger said, "Well, give me the seven francs again, and I will see what I can do"--and when he got them, he handed the hackman half a franc, and he immediately asked for two cents to buy a drink with.
It may be thought that I am prejudiced.
Perhaps I am.
I would be ashamed of myself if I were not.
ASCENT OF VESUVIUS--CONTINUED.
Well, as I was saying, we got our mules and horses, after an hour and a half of bargaining with the population of Annunciation, and started sleepily up the mountain, with a vagrant at each mule's tail who pretended to be driving the brute along, but was
I made slow headway at first, but I began to get dissatisfied at the idea of paying my minion five francs to hold my mule back by the tail and keep him from going up the hill, and so I discharged him.
I got along faster then.
We had one magnificent picture of Naples from a high point on the mountain side.
We saw nothing but the gas lamps, of course--two-thirds of a circle, skirting the great Bay--a necklace of diamonds glinting up through the darkness from the remote distance--less brilliant than the stars overhead, but more softly, richly beautiful--and
And back of the town, far around and abroad over the miles of level campagna, were scattered rows, and circles, and clusters of lights, all glowing like so many gems, and marking where a score of villages were sleeping.
About this time, the fellow who was hanging on to the tail of the horse in front of me and practicing all sorts of unnecessary cruelty upon the animal, got kicked some fourteen rods, and this incident, together with the fairy spectacle of the lights far in
ASCENT OF MOUNT VESUVIUS--CONTINUED.
This subject will be excellent matter for a chapter, and tomorrow or next day I will write it.
CHAPTER XXX.
ASCENT OF VESUVIUS--CONTINUED.
"See Naples and die".
Well, I do not know that one would necessarily die after merely seeing it, but to attempt to live there might turn out a little differently.
To see Naples as we saw it in the early dawn from far up on the side of Vesuvius, is to see a picture of wonderful beauty.
At that distance its dingy buildings looked white--and so, rank on rank of balconies, windows and roofs, they piled themselves up from the blue ocean till the colossal castle of St. Elmo topped the grand white pyramid and gave the picture symmetry,
And when its lilies turned to roses--when it blushed under the sun's first kiss--it was beautiful beyond all description.
One might well say, then, "See Naples and die".
The frame of the picture was charming, itself.
In front, the smooth sea--a vast mosaic of many colors; the lofty islands swimming in a dreamy haze in the distance; at our end of the city the stately double peak of Vesuvius, and its strong black ribs and seams of lava stretching down to the limitless
It is from the Hermitage, there on the side of Vesuvius, that one should "see Naples and die".
But do not go within the walls and look at it in detail.
That takes away some of the romance of the thing.
The people are filthy in their habits, and this makes filthy streets and breeds disagreeable sights and smells.
There never was a community so prejudiced against the cholera as these Neapolitans are.
But they have good reason to be.
The cholera generally vanquishes a Neapolitan when it seizes him, because, you understand, before the doctor can dig through the dirt and get at the disease the man dies.
The upper classes take a sea-bath every day, and are pretty decent.
The streets are generally about wide enough for one wagon, and how they do swarm with people!
It is Broadway repeated in every street, in every court, in every alley!
Such masses, such throngs, such multitudes of hurrying, bustling, struggling humanity!
We never saw the like of it, hardly even in New York, I think.
There are seldom any sidewalks, and when there are, they are not often wide enough to pass a man on without caroming on him.
So everybody walks in the street--and where the street is wide enough, carriages are forever dashing along.
Why a thousand people are not run over and crippled every day is a mystery that no man can solve.
But if there is an eighth wonder in the world, it must be the dwelling-houses of Naples.
I honestly believe a good majority of them are a hundred feet high!
And the solid brick walls are seven feet through.
You go up nine flights of stairs before you get to the "first" floor.
No, not nine, but there or thereabouts.
There is a little bird-cage of an iron railing in front of every window clear away up, up, up, among the eternal clouds, where the roof is, and there is always somebody looking out of every window--people of ordinary size looking out from the first floor,
The perspective of one of these narrow cracks of streets, with its rows of tall houses stretching away till they come together in the distance like railway tracks; its clothes-lines crossing over at all altitudes and waving their bannered raggedness over
ASCENT OF VESUVIUS--CONTINUED.
Naples, with its immediate suburbs, contains six hundred and twenty-five thousand inhabitants, but I am satisfied it covers no more ground than an American city of one hundred and fifty thousand.
It reaches up into the air infinitely higher than three American cities, though, and there is where the secret of it lies.
I will observe here, in passing, that the contrasts between opulence and poverty, and magnificence and misery, are more frequent and more striking in Naples than in Paris even.
One must go to the Bois de Boulogne to see fashionable dressing, splendid equipages and stunning liveries, and to the Faubourg St. Antoine to see vice, misery, hunger, rags, dirt--but in the thoroughfares of Naples these things are all mixed together.
Naked boys of nine years and the fancy-dressed children of luxury; shreds and tatters, and brilliant uniforms; jackass-carts and state-carriages; beggars, Princes and Bishops, jostle each other in every street.
At six o'clock every evening, all Naples turns out to drive on the 'Riviere di Chiaja', (whatever that may mean;) and for two hours one may stand there and see the motliest and the worst mixed procession go by that ever eyes beheld.
Princes (there are more Princes than policemen in Naples--the city is infested with them)--Princes who live up seven flights of stairs and don't own any principalities, will keep a carriage and go hungry; and clerks, mechanics, milliners and strumpets will
For two hours rank and wealth, and obscurity and poverty clatter along side by side in the wild procession, and then go home serene, happy, covered with glory!
I was looking at a magnificent marble staircase in the King's palace, the other day, which, it was said, cost five million francs, and I suppose it did cost half a million, may be.
I felt as if it must be a fine thing to live in a country where there was such comfort and such luxury as this.
And then I stepped out musing, and almost walked over a vagabond who was eating his dinner on the curbstone--a piece of bread and a bunch of grapes.
When I found that this mustang was clerking in a fruit establishment (he had the establishment along with him in a basket,) at two cents a day, and that he had no palace at home where he lived, I lost some of my enthusiasm concerning the happiness of
This naturally suggests to me a thought about wages here.
Lieutenants in the army get about a dollar a day, and common soldiers a couple of cents.
I only know one clerk--he gets four dollars a month.
Printers get six dollars and a half a month, but I have heard of a foreman who gets thirteen.
To be growing suddenly and violently rich, as this man is, naturally makes him a bloated aristocrat.
The airs he puts on are insufferable.
And, speaking of wages, reminds me of prices of merchandise.
In Paris you pay twelve dollars a dozen for Jouvin's best kid gloves; gloves of about as good quality sell here at three or four dollars a dozen.
You pay five and six dollars apiece for fine linen shirts in Paris; here and in Leghorn you pay two and a half.
In Marseilles you pay forty dollars for a first-class dress coat made by a good tailor, but in Leghorn you can get a full dress suit for the same money.
Here you get handsome business suits at from ten to twenty dollars, and in Leghorn you can get an overcoat for fifteen dollars that would cost you seventy in New York.
Fine kid boots are worth eight dollars in Marseilles and four dollars here.
Lyons velvets rank higher in America than those of Genoa.
Yet the bulk of Lyons velvets you buy in the States are made in Genoa and imported into Lyons, where they receive the Lyons stamp and are then exported to America.
You can buy enough velvet in Genoa for twenty-five dollars to make a five hundred dollar cloak in New York--so the ladies tell me.
Of course these things bring me back, by a natural and easy transition, to the ASCENT OF VESUVIUS--CONTINUED.
And thus the wonderful Blue Grotto is suggested to me.
It is situated on the Island of Capri, twenty-two miles from Naples.
We chartered a little steamer and went out there.
Of course, the police boarded us and put us through a health examination, and inquired into our politics, before they would let us land.
The airs these little insect Governments put on are in the last degree ridiculous.
They even put a policeman on board of our boat to keep an eye on us as long as we were in the Capri dominions.
They thought we wanted to steal the grotto, I suppose.
It was worth stealing.
The entrance to the cave is four feet high and four feet wide, and is in the face of a lofty perpendicular cliff--the sea-wall.
You enter in small boats--and a tight squeeze it is, too.
You can not go in at all when the tide is up.
Once within, you find yourself in an arched cavern about one hundred and sixty feet long, one hundred and twenty wide, and about seventy high.
How deep it is no man knows.
It goes down to the bottom of the ocean.
The waters of this placid subterranean lake are the brightest, loveliest blue that can be imagined.
They are as transparent as plate glass, and their coloring would shame the richest sky that ever bent over Italy.
No tint could be more ravishing, no lustre more superb.
Throw a stone into the water, and the myriad of tiny bubbles that are created flash out a brilliant glare like blue theatrical fires.
Dip an oar, and its blade turns to splendid frosted silver, tinted with blue.
Let a man jump in, and instantly he is cased in an armor more gorgeous than ever kingly Crusader wore.
Then we went to Ischia, but I had already been to that island and tired myself to death "resting" a couple of days and studying human villainy, with the landlord of the Grande Sentinelle for a model.
So we went to Procida, and from thence to Pozzuoli, where St. Paul landed after he sailed from Samos.
I landed at precisely the same spot where St. Paul landed, and so did Dan and the others.
It was a remarkable coincidence.
St. Paul preached to these people seven days before he started to Rome.
Nero's Baths, the ruins of Baiae, the Temple of Serapis; Cumae, where the Cumaen Sybil interpreted the oracles, the Lake Agnano, with its ancient submerged city still visible far down in its depths--these and a hundred other points of interest we examined
Every body has written about the Grotto del Cane and its poisonous vapors, from Pliny down to Smith, and every tourist has held a dog over its floor by the legs to test the capabilities of the place.
The dog dies in a minute and a half--a chicken instantly.
As a general thing, strangers who crawl in there to sleep do not get up until they are called.
And then they don't either.
The stranger that ventures to sleep there takes a permanent contract.
I longed to see this grotto.
I resolved to take a dog and hold him myself; suffocate him a little, and time him; suffocate him some more and then finish him.
We reached the grotto at about three in the afternoon, and proceeded at once to make the experiments.
But now, an important difficulty presented itself.
We had no dog.
ASCENT OF VESUVIUS--CONTINUED.
At the Hermitage we were about fifteen or eighteen hundred feet above the sea, and thus far a portion of the ascent had been pretty abrupt.
For the next two miles the road was a mixture--sometimes the ascent was abrupt and sometimes it was not: but one characteristic it possessed all the time, without failure--without modification--it was all uncompromisingly and unspeakably infamous.
It was a rough, narrow trail, and led over an old lava flow--a black ocean which was tumbled into a thousand fantastic shapes--a wild chaos of ruin, desolation, and barrenness--a wilderness of billowy upheavals, of furious whirlpools, of miniature
--all stricken dead and cold in the instant of its maddest rioting!
--fettered, paralyzed, and left to glower at heaven in impotent rage for evermore!
Finally we stood in a level, narrow valley (a valley that had been created by the terrific march of some old time irruption) and on either hand towered the two steep peaks of Vesuvius.
The one we had to climb --the one that contains the active volcano--seemed about eight hundred or one thousand feet high, and looked almost too straight-up-and-down for any man to climb, and certainly no mule could climb it with a man on his back.
Four of these native pirates will carry you to the top in a sedan chair, if you wish it, but suppose they were to slip and let you fall, --is it likely that you would ever stop rolling?
Not this side of eternity, perhaps.
We left the mules, sharpened our finger-nails, and began the ascent I have been writing about so long, at twenty minutes to six in the morning.
The path led straight up a rugged sweep of loose chunks of pumice-stone, and for about every two steps forward we took, we slid back one.
It was so excessively steep that we had to stop, every fifty or sixty steps, and rest a moment.
To see our comrades, we had to look very nearly straight up at those above us, and very nearly straight down at those below.
We stood on the summit at last--it had taken an hour and fifteen minutes to make the trip.
What we saw there was simply a circular crater--a circular ditch, if you please--about two hundred feet deep, and four or five hundred feet wide, whose inner wall was about half a mile in circumference.
In the centre of the great circus ring thus formed, was a torn and ragged upheaval a hundred feet high, all snowed over with a sulphur crust of many and many a brilliant and beautiful color, and the ditch inclosed this like the moat of a castle, or
The sulphur coating of that island was gaudy in the extreme--all mingled together in the richest confusion were red, blue, brown, black, yellow, white--I do not know that there was a color, or shade of a color, or combination of colors, unrepresented--and
The crater itself--the ditch--was not so variegated in coloring, but yet, in its softness, richness, and unpretentious elegance, it was more charming, more fascinating to the eye.
There was nothing "loud" about its well-bred and well-creased look.
Beautiful?
One could stand and look down upon it for a week without getting tired of it.
It had the semblance of a pleasant meadow, whose slender grasses and whose velvety mosses were frosted with a shining dust, and tinted with palest green that deepened gradually to the darkest hue of the orange leaf, and deepened yet again into gravest
Where portions of the meadow had sunk, and where other portions had been broken up like an ice-floe, the cavernous openings of the one, and the ragged upturned edges exposed by the other, were hung with a lace-work of soft-tinted crystals of sulphur that
The walls of the ditch were brilliant with yellow banks of sulphur and with lava and pumice-stone of many colors.
No fire was visible any where, but gusts of sulphurous steam issued silently and invisibly from a thousand little cracks and fissures in the crater, and were wafted to our noses with every breeze.
But so long as we kept our nostrils buried in our handkerchiefs, there was small danger of suffocation.
Some of the boys thrust long slips of paper down into holes and set them on fire, and so achieved the glory of lighting their cigars by the flames of Vesuvius, and others cooked eggs over fissures in the rocks and were happy.
The view from the summit would have been superb but for the fact that the sun could only pierce the mists at long intervals.
Thus the glimpses we had of the grand panorama below were only fitful and unsatisfactory.
THE DESCENT.
The descent of the mountain was a labor of only four minutes.
Instead of stalking down the rugged path we ascended, we chose one which was bedded knee-deep in loose ashes, and ploughed our way with prodigious strides that would almost have shamed the performance of him of the seven-league boots.
The Vesuvius of today is a very poor affair compared to the mighty volcano of Kilauea, in the Sandwich Islands, but I am glad I visited it.
It was well worth it.
It is said that during one of the grand eruptions of Vesuvius it discharged massy rocks weighing many tons a thousand feet into the air, its vast jets of smoke and steam ascended thirty miles toward the firmament, and clouds of its ashes were wafted abroad
I will take the ashes at a moderate discount, if any one will take the thirty miles of smoke, but I do not feel able to take a commanding interest in the whole story by myself.
CHAPTER XXXI.
THE BURIED CITY OF POMPEII They pronounce it Pom-pay-e.
I always had an idea that you went down into Pompeii with torches, by the way of damp, dark stairways, just as you do in silver mines, and traversed gloomy tunnels with lava overhead and something on either hand like dilapidated prisons gouged out of the
But you do nothing the kind.
Fully one-half of the buried city, perhaps, is completely exhumed and thrown open freely to the light of day; and there stand the long rows of solidly-built brick houses (roofless) just as they stood eighteen hundred years ago, hot with the flaming sun;
The broken pillars lying about, the doorless doorways and the crumbled tops of the wilderness of walls, were wonderfully suggestive of the "burnt district" in one of our cities, and if there had been any charred timbers, shattered windows, heaps of debris,
But no--the sun shines as brightly down on old Pompeii to-day as it did when Christ was born in Bethlehem, and its streets are cleaner a hundred times than ever Pompeiian saw them in her prime.
I know whereof I speak--for in the great, chief thoroughfares (Merchant street and the Street of Fortune) have I not seen with my own eyes how for two hundred years at least the pavements were not repaired!
--how ruts five and even ten inches deep were worn into the thick flagstones by the chariot-wheels of generations of swindled tax-payers?
And do I not know by these signs that Street Commissioners of Pompeii never attended to their business, and that if they never mended the pavements they never cleaned them?
And, besides, is it not the inborn nature of Street Commissioners to avoid their duty whenever they get a chance?
I wish I knew the name of the last one that held office in Pompeii so that I could give him a blast.
I speak with feeling on this subject, because I caught my foot in one of those ruts, and the sadness that came over me when I saw the first poor skeleton, with ashes and lava sticking to it, was tempered by the reflection that may be that party was the
No--Pompeii is no longer a buried city.
It is a city of hundreds and hundreds of roofless houses, and a tangled maze of streets where one could easily get lost, without a guide, and have to sleep in some ghostly palace that had known no living tenant since that awful November night of eighteen
We passed through the gate which faces the Mediterranean, (called the "Marine Gate,") and by the rusty, broken image of Minerva, still keeping tireless watch and ward over the possessions it was powerless to save, and went up a long street and stood in the
The floor was level and clean, and up and down either side was a noble colonnade of broken pillars, with their beautiful Ionic and Corinthian columns scattered about them.
At the upper end were the vacant seats of the Judges, and behind them we descended into a dungeon where the ashes and cinders had found two prisoners chained on that memorable November night, and tortured them to death.
How they must have tugged at the pitiless fetters as the fierce fires surged around them!
Then we lounged through many and many a sumptuous private mansion which we could not have entered without a formal invitation in incomprehensible Latin, in the olden time, when the owners lived there--and we probably wouldn't have got it.
These people built their houses a good deal alike.
The floors were laid in fanciful figures wrought in mosaics of many-colored marbles.
At the threshold your eyes fall upon a Latin sentence of welcome, sometimes, or a picture of a dog, with the legend "Beware of the Dog," and sometimes a picture of a bear or a faun with no inscription at all.
Then you enter a sort of vestibule, where they used to keep the hat-rack, I suppose; next a room with a large marble basin in the midst and the pipes of a fountain; on either side are bedrooms; beyond the fountain is a reception-room, then a little garden,
The floors were all mosaic, the walls were stuccoed, or frescoed, or ornamented with bas-reliefs, and here and there were statues, large and small, and little fish-pools, and cascades of sparkling water that sprang from secret places in the colonnade of
Those Pompeiians were very luxurious in their tastes and habits.
The most exquisite bronzes we have seen in Europe, came from the exhumed cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii, and also the finest cameos and the most delicate engravings on precious stones; their pictures, eighteen or nineteen centuries old, are often much
They were well up in art.
From the creation of these works of the first, clear up to the eleventh century, art seems hardly to have existed at all--at least no remnants of it are left--and it was curious to see how far (in some things, at any rate,) these old time pagans excelled
The pride of the world in sculptures seem to be the Laocoon and the Dying Gladiator, in Rome.
They are as old as Pompeii, were dug from the earth like Pompeii; but their exact age or who made them can only be conjectured.
But worn, and cracked, without a history, and with the blemishing stains of numberless centuries upon them, they still mutely mock at all efforts to rival their perfections.
It was a quaint and curious pastime, wandering through this old silent city of the dead--lounging through utterly deserted streets where thousands and thousands of human beings once bought and sold, and walked and rode, and made the place resound with the
They were not lazy.
They hurried in those days.
We had evidence of that.
There was a temple on one corner, and it was a shorter cut to go between the columns of that temple from one street to the other than to go around--and behold that pathway had been worn deep into the heavy flagstone floor of the building by generations of
They would not go around when it was quicker to go through.
We do that way in our cities.
Every where, you see things that make you wonder how old these old houses were before the night of destruction came--things, too, which bring back those long dead inhabitants and place the living before your eyes.
For instance: The steps (two feet thick--lava blocks) that lead up out of the school, and the same kind of steps that lead up into the dress circle of the principal theatre, are almost worn through!
For ages the boys hurried out of that school, and for ages their parents hurried into that theatre, and the nervous feet that have been dust and ashes for eighteen centuries have left their record for us to read to-day.
I imagined I could see crowds of gentlemen and ladies thronging into the theatre, with tickets for secured seats in their hands, and on the wall, I read the imaginary placard, in infamous grammar, "POSITIVELY NO FREE LIST, EXCEPT MEMBERS OF THE PRESS"!
Hanging about the doorway (I fancied,) were slouchy Pompeiian street-boys uttering slang and profanity, and keeping a wary eye out for checks.
I entered the theatre, and sat down in one of the long rows of stone benches in the dress circle, and looked at the place for the orchestra, and the ruined stage, and around at the wide sweep of empty boxes, and thought to myself, "This house won't pay".
I tried to imagine the music in full blast, the leader of the orchestra beating time, and the "versatile" So-and-So (who had "just returned from a most successful tour in the provinces to play his last and farewell engagement of positively six nights only,
I said, these people that ought to be here have been dead, and still, and moldering to dust for ages and ages, and will never care for the trifles and follies of life any more for ever--"Owing to circumstances, etc.
, etc.
, there will not be any performance to-night".
Close down the curtain.
Put out the lights.
And so I turned away and went through shop after shop and store after store, far down the long street of the merchants, and called for the wares of Rome and the East, but the tradesmen were gone, the marts were silent, and nothing was left but the broken
In a bake-shop was a mill for grinding the grain, and the furnaces for baking the bread: and they say that here, in the same furnaces, the exhumers of Pompeii found nice, well baked loaves which the baker had not found time to remove from the ovens the
In one house (the only building in Pompeii which no woman is now allowed to enter,) were the small rooms and short beds of solid masonry, just as they were in the old times, and on the walls were pictures which looked almost as fresh as if they were
In one of the principal streets was a ponderous stone tank, and a water-spout that supplied it, and where the tired, heated toilers from the Campagna used to rest their right hands when they bent over to put their lips to the spout, the thick stone was
Think of the countless thousands of hands that had pressed that spot in the ages that are gone, to so reduce a stone that is as hard as iron!
They had a great public bulletin board in Pompeii--a place where announcements for gladiatorial combats, elections, and such things, were posted--not on perishable paper, but carved in enduring stone.
One lady, who, I take it, was rich and well brought up, advertised a dwelling or so to rent, with baths and all the modern improvements, and several hundred shops, stipulating that the dwellings should not be put to immoral purposes.
You can find out who lived in many a house in Pompeii by the carved stone door-plates affixed to them: and in the same way you can tell who they were that occupy the tombs.
Every where around are things that reveal to you something of the customs and history of this forgotten people.
But what would a volcano leave of an American city, if it once rained its cinders on it?
Hardly a sign or a symbol to tell its story.
In one of these long Pompeiian halls the skeleton of a man was found, with ten pieces of gold in one hand and a large key in the other.
He had seized his money and started toward the door, but the fiery tempest caught him at the very threshold, and he sank down and died.
One more minute of precious time would have saved him.
I saw the skeletons of a man, a woman, and two young girls.
The woman had her hands spread wide apart, as if in mortal terror, and I imagined I could still trace upon her shapeless face something of the expression of wild despair that distorted it when the heavens rained fire in these streets, so many ages ago.
The girls and the man lay with their faces upon their arms, as if they had tried to shield them from the enveloping cinders.
In one apartment eighteen skeletons were found, all in sitting postures, and blackened places on the walls still mark their shapes and show their attitudes, like shadows.
One of them, a woman, still wore upon her skeleton throat a necklace, with her name engraved upon it--JULIE DI DIOMEDE.
But perhaps the most poetical thing Pompeii has yielded to modern research, was that grand figure of a Roman soldier, clad in complete armor; who, true to his duty, true to his proud name of a soldier of Rome, and full of the stern courage which had given
We never read of Pompeii but we think of that soldier; we can not write of Pompeii without the natural impulse to grant to him the mention he so well deserves.
Let us remember that he was a soldier--not a policeman --and so, praise him.
Being a soldier, he staid,--because the warrior instinct forbade him to fly.
Had he been a policeman he would have staid, also--because he would have been asleep.
There are not half a dozen flights of stairs in Pompeii, and no other evidences that the houses were more than one story high.
The people did not live in the clouds, as do the Venetians, the Genoese and Neapolitans of to-day.
We came out from under the solemn mysteries of this city of the Venerable Past--this city which perished, with all its old ways and its quaint old fashions about it, remote centuries ago, when the Disciples were preaching the new religion, which is as old
woke me up and reminded me that I belonged in the nineteenth century, and was not a dusty mummy, caked with ashes and cinders, eighteen hundred years old.
The transition was startling.
The idea of a railroad train actually running to old dead Pompeii, and whistling irreverently, and calling for passengers in the most bustling and business-like way, was as strange a thing as one could imagine, and as unpoetical and disagreeable as it was
Compare the cheerful life and the sunshine of this day with the horrors the younger Pliny saw here, the 9th of November, A.D. 79, when he was so bravely striving to remove his mother out of reach of harm, while she begged him, with all a mother's
'By this time the murky darkness had so increased that one might have believed himself abroad in a black and moonless night, or in a chamber where all the lights had been extinguished.
On every hand was heard the complaints of women, the wailing of children, and the cries of men.
One called his father, another his son, and another his wife, and only by their voices could they know each other.
Many in their despair begged that death would come and end their distress.
"Some implored the gods to succor them, and some believed that this night was the last, the eternal night which should engulf the universe!
"Even so it seemed to me--and I consoled myself for the coming death with the reflection: BEHOLD, THE WORLD IS PASSING AWAY"!
* * * * * * * * After browsing among the stately ruins of Rome, of Baiae, of Pompeii, and after glancing down the long marble ranks of battered and nameless imperial heads that stretch down the corridors of the Vatican, one thing strikes me with a force it
Men lived long lives, in the olden time, and struggled feverishly through them, toiling like slaves, in oratory, in generalship, or in literature, and then laid them down and died, happy in the possession of an enduring history and a deathless name.
Well, twenty little centuries flutter away, and what is left of these things?
A crazy inscription on a block of stone, which snuffy antiquaries bother over and tangle up and make nothing out of but a bare name (which they spell wrong)--no history, no tradition, no poetry--nothing that can give it even a passing interest.
What may be left of General Grant's great name forty centuries hence?
This--in the Encyclopedia for A. D. 5868, possibly: "URIAH S. (or Z.) GRAUNT--popular poet of ancient times in the Aztec provinces of the United States of British America.
Some authors say flourished about A. D. 742; but the learned Ah-ah Foo-foo states that he was a cotemporary of Scharkspyre, the English poet, and flourished about A. D. 1328, some three centuries after the Trojan war instead of before it.
He wrote 'Rock me to Sleep, Mother.
'" These thoughts sadden me.
I will to bed.
CHAPTER XXXII.
Home, again!
For the first time, in many weeks, the ship's entire family met and shook hands on the quarter-deck.
They had gathered from many points of the compass and from many lands, but not one was missing; there was no tale of sickness or death among the flock to dampen the pleasure of the reunion.
Once more there was a full audience on deck to listen to the sailors' chorus as they got the anchor up, and to wave an adieu to the land as we sped away from Naples.
The seats were full at dinner again, the domino parties were complete, and the life and bustle on the upper deck in the fine moonlight at night was like old times--old times that had been gone weeks only, but yet they were weeks so crowded with incident,
There was no lack of cheerfulness on board the Quaker City.
For once, her title was a misnomer.
At seven in the evening, with the western horizon all golden from the sunken sun, and specked with distant ships, the full moon sailing high over head, the dark blue of the sea under foot, and a strange sort of twilight affected by all these different
With what majesty the monarch held his lonely state above the level sea!
Distance clothed him in a purple gloom, and added a veil of shimmering mist that so softened his rugged features that we seemed to see him through a web of silver gauze.
His torch was out; his fires were smoldering; a tall column of smoke that rose up and lost itself in the growing moonlight was all the sign he gave that he was a living Autocrat of the Sea and not the spectre of a dead one.
At two in the morning we swept through the Straits of Messina, and so bright was the moonlight that Italy on the one hand and Sicily on the other seemed almost as distinctly visible as though we looked at them from the middle of a street we were
The city of Messina, milk-white, and starred and spangled all over with gaslights, was a fairy spectacle.
A great party of us were on deck smoking and making a noise, and waiting to see famous Scylla and Charybdis.
And presently the Oracle stepped out with his eternal spy-glass and squared himself on the deck like another Colossus of Rhodes.
It was a surprise to see him abroad at such an hour.
Nobody supposed he cared anything about an old fable like that of Scylla and Charybdis.
One of the boys said: "Hello, doctor, what are you doing up here at this time of night?
--What do you want to see this place for"?
"What do I want to see this place for?
Young man, little do you know me, or you wouldn't ask such a question.
I wish to see all the places that's mentioned in the Bible".
"Stuff--this place isn't mentioned in the Bible".
"It ain't mentioned in the Bible!
--this place ain't--well now, what place is this, since you know so much about it"?
"Why it's Scylla and Charybdis".
"Scylla and Cha--confound it, I thought it was Sodom and Gomorrah"!
And he closed up his glass and went below.
The above is the ship story.
Its plausibility is marred a little by the fact that the Oracle was not a biblical student, and did not spend much of his time instructing himself about Scriptural localities.
--They say the Oracle complains, in this hot weather, lately, that the only beverage in the ship that is passable, is the butter.
He did not mean butter, of course, but inasmuch as that article remains in a melted state now since we are out of ice, it is fair to give him the credit of getting one long word in the right place, anyhow, for once in his life.
He said, in Rome, that the Pope was a noble-looking old man, but he never did think much of his Iliad.
We spent one pleasant day skirting along the Isles of Greece.
They are very mountainous.
Their prevailing tints are gray and brown, approaching to red.
Little white villages surrounded by trees, nestle in the valleys or roost upon the lofty perpendicular sea-walls.
We had one fine sunset--a rich carmine flush that suffused the western sky and cast a ruddy glow far over the sea.
--Fine sunsets seem to be rare in this part of the world--or at least, striking ones.
They are soft, sensuous, lovely--they are exquisite refined, effeminate, but we have seen no sunsets here yet like the gorgeous conflagrations that flame in the track of the sinking sun in our high northern latitudes.
But what were sunsets to us, with the wild excitement upon us of approaching the most renowned of cities!
What cared we for outward visions, when Agamemnon, Achilles, and a thousand other heroes of the great Past were marching in ghostly procession through our fancies?
What were sunsets to us, who were about to live and breathe and walk in actual Athens; yea, and go far down into the dead centuries and bid in person for the slaves, Diogenes and Plato, in the public market-place, or gossip with the neighbors about the
We scorned to consider sunsets.
We arrived, and entered the ancient harbor of the Piraeus at last.
We dropped anchor within half a mile of the village.
Away off, across the undulating Plain of Attica, could be seen a little square-topped hill with a something on it, which our glasses soon discovered to be the ruined edifices of the citadel of the Athenians, and most prominent among them loomed the
So exquisitely clear and pure is this wonderful atmosphere that every column of the noble structure was discernible through the telescope, and even the smaller ruins about it assumed some semblance of shape.
This at a distance of five or six miles.
In the valley, near the Acropolis, (the square-topped hill before spoken of,) Athens itself could be vaguely made out with an ordinary lorgnette.
Every body was anxious to get ashore and visit these classic localities as quickly as possible.
No land we had yet seen had aroused such universal interest among the passengers.
But bad news came.
The commandant of the Piraeus came in his boat, and said we must either depart or else get outside the harbor and remain imprisoned in our ship, under rigid quarantine, for eleven days!
So we took up the anchor and moved outside, to lie a dozen hours or so, taking in supplies, and then sail for Constantinople.
It was the bitterest disappointment we had yet experienced.
To lie a whole day in sight of the Acropolis, and yet be obliged to go away without visiting Athens!
Disappointment was hardly a strong enough word to describe the circumstances.
All hands were on deck, all the afternoon, with books and maps and glasses, trying to determine which "narrow rocky ridge" was the Areopagus, which sloping hill the Pnyx, which elevation the Museum Hill, and so on.
And we got things confused.
Discussion became heated, and party spirit ran high.
Church members were gazing with emotion upon a hill which they said was the one St. Paul preached from, and another faction claimed that that hill was Hymettus, and another that it was Pentelicon!
After all the trouble, we could be certain of only one thing--the square-topped hill was the Acropolis, and the grand ruin that crowned it was the Parthenon, whose picture we knew in infancy in the school books.
We inquired of every body who came near the ship, whether there were guards in the Piraeus, whether they were strict, what the chances were of capture should any of us slip ashore, and in case any of us made the venture and were caught, what would be
The answers were discouraging: There was a strong guard or police force; the Piraeus was a small town, and any stranger seen in it would surely attract attention--capture would be certain.
The commandant said the punishment would be "heavy;" when asked "how heavy"?
he said it would be "very severe"--that was all we could get out of him.
At eleven o'clock at night, when most of the ship's company were abed, four of us stole softly ashore in a small boat, a clouded moon favoring the enterprise, and started two and two, and far apart, over a low hill, intending to go clear around the
Picking our way so stealthily over that rocky, nettle-grown eminence, made me feel a good deal as if I were on my way somewhere to steal something.
My immediate comrade and I talked in an undertone about quarantine laws and their penalties, but we found nothing cheering in the subject.
I was posted.
Only a few days before, I was talking with our captain, and he mentioned the case of a man who swam ashore from a quarantined ship somewhere, and got imprisoned six months for it; and when he was in Genoa a few years ago, a captain of a quarantined ship
This kind of conversation did no good, further than to give a sort of dismal interest to our quarantine-breaking expedition, and so we dropped it.
We made the entire circuit of the town without seeing any body but one man, who stared at us curiously, but said nothing, and a dozen persons asleep on the ground before their doors, whom we walked among and never woke--but we woke up dogs enough, in all
They made such a preposterous din that persons aboard our ship said they could tell how we were progressing for a long time, and where we were, by the barking of the dogs.
The clouded moon still favored us.
When we had made the whole circuit, and were passing among the houses on the further side of the town, the moon came out splendidly, but we no longer feared the light.
As we approached a well, near a house, to get a drink, the owner merely glanced at us and went within.
He left the quiet, slumbering town at our mercy.
I record it here proudly, that we didn't do any thing to it.
Seeing no road, we took a tall hill to the left of the distant Acropolis for a mark, and steered straight for it over all obstructions, and over a little rougher piece of country than exists any where else outside of the State of Nevada, perhaps.
Part of the way it was covered with small, loose stones--we trod on six at a time, and they all rolled.
Another part of it was dry, loose, newly-ploughed ground.
Still another part of it was a long stretch of low grape-vines, which were tanglesome and troublesome, and which we took to be brambles.
The Attic Plain, barring the grape-vines, was a barren, desolate, unpoetical waste--I wonder what it was in Greece's Age of Glory, five hundred years before Christ?
In the neighborhood of one o'clock in the morning, when we were heated with fast walking and parched with thirst, Denny exclaimed, "Why, these weeds are grape-vines"!
and in five minutes we had a score of bunches of large, white, delicious grapes, and were reaching down for more when a dark shape rose mysteriously up out of the shadows beside us and said "Ho"!
And so we left.
In ten minutes more we struck into a beautiful road, and unlike some others we had stumbled upon at intervals, it led in the right direction.
We followed it.
It was broad, and smooth, and white--handsome and in perfect repair, and shaded on both sides for a mile or so with single ranks of trees, and also with luxuriant vineyards.
Twice we entered and stole grapes, and the second time somebody shouted at us from some invisible place.
Whereupon we left again.
We speculated in grapes no more on that side of Athens.
Shortly we came upon an ancient stone aqueduct, built upon arches, and from that time forth we had ruins all about us--we were approaching our journey's end.
We could not see the Acropolis now or the high hill, either, and I wanted to follow the road till we were abreast of them, but the others overruled me, and we toiled laboriously up the stony hill immediately in our front--and from its summit saw
It was an hour of exhausting work.
Soon we came upon a row of open graves, cut in the solid rock--(for a while one of them served Socrates for a prison)--we passed around the shoulder of the hill, and the citadel, in all its ruined magnificence, burst upon us!
We hurried across the ravine and up a winding road, and stood on the old Acropolis, with the prodigious walls of the citadel towering above our heads.
We did not stop to inspect their massive blocks of marble, or measure their height, or guess at their extraordinary thickness, but passed at once through a great arched passage like a railway tunnel, and went straight to the gate that leads to the ancient
It was locked!
So, after all, it seemed that we were not to see the great Parthenon face to face.
We sat down and held a council of war.
Result: the gate was only a flimsy structure of wood--we would break it down.
It seemed like desecration, but then we had traveled far, and our necessities were urgent.
We could not hunt up guides and keepers--we must be on the ship before daylight.
So we argued.
This was all very fine, but when we came to break the gate, we could not do it.
We moved around an angle of the wall and found a low bastion--eight feet high without--ten or twelve within.
Denny prepared to scale it, and we got ready to follow.
By dint of hard scrambling he finally straddled the top, but some loose stones crumbled away and fell with a crash into the court within.
There was instantly a banging of doors and a shout.
Denny dropped from the wall in a twinkling, and we retreated in disorder to the gate.
Xerxes took that mighty citadel four hundred and eighty years before Christ, when his five millions of soldiers and camp-followers followed him to Greece, and if we four Americans could have remained unmolested five minutes longer, we would have taken it
The garrison had turned out--four Greeks.
We clamored at the gate, and they admitted us.
[Bribery and corruption.
] We crossed a large court, entered a great door, and stood upon a pavement of purest white marble, deeply worn by footprints.
Before us, in the flooding moonlight, rose the noblest ruins we had ever looked upon--the Propylae; a small Temple of Minerva; the Temple of Hercules, and the grand Parthenon.
[We got these names from the Greek guide, who didn't seem to know more than seven men ought to know.
] These edifices were all built of the whitest Pentelic marble, but have a pinkish stain upon them now.
Where any part is broken, however, the fracture looks like fine loaf sugar.
Six caryatides, or marble women, clad in flowing robes, support the portico of the Temple of Hercules, but the porticos and colonnades of the other structures are formed of massive Doric and Ionic pillars, whose flutings and capitals are still measurably
The Parthenon, originally, was two hundred and twenty-six feet long, one hundred wide, and seventy high, and had two rows of great columns, eight in each, at either end, and single rows of seventeen each down the sides, and was one of the most graceful and
Most of the Parthenon's imposing columns are still standing, but the roof is gone.
It was a perfect building two hundred and fifty years ago, when a shell dropped into the Venetian magazine stored here, and the explosion which followed wrecked and unroofed it.
I remember but little about the Parthenon, and I have put in one or two facts and figures for the use of other people with short memories.
Got them from the guide-book.
As we wandered thoughtfully down the marble-paved length of this stately temple, the scene about us was strangely impressive.
Here and there, in lavish profusion, were gleaming white statues of men and women, propped against blocks of marble, some of them armless, some without legs, others headless--but all looking mournful in the moonlight, and startlingly human!
They rose up and confronted the midnight intruder on every side --they stared at him with stony eyes from unlooked-for nooks and recesses; they peered at him over fragmentary heaps far down the desolate corridors; they barred his way in the midst of the
What a world of ruined sculpture was about us!
Set up in rows--stacked up in piles--scattered broadcast over the wide area of the Acropolis --were hundreds of crippled statues of all sizes and of the most exquisite workmanship; and vast fragments of marble that once belonged to the entablatures,
History says that the temples of the Acropolis were filled with the noblest works of Praxiteles and Phidias, and of many a great master in sculpture besides--and surely these elegant fragments attest it.
We walked out into the grass-grown, fragment-strewn court beyond the Parthenon.
It startled us, every now and then, to see a stony white face stare suddenly up at us out of the grass with its dead eyes.
The place seemed alive with ghosts.
I half expected to see the Athenian heroes of twenty centuries ago glide out of the shadows and steal into the old temple they knew so well and regarded with such boundless pride.
The full moon was riding high in the cloudless heavens, now.
We sauntered carelessly and unthinkingly to the edge of the lofty battlements of the citadel, and looked down--a vision!
And such a vision!
Athens by moonlight!
The prophet that thought the splendors of the New Jerusalem were revealed to him, surely saw this instead!
It lay in the level plain right under our feet--all spread abroad like a picture--and we looked down upon it as we might have looked from a balloon.
We saw no semblance of a street, but every house, every window, every clinging vine, every projection was as distinct and sharply marked as if the time were noon-day; and yet there was no glare, no glitter, nothing harsh or repulsive--the noiseless city
On its further side was a little temple, whose delicate pillars and ornate front glowed with a rich lustre that chained the eye like a spell; and nearer by, the palace of the king reared its creamy walls out of the midst of a great garden of shrubbery that
Overhead the stately columns, majestic still in their ruin--under foot the dreaming city--in the distance the silver sea --not on the broad earth is there an other picture half so beautiful!
As we turned and moved again through the temple, I wished that the illustrious men who had sat in it in the remote ages could visit it again and reveal themselves to our curious eyes--Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, Socrates, Phocion, Pythagoras, Euclid,
What a constellation of celebrated names!
But more than all, I wished that old Diogenes, groping so patiently with his lantern, searching so zealously for one solitary honest man in all the world, might meander along and stumble on our party.
I ought not to say it, may be, but still I suppose he would have put out his light.
We left the Parthenon to keep its watch over old Athens, as it had kept it for twenty-three hundred years, and went and stood outside the walls of the citadel.
In the distance was the ancient, but still almost perfect Temple of Theseus, and close by, looking to the west, was the Bema, from whence Demosthenes thundered his philippics and fired the wavering patriotism of his countrymen.
To the right was Mars Hill, where the Areopagus sat in ancient times and where St. Paul defined his position, and below was the market-place where he "disputed daily" with the gossip-loving Athenians.
We climbed the stone steps St. Paul ascended, and stood in the square-cut place he stood in, and tried to recollect the Bible account of the matter--but for certain reasons, I could not recall the words.
I have found them since: "Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given up to idolatry.
Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the market daily with them that met with him.
* * * * * * * * * "And they took him and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know what this new doctrine whereof thou speakest is?
* * * * * * * * * "Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars hill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious; For as I passed by and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription: To THE UNKNOWN GOD.
Whom, therefore, ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you".
--Acts, ch.
xvii".
It occurred to us, after a while, that if we wanted to get home before daylight betrayed us, we had better be moving.
So we hurried away.
When far on our road, we had a parting view of the Parthenon, with the moonlight streaming through its open colonnades and touching its capitals with silver.
As it looked then, solemn, grand, and beautiful it will always remain in our memories.
As we marched along, we began to get over our fears, and ceased to care much about quarantine scouts or any body else.
We grew bold and reckless; and once, in a sudden burst of courage, I even threw a stone at a dog.
It was a pleasant reflection, though, that I did not hit him, because his master might just possibly have been a policeman.
Inspired by this happy failure, my valor became utterly uncontrollable, and at intervals I absolutely whistled, though on a moderate key.
But boldness breeds boldness, and shortly I plunged into a Vineyard, in the full light of the moon, and captured a gallon of superb grapes, not even minding the presence of a peasant who rode by on a mule.
Denny and Birch followed my example.
Now I had grapes enough for a dozen, but then Jackson was all swollen up with courage, too, and he was obliged to enter a vineyard presently.
The first bunch he seized brought trouble.
A frowsy, bearded brigand sprang into the road with a shout, and flourished a musket in the light of the moon!
We sidled toward the Piraeus--not running you understand, but only advancing with celerity.
The brigand shouted again, but still we advanced.
It was getting late, and we had no time to fool away on every ass that wanted to drivel Greek platitudes to us.
We would just as soon have talked with him as not if we had not been in a hurry.
Presently Denny said, "Those fellows are following us"!
We turned, and, sure enough, there they were--three fantastic pirates armed with guns.
We slackened our pace to let them come up, and in the meantime I got out my cargo of grapes and dropped them firmly but reluctantly into the shadows by the wayside.
But I was not afraid.
I only felt that it was not right to steal grapes.
And all the more so when the owner was around--and not only around, but with his friends around also.
The villains came up and searched a bundle Dr. Birch had in his hand, and scowled upon him when they found it had nothing in it but some holy rocks from Mars Hill, and these were not contraband.
They evidently suspected him of playing some wretched fraud upon them, and seemed half inclined to scalp the party.
But finally they dismissed us with a warning, couched in excellent Greek, I suppose, and dropped tranquilly in our wake.
When they had gone three hundred yards they stopped, and we went on rejoiced.
But behold, another armed rascal came out of the shadows and took their place, and followed us two hundred yards.
Then he delivered us over to another miscreant, who emerged from some mysterious place, and he in turn to another!
For a mile and a half our rear was guarded all the while by armed men.
I never traveled in so much state before in all my life.
It was a good while after that before we ventured to steal any more grapes, and when we did we stirred up another troublesome brigand, and then we ceased all further speculation in that line.
I suppose that fellow that rode by on the mule posted all the sentinels, from Athens to the Piraeus, about us.
Every field on that long route was watched by an armed sentinel, some of whom had fallen asleep, no doubt, but were on hand, nevertheless.
This shows what sort of a country modern Attica is--a community of questionable characters.
These men were not there to guard their possessions against strangers, but against each other; for strangers seldom visit Athens and the Piraeus, and when they do, they go in daylight, and can buy all the grapes they want for a trifle.
The modern inhabitants are confiscators and falsifiers of high repute, if gossip speaks truly concerning them, and I freely believe it does.
Just as the earliest tinges of the dawn flushed the eastern sky and turned the pillared Parthenon to a broken harp hung in the pearly horizon, we closed our thirteenth mile of weary, round-about marching, and emerged upon the sea-shore abreast the ships,
We hailed a boat that was two or three hundred yards from shore, and discovered in a moment that it was a police-boat on the lookout for any quarantine-breakers that might chance to be abroad.
So we dodged--we were used to that by this time--and when the scouts reached the spot we had so lately occupied, we were absent.
They cruised along the shore, but in the wrong direction, and shortly our own boat issued from the gloom and took us aboard.
They had heard our signal on the ship.
We rowed noiselessly away, and before the police-boat came in sight again, we were safe at home once more.
Four more of our passengers were anxious to visit Athens, and started half an hour after we returned; but they had not been ashore five minutes till the police discovered and chased them so hotly that they barely escaped to their boat again, and that was
They pursued the enterprise no further.
We set sail for Constantinople to-day, but some of us little care for that.
We have seen all there was to see in the old city that had its birth sixteen hundred years before Christ was born, and was an old town before the foundations of Troy were laid--and saw it in its most attractive aspect.
Wherefore, why should we worry?
Two other passengers ran the blockade successfully last night.
So we learned this morning.
They slipped away so quietly that they were not missed from the ship for several hours.
They had the hardihood to march into the Piraeus in the early dusk and hire a carriage.
They ran some danger of adding two or three months' imprisonment to the other novelties of their Holy Land Pleasure Excursion.
I admire "cheek".
--[Quotation from the Pilgrims.
]--But they went and came safely, and never walked a step.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
From Athens all through the islands of the Grecian Archipelago, we saw little but forbidding sea-walls and barren hills, sometimes surmounted by three or four graceful columns of some ancient temple, lonely and deserted--a fitting symbol of the desolation
We saw no ploughed fields, very few villages, no trees or grass or vegetation of any kind, scarcely, and hardly ever an isolated house.
Greece is a bleak, unsmiling desert, without agriculture, manufactures or commerce, apparently.
What supports its poverty-stricken people or its Government, is a mystery.
I suppose that ancient Greece and modern Greece compared, furnish the most extravagant contrast to be found in history.
George I., an infant of eighteen, and a scraggy nest of foreign office holders, sit in the places of Themistocles, Pericles, and the illustrious scholars and generals of the Golden Age of Greece.
The fleets that were the wonder of the world when the Parthenon was new, are a beggarly handful of fishing-smacks now, and the manly people that performed such miracles of valor at Marathon are only a tribe of unconsidered slaves to-day.
The classic Illyssus has gone dry, and so have all the sources of Grecian wealth and greatness.
The nation numbers only eight hundred thousand souls, and there is poverty and misery and mendacity enough among them to furnish forty millions and be liberal about it.
Under King Otho the revenues of the State were five millions of dollars--raised from a tax of one-tenth of all the agricultural products of the land (which tenth the farmer had to bring to the royal granaries on pack-mules any distance not exceeding six
Out of that five millions the small tyrant tried to keep an army of ten thousand men, pay all the hundreds of useless Grand Equerries in Waiting, First Grooms of the Bedchamber, Lord High Chancellors of the Exploded Exchequer, and all the other absurdities
The result was, simply: ten into five goes no times and none over.
All these things could not be done with five millions, and Otho fell into trouble.
The Greek throne, with its unpromising adjuncts of a ragged population of ingenious rascals who were out of employment eight months in the year because there was little for them to borrow and less to confiscate, and a waste of barren hills and weed-grown
It was offered to one of Victoria's sons, and afterwards to various other younger sons of royalty who had no thrones and were out of business, but they all had the charity to decline the dreary honor, and veneration enough for Greece's ancient greatness to
He has finished the splendid palace I saw in the radiant moonlight the other night, and is doing many other things for the salvation of Greece, they say.
We sailed through the barren Archipelago, and into the narrow channel they sometimes call the Dardanelles and sometimes the Hellespont.
This part of the country is rich in historic reminiscences, and poor as Sahara in every thing else.
For instance, as we approached the Dardanelles, we coasted along the Plains of Troy and past the mouth of the Scamander; we saw where Troy had stood (in the distance,) and where it does not stand now--a city that perished when the world was young.
The poor Trojans are all dead, now.
They were born too late to see Noah's ark, and died too soon to see our menagerie.
We saw where Agamemnon's fleets rendezvoused, and away inland a mountain which the map said was Mount Ida.
Within the Hellespont we saw where the original first shoddy contract mentioned in history was carried out, and the "parties of the second part" gently rebuked by Xerxes.
I speak of the famous bridge of boats which Xerxes ordered to be built over the narrowest part of the Hellespont (where it is only two or three miles wide.
) A moderate gale destroyed the flimsy structure, and the King, thinking that to publicly rebuke the contractors might have a good effect on the next set, called them out before the army and had them beheaded.
In the next ten minutes he let a new contract for the bridge.
It has been observed by ancient writers that the second bridge was a very good bridge.
Xerxes crossed his host of five millions of men on it, and if it had not been purposely destroyed, it would probably have been there yet.
If our Government would rebuke some of our shoddy contractors occasionally, it might work much good.
In the Hellespont we saw where Leander and Lord Byron swam across, the one to see her upon whom his soul's affections were fixed with a devotion that only death could impair, and the other merely for a flyer, as Jack says.
We had two noted tombs near us, too.
On one shore slept Ajax, and on the other Hecuba.
We had water batteries and forts on both sides of the Hellespont, flying the crimson flag of Turkey, with its white crescent, and occasionally a village, and sometimes a train of camels; we had all these to look at till we entered the broad sea of Marmora,
We dropped anchor in the mouth of the Golden Horn at daylight in the morning.
Only three or four of us were up to see the great Ottoman capital.
The passengers do not turn out at unseasonable hours, as they used to, to get the earliest possible glimpse of strange foreign cities.
They are well over that.
If we were lying in sight of the Pyramids of Egypt, they would not come on deck until after breakfast, now-a-days.
The Golden Horn is a narrow arm of the sea, which branches from the Bosporus (a sort of broad river which connects the Marmora and Black Seas,) and, curving around, divides the city in the middle.
Galata and Pera are on one side of the Bosporus, and the Golden Horn; Stamboul (ancient Byzantium) is upon the other.
On the other bank of the Bosporus is Scutari and other suburbs of Constantinople.
This great city contains a million inhabitants, but so narrow are its streets, and so crowded together are its houses, that it does not cover much more than half as much ground as New York City.
Seen from the anchorage or from a mile or so up the Bosporus, it is by far the handsomest city we have seen.
Its dense array of houses swells upward from the water's edge, and spreads over the domes of many hills; and the gardens that peep out here and there, the great globes of the mosques, and the countless minarets that meet the eye every where, invest the
Constantinople makes a noble picture.
But its attractiveness begins and ends with its picturesqueness.
From the time one starts ashore till he gets back again, he execrates it.
The boat he goes in is admirably miscalculated for the service it is built for.
It is handsomely and neatly fitted up, but no man could handle it well in the turbulent currents that sweep down the Bosporus from the Black Sea, and few men could row it satisfactorily even in still water.
It is a long, light canoe (caique,) large at one end and tapering to a knife blade at the other.
They make that long sharp end the bow, and you can imagine how these boiling currents spin it about.
It has two oars, and sometimes four, and no rudder.
You start to go to a given point and you run in fifty different directions before you get there.
First one oar is backing water, and then the other; it is seldom that both are going ahead at once.
This kind of boating is calculated to drive an impatient man mad in a week.
The boatmen are the awkwardest, the stupidest, and the most unscientific on earth, without question.
Ashore, it was--well, it was an eternal circus.
People were thicker than bees, in those narrow streets, and the men were dressed in all the outrageous, outlandish, idolatrous, extravagant, thunder-and-lightning costumes that ever a tailor with the delirium tremens and seven devils could conceive of.
There was no freak in dress too crazy to be indulged in; no absurdity too absurd to be tolerated; no frenzy in ragged diabolism too fantastic to be attempted.
No two men were dressed alike.
It was a wild masquerade of all imaginable costumes--every struggling throng in every street was a dissolving view of stunning contrasts.
Some patriarchs wore awful turbans, but the grand mass of the infidel horde wore the fiery red skull-cap they call a fez.
All the remainder of the raiment they indulged in was utterly indescribable.
The shops here are mere coops, mere boxes, bath-rooms, closets--any thing you please to call them--on the first floor.
The Turks sit cross-legged in them, and work and trade and smoke long pipes, and smell like--like Turks.
That covers the ground.
Crowding the narrow streets in front of them are beggars, who beg forever, yet never collect any thing; and wonderful cripples, distorted out of all semblance of humanity, almost; vagabonds driving laden asses; porters carrying dry-goods boxes as large as
Seen moving about, far away in the dim, arched aisles of the Great Bazaar, they look as the shrouded dead must have looked when they walked forth from their graves amid the storms and thunders and earthquakes that burst upon Calvary that awful night of the
A street in Constantinople is a picture which one ought to see once--not oftener.
And then there was the goose-rancher--a fellow who drove a hundred geese before him about the city, and tried to sell them.
He had a pole ten feet long, with a crook in the end of it, and occasionally a goose would branch out from the flock and make a lively break around the corner, with wings half lifted and neck stretched to its utmost.
Did the goose-merchant get excited?
No.
He took his pole and reached after that goose with unspeakable sang froid--took a hitch round his neck, and "yanked" him back to his place in the flock without an effort.
He steered his geese with that stick as easily as another man would steer a yawl.
A few hours afterward we saw him sitting on a stone at a corner, in the midst of the turmoil, sound asleep in the sun, with his geese squatting around him, or dodging out of the way of asses and men.
We came by again, within the hour, and he was taking account of stock, to see whether any of his flock had strayed or been stolen.
The way he did it was unique.
He put the end of his stick within six or eight inches of a stone wall, and made the geese march in single file between it and the wall.
He counted them as they went by.
There was no dodging that arrangement.
If you want dwarfs--I mean just a few dwarfs for a curiosity--go to Genoa.
If you wish to buy them by the gross, for retail, go to Milan.
There are plenty of dwarfs all over Italy, but it did seem to me that in Milan the crop was luxuriant.
If you would see a fair average style of assorted cripples, go to Naples, or travel through the Roman States.
But if you would see the very heart and home of cripples and human monsters, both, go straight to Constantinople.
A beggar in Naples who can show a foot which has all run into one horrible toe, with one shapeless nail on it, has a fortune--but such an exhibition as that would not provoke any notice in Constantinople.
The man would starve.
Who would pay any attention to attractions like his among the rare monsters that throng the bridges of the Golden Horn and display their deformities in the gutters of Stamboul?
O, wretched impostor!
How could he stand against the three-legged woman, and the man with his eye in his cheek?
How would he blush in presence of the man with fingers on his elbow?
Where would he hide himself when the dwarf with seven fingers on each hand, no upper lip, and his under-jaw gone, came down in his majesty?
Bismillah!
The cripples of Europe are a delusion and a fraud.
The truly gifted flourish only in the by-ways of Pera and Stamboul.
That three-legged woman lay on the bridge, with her stock in trade so disposed as to command the most striking effect--one natural leg, and two long, slender, twisted ones with feet on them like somebody else's fore-arm.
Then there was a man further along who had no eyes, and whose face was the color of a fly-blown beefsteak, and wrinkled and twisted like a lava-flow--and verily so tumbled and distorted were his features that no man could tell the wart that served him for
In Stamboul was a man with a prodigious head, an uncommonly long body, legs eight inches long and feet like snow-shoes.
He traveled on those feet and his hands, and was as sway-backed as if the Colossus of Rhodes had been riding him.
Ah, a beggar has to have exceedingly good points to make a living in Constantinople.
A blue-faced man, who had nothing to offer except that he had been blown up in a mine, would be regarded as a rank impostor, and a mere damaged soldier on crutches would never make a cent.
It would pay him to get apiece of his head taken off, and cultivate a wen like a carpet sack.
The Mosque of St. Sophia is the chief lion of Constantinople.
You must get a firman and hurry there the first thing.
We did that.
We did not get a firman, but we took along four or five francs apiece, which is much the same thing.
I do not think much of the Mosque of St. Sophia.
I suppose I lack appreciation.
We will let it go at that.
It is the rustiest old barn in heathendom.
I believe all the interest that attaches to it comes from the fact that it was built for a Christian church and then turned into a mosque, without much alteration, by the Mohammedan conquerors of the land.
They made me take off my boots and walk into the place in my stocking-feet.
I caught cold, and got myself so stuck up with a complication of gums, slime and general corruption, that I wore out more than two thousand pair of boot-jacks getting my boots off that night, and even then some Christian hide peeled off with them.
I abate not a single boot-jack.
St. Sophia is a colossal church, thirteen or fourteen hundred years old, and unsightly enough to be very, very much older.
Its immense dome is said to be more wonderful than St. Peter's, but its dirt is much more wonderful than its dome, though they never mention it.
The church has a hundred and seventy pillars in it, each a single piece, and all of costly marbles of various kinds, but they came from ancient temples at Baalbec, Heliopolis, Athens and Ephesus, and are battered, ugly and repulsive.
They were a thousand years old when this church was new, and then the contrast must have been ghastly--if Justinian's architects did not trim them any.
The inside of the dome is figured all over with a monstrous inscription in Turkish characters, wrought in gold mosaic, that looks as glaring as a circus bill; the pavements and the marble balustrades are all battered and dirty; the perspective is marred
Squatting and sitting in groups, here and there and far and near, were ragged Turks reading books, hearing sermons, or receiving lessons like children.
And in fifty places were more of the same sort bowing and straightening up, bowing again and getting down to kiss the earth, muttering prayers the while, and keeping up their gymnastics till they ought to have been tired, if they were not.
Every where was dirt, and dust, and dinginess, and gloom; every where were signs of a hoary antiquity, but with nothing touching or beautiful about it; every where were those groups of fantastic pagans; overhead the gaudy mosaics and the web of
The people who go into ecstasies over St. Sophia must surely get them out of the guide-book (where every church is spoken of as being "considered by good judges to be the most marvelous structure, in many respects, that the world has ever seen".
) Or else they are those old connoisseurs from the wilds of New Jersey who laboriously learn the difference between a fresco and a fire-plug and from that day forward feel privileged to void their critical bathos on painting, sculpture and architecture
We visited the Dancing Dervishes.
There were twenty-one of them.
They wore a long, light-colored loose robe that hung to their heels.
Each in his turn went up to the priest (they were all within a large circular railing) and bowed profoundly and then went spinning away deliriously and took his appointed place in the circle, and continued to spin.
When all had spun themselves to their places, they were about five or six feet apart--and so situated, the entire circle of spinning pagans spun itself three separate times around the room.
It took twenty-five minutes to do it.
They spun on the left foot, and kept themselves going by passing the right rapidly before it and digging it against the waxed floor.
Some of them made incredible "time".
Most of them spun around forty times in a minute, and one artist averaged about sixty-one times a minute, and kept it up during the whole twenty-five.
His robe filled with air and stood out all around him like a balloon.
They made no noise of any kind, and most of them tilted their heads back and closed their eyes, entranced with a sort of devotional ecstacy.
There was a rude kind of music, part of the time, but the musicians were not visible.
None but spinners were allowed within the circle.
A man had to either spin or stay outside.
It was about as barbarous an exhibition as we have witnessed yet.
Then sick persons came and lay down, and beside them women laid their sick children (one a babe at the breast,) and the patriarch of the Dervishes walked upon their bodies.
He was supposed to cure their diseases by trampling upon their breasts or backs or standing on the back of their necks.
This is well enough for a people who think all their affairs are made or marred by viewless spirits of the air--by giants, gnomes, and genii--and who still believe, to this day, all the wild tales in the Arabian Nights.
Even so an intelligent missionary tells me.
We visited the Thousand and One Columns.
I do not know what it was originally intended for, but they said it was built for a reservoir.
It is situated in the centre of Constantinople.
You go down a flight of stone steps in the middle of a barren place, and there you are.
You are forty feet under ground, and in the midst of a perfect wilderness of tall, slender, granite columns, of Byzantine architecture.
Stand where you would, or change your position as often as you pleased, you were always a centre from which radiated a dozen long archways and colonnades that lost themselves in distance and the sombre twilight of the place.
This old dried-up reservoir is occupied by a few ghostly silk-spinners now, and one of them showed me a cross cut high up in one of the pillars.
I suppose he meant me to understand that the institution was there before the Turkish occupation, and I thought he made a remark to that effect; but he must have had an impediment in his speech, for I did not understand him.
We took off our shoes and went into the marble mausoleum of the Sultan Mahmoud, the neatest piece of architecture, inside, that I have seen lately.
Mahmoud's tomb was covered with a black velvet pall, which was elaborately embroidered with silver; it stood within a fancy silver railing; at the sides and corners were silver candlesticks that would weigh more than a hundred pounds, and they supported
Mahmoud's whole family were comfortably planted around him.
We went to the great Bazaar in Stamboul, of course, and I shall not describe it further than to say it is a monstrous hive of little shops --thousands, I should say--all under one roof, and cut up into innumerable little blocks by narrow streets which are
One street is devoted to a particular kind of merchandise, another to another, and so on.
When you wish to buy a pair of shoes you have the swing of the whole street--you do not have to walk yourself down hunting stores in different localities.
It is the same with silks, antiquities, shawls, etc.
The place is crowded with people all the time, and as the gay-colored Eastern fabrics are lavishly displayed before every shop, the great Bazaar of Stamboul is one of the sights that are worth seeing.
It is full of life, and stir, and business, dirt, beggars, asses, yelling peddlers, porters, dervishes, high-born Turkish female shoppers, Greeks, and weird-looking and weirdly dressed Mohammedans from the mountains and the far provinces --and the only
CHAPTER XXXIV.
Mosques are plenty, churches are plenty, graveyards are plenty, but morals and whiskey are scarce.
The Koran does not permit Mohammedans to drink.
Their natural instincts do not permit them to be moral.
They say the Sultan has eight hundred wives.
This almost amounts to bigamy.
It makes our cheeks burn with shame to see such a thing permitted here in Turkey.
We do not mind it so much in Salt Lake, however.
Circassian and Georgian girls are still sold in Constantinople by their parents, but not publicly.
The great slave marts we have all read so much about--where tender young girls were stripped for inspection, and criticised and discussed just as if they were horses at an agricultural fair--no longer exist.
The exhibition and the sales are private now.
Stocks are up, just at present, partly because of a brisk demand created by the recent return of the Sultan's suite from the courts of Europe; partly on account of an unusual abundance of bread-stuffs, which leaves holders untortured by hunger and enables
Under these circumstances, if the American metropolitan newspapers were published here in Constantinople, their next commercial report would read about as follows, I suppose: SLAVE GIRL MARKET REPORT.
"Best brands Circassians, crop of 1850, L200; 1852, L250; 1854, L300.
Best brands Georgian, none in market; second quality, 1851, L180.
Nineteen fair to middling Wallachian girls offered at L130 @ 150, but no takers; sixteen prime A 1 sold in small lots to close out--terms private.
"Sales of one lot Circassians, prime to good, 1852 to 1854, at L240 @ 242, buyer 30; one forty-niner--damaged--at L23, seller ten, no deposit.
Several Georgians, fancy brands, 1852, changed hands to fill orders.
The Georgians now on hand are mostly last year's crop, which was unusually poor.
The new crop is a little backward, but will be coming in shortly.
As regards its quantity and quality, the accounts are most encouraging.
In this connection we can safely say, also, that the new crop of Circassians is looking extremely well.
His Majesty the Sultan has already sent in large orders for his new harem, which will be finished within a fortnight, and this has naturally strengthened the market and given Circassian stock a strong upward tendency.
Taking advantage of the inflated market, many of our shrewdest operators are selling short.
There are hints of a 'corner' on Wallachians.
"There is nothing new in Nubians.
Slow sale.
"Eunuchs--None offering; however, large cargoes are expected from Egypt today".
I think the above would be about the style of the commercial report.
Prices are pretty high now, and holders firm; but, two or three years ago, parents in a starving condition brought their young daughters down here and sold them for even twenty and thirty dollars, when they could do no better, simply to save themselves and
It is sad to think of so distressing a thing as this, and I for one am sincerely glad the prices are up again.
Commercial morals, especially, are bad.
There is no gainsaying that.
Greek, Turkish and Armenian morals consist only in attending church regularly on the appointed Sabbaths, and in breaking the ten commandments all the balance of the week.
It comes natural to them to lie and cheat in the first place, and then they go on and improve on nature until they arrive at perfection.
In recommending his son to a merchant as a valuable salesman, a father does not say he is a nice, moral, upright boy, and goes to Sunday School and is honest, but he says, "This boy is worth his weight in broad pieces of a hundred--for behold, he will
How is that for a recommendation?
The Missionaries tell me that they hear encomiums like that passed upon people every day.
They say of a person they admire, "Ah, he is a charming swindler, and a most exquisite liar"!
Every body lies and cheats--every body who is in business, at any rate.
Even foreigners soon have to come down to the custom of the country, and they do not buy and sell long in Constantinople till they lie and cheat like a Greek.
I say like a Greek, because the Greeks are called the worst transgressors in this line.
Several Americans long resident in Constantinople contend that most Turks are pretty trustworthy, but few claim that the Greeks have any virtues that a man can discover--at least without a fire assay.
I am half willing to believe that the celebrated dogs of Constantinople have been misrepresented--slandered.
I have always been led to suppose that they were so thick in the streets that they blocked the way; that they moved about in organized companies, platoons and regiments, and took what they wanted by determined and ferocious assault; and that at night they
The dogs I see here can not be those I have read of.
I find them every where, but not in strong force.
The most I have found together has been about ten or twenty.
And night or day a fair proportion of them were sound asleep.
Those that were not asleep always looked as if they wanted to be.
I never saw such utterly wretched, starving, sad-visaged, broken-hearted looking curs in my life.
It seemed a grim satire to accuse such brutes as these of taking things by force of arms.
They hardly seemed to have strength enough or ambition enough to walk across the street--I do not know that I have seen one walk that far yet.
They are mangy and bruised and mutilated, and often you see one with the hair singed off him in such wide and well defined tracts that he looks like a map of the new Territories.
They are the sorriest beasts that breathe--the most abject--the most pitiful.
In their faces is a settled expression of melancholy, an air of hopeless despondency.
The hairless patches on a scalded dog are preferred by the fleas of Constantinople to a wider range on a healthier dog; and the exposed places suit the fleas exactly.
I saw a dog of this kind start to nibble at a flea--a fly attracted his attention, and he made a snatch at him; the flea called for him once more, and that forever unsettled him; he looked sadly at his flea-pasture, then sadly looked at his bald spot.
Then he heaved a sigh and dropped his head resignedly upon his paws.
He was not equal to the situation.
The dogs sleep in the streets, all over the city.
From one end of the street to the other, I suppose they will average about eight or ten to a block.
Sometimes, of course, there are fifteen or twenty to a block.
They do not belong to any body, and they seem to have no close personal friendships among each other.
But they district the city themselves, and the dogs of each district, whether it be half a block in extent, or ten blocks, have to remain within its bounds.
Woe to a dog if he crosses the line!
His neighbors would snatch the balance of his hair off in a second.
So it is said.
But they don't look it.
They sleep in the streets these days.
They are my compass--my guide.
When I see the dogs sleep placidly on, while men, sheep, geese, and all moving things turn out and go around them, I know I am not in the great street where the hotel is, and must go further.
In the Grand Rue the dogs have a sort of air of being on the lookout--an air born of being obliged to get out of the way of many carriages every day--and that expression one recognizes in a moment.
It does not exist upon the face of any dog without the confines of that street.
All others sleep placidly and keep no watch.
They would not move, though the Sultan himself passed by.
In one narrow street (but none of them are wide) I saw three dogs lying coiled up, about a foot or two apart.
End to end they lay, and so they just bridged the street neatly, from gutter to gutter.
A drove of a hundred sheep came along.
They stepped right over the dogs, the rear crowding the front, impatient to get on.
The dogs looked lazily up, flinched a little when the impatient feet of the sheep touched their raw backs--sighed, and lay peacefully down again.
No talk could be plainer than that.
So some of the sheep jumped over them and others scrambled between, occasionally chipping a leg with their sharp hoofs, and when the whole flock had made the trip, the dogs sneezed a little, in the cloud of dust, but never budged their bodies an inch.
I thought I was lazy, but I am a steam-engine compared to a Constantinople dog.
But was not that a singular scene for a city of a million inhabitants?
These dogs are the scavengers of the city.
That is their official position, and a hard one it is.
However, it is their protection.
But for their usefulness in partially cleansing these terrible streets, they would not be tolerated long.
They eat any thing and every thing that comes in their way, from melon rinds and spoiled grapes up through all the grades and species of dirt and refuse to their own dead friends and relatives--and yet they are always lean, always hungry, always
The people are loath to kill them--do not kill them, in fact.
The Turks have an innate antipathy to taking the life of any dumb animal, it is said.
But they do worse.
They hang and kick and stone and scald these wretched creatures to the very verge of death, and then leave them to live and suffer.
Once a Sultan proposed to kill off all the dogs here, and did begin the work--but the populace raised such a howl of horror about it that the massacre was stayed.
After a while, he proposed to remove them all to an island in the Sea of Marmora.
No objection was offered, and a ship-load or so was taken away.
But when it came to be known that somehow or other the dogs never got to the island, but always fell overboard in the night and perished, another howl was raised and the transportation scheme was dropped.
So the dogs remain in peaceable possession of the streets.
I do not say that they do not howl at night, nor that they do not attack people who have not a red fez on their heads.
I only say that it would be mean for me to accuse them of these unseemly things who have not seen them do them with my own eyes or heard them with my own ears.
I was a little surprised to see Turks and Greeks playing newsboy right here in the mysterious land where the giants and genii of the Arabian Nights once dwelt--where winged horses and hydra-headed dragons guarded enchanted castles--where Princes and
It was curious to see newsboys selling papers in so dreamy a land as that.
And, to say truly, it is comparatively a new thing here.
The selling of newspapers had its birth in Constantinople about a year ago, and was a child of the Prussian and Austrian war.
There is one paper published here in the English language--The Levant Herald--and there are generally a number of Greek and a few French papers rising and falling, struggling up and falling again.
Newspapers are not popular with the Sultan's Government.
They do not understand journalism.
The proverb says, "The unknown is always great".
To the court, the newspaper is a mysterious and rascally institution.
They know what a pestilence is, because they have one occasionally that thins the people out at the rate of two thousand a day, and they regard a newspaper as a mild form of pestilence.
When it goes astray, they suppress it--pounce upon it without warning, and throttle it.
When it don't go astray for a long time, they get suspicious and throttle it anyhow, because they think it is hatching deviltry.
Imagine the Grand Vizier in solemn council with the magnates of the realm, spelling his way through the hated newspaper, and finally delivering his profound decision: "This thing means mischief --it is too darkly, too suspiciously inoffensive--suppress it!
Warn the publisher that we can not have this sort of thing: put the editor in prison"!
The newspaper business has its inconveniences in Constantinople.
Two Greek papers and one French one were suppressed here within a few days of each other.
No victories of the Cretans are allowed to be printed.
From time to time the Grand Vizier sends a notice to the various editors that the Cretan insurrection is entirely suppressed, and although that editor knows better, he still has to print the notice.
The Levant Herald is too fond of speaking praisefully of Americans to be popular with the Sultan, who does not relish our sympathy with the Cretans, and therefore that paper has to be particularly circumspect in order to keep out of trouble.
Once the editor, forgetting the official notice in his paper that the Cretans were crushed out, printed a letter of a very different tenor, from the American Consul in Crete, and was fined two hundred and fifty dollars for it.
Shortly he printed another from the same source and was imprisoned three months for his pains.
I think I could get the assistant editorship of the Levant Herald, but I am going to try to worry along without it.
To suppress a paper here involves the ruin of the publisher, almost.
But in Naples I think they speculate on misfortunes of that kind.
Papers are suppressed there every day, and spring up the next day under a new name.
During the ten days or a fortnight we staid there one paper was murdered and resurrected twice.
The newsboys are smart there, just as they are elsewhere.
They take advantage of popular weaknesses.
When they find they are not likely to sell out, they approach a citizen mysteriously, and say in a low voice--"Last copy, sir: double price; paper just been suppressed"!
The man buys it, of course, and finds nothing in it.
They do say--I do not vouch for it--but they do say that men sometimes print a vast edition of a paper, with a ferociously seditious article in it, distribute it quickly among the newsboys, and clear out till the Government's indignation cools.
It pays well.
Confiscation don't amount to any thing.
The type and presses are not worth taking care of.
There is only one English newspaper in Naples.
It has seventy subscribers.
The publisher is getting rich very deliberately--very deliberately indeed.
I never shall want another Turkish lunch.
The cooking apparatus was in the little lunch room, near the bazaar, and it was all open to the street.
The cook was slovenly, and so was the table, and it had no cloth on it.
The fellow took a mass of sausage meat and coated it round a wire and laid it on a charcoal fire to cook.
When it was done, he laid it aside and a dog walked sadly in and nipped it.
He smelt it first, and probably recognized the remains of a friend.
The cook took it away from him and laid it before us.
Jack said, "I pass"--he plays euchre sometimes--and we all passed in turn.
Then the cook baked a broad, flat, wheaten cake, greased it well with the sausage, and started towards us with it.
It dropped in the dirt, and he picked it up and polished it on his breeches, and laid it before us.
Jack said, "I pass".
We all passed.
He put some eggs in a frying pan, and stood pensively prying slabs of meat from between his teeth with a fork.
Then he used the fork to turn the eggs with--and brought them along.
Jack said "Pass again".
All followed suit.
We did not know what to do, and so we ordered a new ration of sausage.
The cook got out his wire, apportioned a proper amount of sausage-meat, spat it on his hands and fell to work!
This time, with one accord, we all passed out.
We paid and left.
That is all I learned about Turkish lunches.
A Turkish lunch is good, no doubt, but it has its little drawbacks.
When I think how I have been swindled by books of Oriental travel, I want a tourist for breakfast.
For years and years I have dreamed of the wonders of the Turkish bath; for years and years I have promised myself that I would yet enjoy one.
Many and many a time, in fancy, I have lain in the marble bath, and breathed the slumbrous fragrance of Eastern spices that filled the air; then passed through a weird and complicated system of pulling and hauling, and drenching and scrubbing, by a gang of
That was the picture, just as I got it from incendiary books of travel.
It was a poor, miserable imposture.
The reality is no more like it than the Five Points are like the Garden of Eden.
They received me in a great court, paved with marble slabs; around it were broad galleries, one above another, carpeted with seedy matting, railed with unpainted balustrades, and furnished with huge rickety chairs, cushioned with rusty old mattresses,
The place was vast, naked, dreary; its court a barn, its galleries stalls for human horses.
The cadaverous, half nude varlets that served in the establishment had nothing of poetry in their appearance, nothing of romance, nothing of Oriental splendor.
They shed no entrancing odors --just the contrary.
Their hungry eyes and their lank forms continually suggested one glaring, unsentimental fact--they wanted what they term in California "a square meal".
I went into one of the racks and undressed.
An unclean starveling wrapped a gaudy table-cloth about his loins, and hung a white rag over my shoulders.
If I had had a tub then, it would have come natural to me to take in washing.
I was then conducted down stairs into the wet, slippery court, and the first things that attracted my attention were my heels.
My fall excited no comment.
They expected it, no doubt.
It belonged in the list of softening, sensuous influences peculiar to this home of Eastern luxury.
It was softening enough, certainly, but its application was not happy.
They now gave me a pair of wooden clogs--benches in miniature, with leather straps over them to confine my feet (which they would have done, only I do not wear No.
13s.
) These things dangled uncomfortably by the straps when I lifted up my feet, and came down in awkward and unexpected places when I put them on the floor again, and sometimes turned sideways and wrenched my ankles out of joint.
However, it was all Oriental luxury, and I did what I could to enjoy it.
They put me in another part of the barn and laid me on a stuffy sort of pallet, which was not made of cloth of gold, or Persian shawls, but was merely the unpretending sort of thing I have seen in the negro quarters of Arkansas.
There was nothing whatever in this dim marble prison but five more of these biers.
It was a very solemn place.
I expected that the spiced odors of Araby were going to steal over my senses now, but they did not.
A copper-colored skeleton, with a rag around him, brought me a glass decanter of water, with a lighted tobacco pipe in the top of it, and a pliant stem a yard long, with a brass mouth-piece to it.
It was the famous "narghili" of the East--the thing the Grand Turk smokes in the pictures.
This began to look like luxury.
I took one blast at it, and it was sufficient; the smoke went in a great volume down into my stomach, my lungs, even into the uttermost parts of my frame.
I exploded one mighty cough, and it was as if Vesuvius had let go.
For the next five minutes I smoked at every pore, like a frame house that is on fire on the inside.
Not any more narghili for me.
The smoke had a vile taste, and the taste of a thousand infidel tongues that remained on that brass mouthpiece was viler still.
I was getting discouraged.
Whenever, hereafter, I see the cross-legged Grand Turk smoking his narghili, in pretended bliss, on the outside of a paper of Connecticut tobacco, I shall know him for the shameless humbug he is.
This prison was filled with hot air.
When I had got warmed up sufficiently to prepare me for a still warmer temperature, they took me where it was--into a marble room, wet, slippery and steamy, and laid me out on a raised platform in the centre.
It was very warm.
Presently my man sat me down by a tank of hot water, drenched me well, gloved his hand with a coarse mitten, and began to polish me all over with it.
I began to smell disagreeably.
The more he polished the worse I smelt.
It was alarming.
I said to him: "I perceive that I am pretty far gone.
It is plain that I ought to be buried without any unnecessary delay.
Perhaps you had better go after my friends at once, because the weather is warm, and I can not 'keep' long".
He went on scrubbing, and paid no attention.
I soon saw that he was reducing my size.
He bore hard on his mitten, and from under it rolled little cylinders, like maccaroni.
It could not be dirt, for it was too white.
He pared me down in this way for a long time.
Finally I said: "It is a tedious process.
It will take hours to trim me to the size you want me; I will wait; go and borrow a jack-plane".
He paid no attention at all.
After a while he brought a basin, some soap, and something that seemed to be the tail of a horse.
He made up a prodigious quantity of soap-suds, deluged me with them from head to foot, without warning me to shut my eyes, and then swabbed me viciously with the horse-tail.
Then he left me there, a snowy statue of lather, and went away.
When I got tired of waiting I went and hunted him up.
He was propped against the wall, in another room, asleep.
I woke him.
He was not disconcerted.
He took me back and flooded me with hot water, then turbaned my head, swathed me with dry table-cloths, and conducted me to a latticed chicken-coop in one of the galleries, and pointed to one of those Arkansas beds.
I mounted it, and vaguely expected the odors of Araby a gain.
They did not come.
The blank, unornamented coop had nothing about it of that oriental voluptuousness one reads of so much.
It was more suggestive of the county hospital than any thing else.
The skinny servitor brought a narghili, and I got him to take it out again without wasting any time about it.
Then he brought the world-renowned Turkish coffee that poets have sung so rapturously for many generations, and I seized upon it as the last hope that was left of my old dreams of Eastern luxury.
It was another fraud.
Of all the unchristian beverages that ever passed my lips, Turkish coffee is the worst.
The cup is small, it is smeared with grounds; the coffee is black, thick, unsavory of smell, and execrable in taste.
The bottom of the cup has a muddy sediment in it half an inch deep.
This goes down your throat, and portions of it lodge by the way, and produce a tickling aggravation that keeps you barking and coughing for an hour.
Here endeth my experience of the celebrated Turkish bath, and here also endeth my dream of the bliss the mortal revels in who passes through it.
It is a malignant swindle.
The man who enjoys it is qualified to enjoy any thing that is repulsive to sight or sense, and he that can invest it with a charm of poetry is able to do the same with any thing else in the world that is tedious, and wretched, and dismal, and nasty.
CHAPTER XXXV.
We left a dozen passengers in Constantinople, and sailed through the beautiful Bosporus and far up into the Black Sea.
We left them in the clutches of the celebrated Turkish guide, "FAR-AWAY MOSES," who will seduce them into buying a ship-load of ottar of roses, splendid Turkish vestments, and all manner of curious things they can never have any use for.
Murray's invaluable guide-books have mentioned 'Far-away Moses' name, and he is a made man.
He rejoices daily in the fact that he is a recognized celebrity.
However, we can not alter our established customs to please the whims of guides; we can not show partialities this late in the day.
Therefore, ignoring this fellow's brilliant fame, and ignoring the fanciful name he takes such pride in, we called him Ferguson, just as we had done with all other guides.
It has kept him in a state of smothered exasperation all the time.
Yet we meant him no harm.
After he has gotten himself up regardless of expense, in showy, baggy trowsers, yellow, pointed slippers, fiery fez, silken jacket of blue, voluminous waist-sash of fancy Persian stuff filled with a battery of silver-mounted horse-pistols, and has strapped
It can not be helped.
All guides are Fergusons to us.
We can not master their dreadful foreign names.
Sebastopol is probably the worst battered town in Russia or any where else.
But we ought to be pleased with it, nevertheless, for we have been in no country yet where we have been so kindly received, and where we felt that to be Americans was a sufficient visa for our passports.
The moment the anchor was down, the Governor of the town immediately dispatched an officer on board to inquire if he could be of any assistance to us, and to invite us to make ourselves at home in Sebastopol!
If you know Russia, you know that this was a wild stretch of hospitality.
They are usually so suspicious of strangers that they worry them excessively with the delays and aggravations incident to a complicated passport system.
Had we come from any other country we could not have had permission to enter Sebastopol and leave again under three days--but as it was, we were at liberty to go and come when and where we pleased.
Every body in Constantinople warned us to be very careful about our passports, see that they were strictly 'en regle', and never to mislay them for a moment: and they told us of numerous instances of Englishmen and others who were delayed days, weeks, and
I had lost my passport, and was traveling under my room-mate's, who stayed behind in Constantinople to await our return.
To read the description of him in that passport and then look at me, any man could see that I was no more like him than I am like Hercules.
So I went into the harbor of Sebastopol with fear and trembling--full of a vague, horrible apprehension that I was going to be found out and hanged.
But all that time my true passport had been floating gallantly overhead--and behold it was only our flag.
They never asked us for any other.
We have had a great many Russian and English gentlemen and ladies on board to-day, and the time has passed cheerfully away.
They were all happy-spirited people, and I never heard our mother tongue sound so pleasantly as it did when it fell from those English lips in this far-off land.
I talked to the Russians a good deal, just to be friendly, and they talked to me from the same motive; I am sure that both enjoyed the conversation, but never a word of it either of us understood.
I did most of my talking to those English people though, and I am sorry we can not carry some of them along with us.
We have gone whithersoever we chose, to-day, and have met with nothing but the kindest attentions.
Nobody inquired whether we had any passports or not.
Several of the officers of the Government have suggested that we take the ship to a little watering-place thirty miles from here, and pay the Emperor of Russia a visit.
He is rusticating there.
These officers said they would take it upon themselves to insure us a cordial reception.
They said if we would go, they would not only telegraph the Emperor, but send a special courier overland to announce our coming.
Our time is so short, though, and more especially our coal is so nearly out, that we judged it best to forego the rare pleasure of holding social intercourse with an Emperor.
Ruined Pompeii is in good condition compared to Sebastopol.
Here, you may look in whatsoever direction you please, and your eye encounters scarcely any thing but ruin, ruin, ruin!
--fragments of houses, crumbled walls, torn and ragged hills, devastation every where!
It is as if a mighty earthquake had spent all its terrible forces upon this one little spot.
For eighteen long months the storms of war beat upon the helpless town, and left it at last the saddest wreck that ever the sun has looked upon.
Not one solitary house escaped unscathed--not one remained habitable, even.
Such utter and complete ruin one could hardly conceive of.
The houses had all been solid, dressed stone structures; most of them were ploughed through and through by cannon balls--unroofed and sliced down from eaves to foundation--and now a row of them, half a mile long, looks merely like an endless procession of
No semblance of a house remains in such as these.
Some of the larger buildings had corners knocked off; pillars cut in two; cornices smashed; holes driven straight through the walls.
Many of these holes are as round and as cleanly cut as if they had been made with an auger.
Others are half pierced through, and the clean impression is there in the rock, as smooth and as shapely as if it were done in putty.
Here and there a ball still sticks in a wall, and from it iron tears trickle down and discolor the stone.
The battle-fields were pretty close together.
The Malakoff tower is on a hill which is right in the edge of the town.
The Redan was within rifle-shot of the Malakoff; Inkerman was a mile away; and Balaklava removed but an hour's ride.
The French trenches, by which they approached and invested the Malakoff were carried so close under its sloping sides that one might have stood by the Russian guns and tossed a stone into them.
Repeatedly, during three terrible days, they swarmed up the little Malakoff hill, and were beaten back with terrible slaughter.
Finally, they captured the place, and drove the Russians out, who then tried to retreat into the town, but the English had taken the Redan, and shut them off with a wall of flame; there was nothing for them to do but go back and retake the Malakoff or die
They did go back; they took the Malakoff and retook it two or three times, but their desperate valor could not avail, and they had to give up at last.
These fearful fields, where such tempests of death used to rage, are peaceful enough now; no sound is heard, hardly a living thing moves about them, they are lonely and silent--their desolation is complete.
There was nothing else to do, and so every body went to hunting relics.
They have stocked the ship with them.
They brought them from the Malakoff, from the Redan, Inkerman, Balaklava--every where.
They have brought cannon balls, broken ramrods, fragments of shell--iron enough to freight a sloop.
Some have even brought bones--brought them laboriously from great distances, and were grieved to hear the surgeon pronounce them only bones of mules and oxen.
I knew Blucher would not lose an opportunity like this.
He brought a sack full on board and was going for another.
I prevailed upon him not to go.
He has already turned his state-room into a museum of worthless trumpery, which he has gathered up in his travels.
He is labeling his trophies, now.
I picked up one a while ago, and found it marked "Fragment of a Russian General".
I carried it out to get a better light upon it--it was nothing but a couple of teeth and part of the jaw-bone of a horse.
I said with some asperity: "Fragment of a Russian General!
This is absurd.
Are you never going to learn any sense"?
He only said: "Go slow--the old woman won't know any different".
[His aunt.
] This person gathers mementoes with a perfect recklessness, now-a-days; mixes them all up together, and then serenely labels them without any regard to truth, propriety, or even plausibility.
I have found him breaking a stone in two, and labeling half of it "Chunk busted from the pulpit of Demosthenes," and the other half "Darnick from the Tomb of Abelard and Heloise".
I have known him to gather up a handful of pebbles by the roadside, and bring them on board ship and label them as coming from twenty celebrated localities five hundred miles apart.
I remonstrate against these outrages upon reason and truth, of course, but it does no good.
I get the same tranquil, unanswerable reply every time: "It don't signify--the old woman won't know any different".
Ever since we three or four fortunate ones made the midnight trip to Athens, it has afforded him genuine satisfaction to give every body in the ship a pebble from the Mars-hill where St. Paul preached.
He got all those pebbles on the sea shore, abreast the ship, but professes to have gathered them from one of our party.
However, it is not of any use for me to expose the deception--it affords him pleasure, and does no harm to any body.
He says he never expects to run out of mementoes of St. Paul as long as he is in reach of a sand-bank.
Well, he is no worse than others.
I notice that all travelers supply deficiencies in their collections in the same way.
I shall never have any confidence in such things again while I live.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
We have got so far east, now--a hundred and fifty-five degrees of longitude from San Francisco--that my watch can not "keep the hang" of the time any more.
It has grown discouraged, and stopped.
I think it did a wise thing.
The difference in time between Sebastopol and the Pacific coast is enormous.
When it is six o'clock in the morning here, it is somewhere about week before last in California.
We are excusable for getting a little tangled as to time.
These distractions and distresses about the time have worried me so much that I was afraid my mind was so much affected that I never would have any appreciation of time again; but when I noticed how handy I was yet about comprehending when it was
Odessa is about twenty hours' run from Sebastopol, and is the most northerly port in the Black Sea.
We came here to get coal, principally.
The city has a population of one hundred and thirty-three thousand, and is growing faster than any other small city out of America.
It is a free port, and is the great grain mart of this particular part of the world.
Its roadstead is full of ships.
Engineers are at work, now, turning the open roadstead into a spacious artificial harbor.
It is to be almost inclosed by massive stone piers, one of which will extend into the sea over three thousand feet in a straight line.
I have not felt so much at home for a long time as I did when I "raised the hill" and stood in Odessa for the first time.
It looked just like an American city; fine, broad streets, and straight as well; low houses, (two or three stories,) wide, neat, and free from any quaintness of architectural ornamentation; locust trees bordering the sidewalks (they call them acacias;) a
Look up the street or down the street, this way or that way, we saw only America!
There was not one thing to remind us that we were in Russia.
We walked for some little distance, reveling in this home vision, and then we came upon a church and a hack-driver, and presto!
the illusion vanished!
The church had a slender-spired dome that rounded inward at its base, and looked like a turnip turned upside down, and the hackman seemed to be dressed in a long petticoat with out any hoops.
These things were essentially foreign, and so were the carriages --but every body knows about these things, and there is no occasion for my describing them.
We were only to stay here a day and a night and take in coal; we consulted the guide-books and were rejoiced to know that there were no sights in Odessa to see; and so we had one good, untrammeled holyday on our hands, with nothing to do but idle about the
We sauntered through the markets and criticised the fearful and wonderful costumes from the back country; examined the populace as far as eyes could do it; and closed the entertainment with an ice-cream debauch.
We do not get ice-cream every where, and so, when we do, we are apt to dissipate to excess.
We never cared any thing about ice-cream at home, but we look upon it with a sort of idolatry now that it is so scarce in these red-hot climates of the East.
We only found two pieces of statuary, and this was another blessing.
One was a bronze image of the Duc de Richelieu, grand-nephew of the splendid Cardinal.
It stood in a spacious, handsome promenade, overlooking the sea, and from its base a vast flight of stone steps led down to the harbor--two hundred of them, fifty feet long, and a wide landing at the bottom of every twenty.
It is a noble staircase, and from a distance the people toiling up it looked like insects.
I mention this statue and this stairway because they have their story.
Richelieu founded Odessa --watched over it with paternal care--labored with a fertile brain and a wise understanding for its best interests--spent his fortune freely to the same end--endowed it with a sound prosperity, and one which will yet make it one of
Well, the people for whom he had done so much, let him walk down these same steps, one day, unattended, old, poor, without a second coat to his back; and when, years afterwards, he died in Sebastopol in poverty and neglect, they called a meeting,
It reminds me of what Robert Burns' mother said when they erected a stately monument to his memory: "Ah, Robbie, ye asked them for bread and they hae gi'en ye a stane".
The people of Odessa have warmly recommended us to go and call on the Emperor, as did the Sebastopolians.
They have telegraphed his Majesty, and he has signified his willingness to grant us an audience.
So we are getting up the anchors and preparing to sail to his watering-place.
What a scratching around there will be, now!
what a holding of important meetings and appointing of solemn committees!
--and what a furbishing up of claw-hammer coats and white silk neck-ties!
As this fearful ordeal we are about to pass through pictures itself to my fancy in all its dread sublimity, I begin to feel my fierce desire to converse with a genuine Emperor cooling down and passing away.
What am I to do with my hands?
What am I to do with my feet?
What in the world am I to do with myself?
CHAPTER XXXVII.
We anchored here at Yalta, Russia, two or three days ago.
To me the place was a vision of the Sierras.
The tall, gray mountains that back it, their sides bristling with pines--cloven with ravines--here and there a hoary rock towering into view--long, straight streaks sweeping down from the summit to the sea, marking the passage of some avalanche of former
The little village of Yalta nestles at the foot of an amphitheatre which slopes backward and upward to the wall of hills, and looks as if it might have sunk quietly down to its present position from a higher elevation.
This depression is covered with the great parks and gardens of noblemen, and through the mass of green foliage the bright colors of their palaces bud out here and there like flowers.
It is a beautiful spot.
We had the United States Consul on board--the Odessa Consul.
We assembled in the cabin and commanded him to tell us what we must do to be saved, and tell us quickly.
He made a speech.
The first thing he said fell like a blight on every hopeful spirit: he had never seen a court reception.
(Three groans for the Consul.
) But he said he had seen receptions at the Governor General's in Odessa, and had often listened to people's experiences of receptions at the Russian and other courts, and believed he knew very well what sort of ordeal we were about to essay.
(Hope budded again.
) He said we were many; the summer palace was small --a mere mansion; doubtless we should be received in summer fashion--in the garden; we would stand in a row, all the gentlemen in swallow-tail coats, white kids, and white neck-ties, and the ladies in
At the moment his Majesty appeared, a universal, delighted, enthusiastic smile ought to break out like a rash among the passengers--a smile of love, of gratification, of admiration--and with one accord, the party must begin to bow--not obsequiously, but
We felt immensely relieved.
It seemed, in a manner, easy.
There was not a man in the party but believed that with a little practice he could stand in a row, especially if there were others along; there was not a man but believed he could bow without tripping on his coat tail and breaking his neck; in a word, we
The Consul also said we ought to draft a little address to the Emperor, and present it to one of his aides-de-camp, who would forward it to him at the proper time.
Therefore, five gentlemen were appointed to prepare the document, and the fifty others went sadly smiling about the ship--practicing.
During the next twelve hours we had the general appearance, somehow, of being at a funeral, where every body was sorry the death had occurred, but glad it was over--where every body was smiling, and yet broken-hearted.
A committee went ashore to wait on his Excellency the Governor-General, and learn our fate.
At the end of three hours of boding suspense, they came back and said the Emperor would receive us at noon the next day --would send carriages for us--would hear the address in person.
The Grand Duke Michael had sent to invite us to his palace also.
Any man could see that there was an intention here to show that Russia's friendship for America was so genuine as to render even her private citizens objects worthy of kindly attentions.
At the appointed hour we drove out three miles, and assembled in the handsome garden in front of the Emperor's palace.
We formed a circle under the trees before the door, for there was no one room in the house able to accommodate our three-score persons comfortably, and in a few minutes the imperial family came out bowing and smiling, and stood in our midst.
A number of great dignitaries of the Empire, in undress unit forms, came with them.
With every bow, his Majesty said a word of welcome.
I copy these speeches.
There is character in them--Russian character--which is politeness itself, and the genuine article.
The French are polite, but it is often mere ceremonious politeness.
A Russian imbues his polite things with a heartiness, both of phrase and expression, that compels belief in their sincerity.
As I was saying, the Czar punctuated his speeches with bows: "Good morning--I am glad to see you--I am gratified--I am delighted--I am happy to receive you"!
All took off their hats, and the Consul inflicted the address on him.
He bore it with unflinching fortitude; then took the rusty-looking document and handed it to some great officer or other, to be filed away among the archives of Russia--in the stove.
He thanked us for the address, and said he was very much pleased to see us, especially as such friendly relations existed between Russia and the United States.
The Empress said the Americans were favorites in Russia, and she hoped the Russians were similarly regarded in America.
These were all the speeches that were made, and I recommend them to parties who present policemen with gold watches, as models of brevity and point.
After this the Empress went and talked sociably (for an Empress) with various ladies around the circle; several gentlemen entered into a disjointed general conversation with the Emperor; the Dukes and Princes, Admirals and Maids of Honor dropped into
She is fourteen years old, light-haired, blue-eyed, unassuming and pretty.
Every body talks English.
The Emperor wore a cap, frock coat and pantaloons, all of some kind of plain white drilling--cotton or linen and sported no jewelry or any insignia whatever of rank.
No costume could be less ostentatious.
He is very tall and spare, and a determined-looking man, though a very pleasant-looking one nevertheless.
It is easy to see that he is kind and affectionate There is something very noble in his expression when his cap is off.
There is none of that cunning in his eye that all of us noticed in Louis Napoleon's.
The Empress and the little Grand Duchess wore simple suits of foulard (or foulard silk, I don't know which is proper,) with a small blue spot in it; the dresses were trimmed with blue; both ladies wore broad blue sashes about their waists; linen collars
The Grand Duchess had no heels on her shoes.
I do not know this of my own knowledge, but one of our ladies told me so.
I was not looking at her shoes.
I was glad to observe that she wore her own hair, plaited in thick braids against the back of her head, instead of the uncomely thing they call a waterfall, which is about as much like a waterfall as a canvas-covered ham is like a cataract.
Taking the kind expression that is in the Emperor's face and the gentleness that is in his young daughter's into consideration, I wondered if it would not tax the Czar's firmness to the utmost to condemn a supplicating wretch to misery in the wastes of
Every time their eyes met, I saw more and more what a tremendous power that weak, diffident school-girl could wield if she chose to do it.
Many and many a time she might rule the Autocrat of Russia, whose lightest word is law to seventy millions of human beings!
She was only a girl, and she looked like a thousand others I have seen, but never a girl provoked such a novel and peculiar interest in me before.
A strange, new sensation is a rare thing in this hum-drum life, and I had it here.
There was nothing stale or worn out about the thoughts and feelings the situation and the circumstances created.
It seemed strange--stranger than I can tell--to think that the central figure in the cluster of men and women, chatting here under the trees like the most ordinary individual in the land, was a man who could open his lips and ships would fly through the
I had a sort of vague desire to examine his hands and see if they were of flesh and blood, like other men's.
Here was a man who could do this wonderful thing, and yet if I chose I could knock him down.
The case was plain, but it seemed preposterous, nevertheless--as preposterous as trying to knock down a mountain or wipe out a continent.
If this man sprained his ankle, a million miles of telegraph would carry the news over mountains --valleys--uninhabited deserts--under the trackless sea--and ten thousand newspapers would prate of it; if he were grievously ill, all the nations would know
If I could have stolen his coat, I would have done it.
When I meet a man like that, I want something to remember him by.
As a general thing, we have been shown through palaces by some plush-legged filagreed flunkey or other, who charged a franc for it; but after talking with the company half an hour, the Emperor of Russia and his family conducted us all through their mansion
They made no charge.
They seemed to take a real pleasure in it.
We spent half an hour idling through the palace, admiring the cosy apartments and the rich but eminently home-like appointments of the place, and then the Imperial family bade our party a kind good-bye, and proceeded to count the spoons.
An invitation was extended to us to visit the palace of the eldest son, the Crown Prince of Russia, which was near at hand.
The young man was absent, but the Dukes and Countesses and Princes went over the premises with us as leisurely as was the case at the Emperor's, and conversation continued as lively as ever.
It was a little after one o'clock, now.
We drove to the Grand Duke Michael's, a mile away, in response to his invitation, previously given.
We arrived in twenty minutes from the Emperor's.
It is a lovely place.
The beautiful palace nestles among the grand old groves of the park, the park sits in the lap of the picturesque crags and hills, and both look out upon the breezy ocean.
In the park are rustic seats, here and there, in secluded nooks that are dark with shade; there are rivulets of crystal water; there are lakelets, with inviting, grassy banks; there are glimpses of sparkling cascades through openings in the wilderness of
The palace is modeled after the choicest forms of Grecian architecture, and its wide colonnades surround a central court that is banked with rare flowers that fill the place with their fragrance, and in their midst springs a fountain that cools the summer
The Grand Duke and his Duchess came out, and the presentation ceremonies were as simple as they had been at the Emperor's.
In a few minutes, conversation was under way, as before.
The Empress appeared in the verandah, and the little Grand Duchess came out into the crowd.
They had beaten us there.
In a few minutes, the Emperor came himself on horseback.
It was very pleasant.
You can appreciate it if you have ever visited royalty and felt occasionally that possibly you might be wearing out your welcome--though as a general thing, I believe, royalty is not scrupulous about discharging you when it is done with you.
The Grand Duke is the third brother of the Emperor, is about thirty-seven years old, perhaps, and is the princeliest figure in Russia.
He is even taller than the Czar, as straight as an Indian, and bears himself like one of those gorgeous knights we read about in romances of the Crusades.
He looks like a great-hearted fellow who would pitch an enemy into the river in a moment, and then jump in and risk his life fishing him out again.
The stories they tell of him show him to be of a brave and generous nature.
He must have been desirous of proving that Americans were welcome guests in the imperial palaces of Russia, because he rode all the way to Yalta and escorted our procession to the Emperor's himself, and kept his aids scurrying about, clearing the road and
We were rather familiar with him then, because we did not know who he was.
We recognized him now, and appreciated the friendly spirit that prompted him to do us a favor that any other Grand Duke in the world would have doubtless declined to do.
He had plenty of servitors whom he could have sent, but he chose to attend to the matter himself.
The Grand Duke was dressed in the handsome and showy uniform of a Cossack officer.
The Grand Duchess had on a white alpaca robe, with the seams and gores trimmed with black barb lace, and a little gray hat with a feather of the same color.
She is young, rather pretty modest and unpretending, and full of winning politeness.
Our party walked all through the house, and then the nobility escorted them all over the grounds, and finally brought them back to the palace about half-past two o'clock to breakfast.
They called it breakfast, but we would have called it luncheon.
It consisted of two kinds of wine; tea, bread, cheese, and cold meats, and was served on the centre-tables in the reception room and the verandahs--anywhere that was convenient; there was no ceremony.
It was a sort of picnic.
I had heard before that we were to breakfast there, but Blucher said he believed Baker's boy had suggested it to his Imperial Highness.
I think not--though it would be like him.
Baker's boy is the famine-breeder of the ship.
He is always hungry.
They say he goes about the state-rooms when the passengers are out, and eats up all the soap.
And they say he eats oakum.
They say he will eat any thing he can get between meals, but he prefers oakum.
He does not like oakum for dinner, but he likes it for a lunch, at odd hours, or any thing that way.
It makes him very disagreeable, because it makes his breath bad, and keeps his teeth all stuck up with tar.
Baker's boy may have suggested the breakfast, but I hope he did not.
It went off well, anyhow.
The illustrious host moved about from place to place, and helped to destroy the provisions and keep the conversation lively, and the Grand Duchess talked with the verandah parties and such as had satisfied their appetites and straggled out from the
The Grand Duke's tea was delicious.
They give one a lemon to squeeze into it, or iced milk, if he prefers it.
The former is best.
This tea is brought overland from China.
It injures the article to transport it by sea.
When it was time to go, we bade our distinguished hosts good-bye, and they retired happy and contented to their apartments to count their spoons.
We had spent the best part of half a day in the home of royalty, and had been as cheerful and comfortable all the time as we could have been in the ship.
I would as soon have thought of being cheerful in Abraham's bosom as in the palace of an Emperor.
I supposed that Emperors were terrible people.
I thought they never did any thing but wear magnificent crowns and red velvet dressing-gowns with dabs of wool sewed on them in spots, and sit on thrones and scowl at the flunkies and the people in the parquette, and order Dukes and Duchesses off to
I find, however, that when one is so fortunate as to get behind the scenes and see them at home and in the privacy of their firesides, they are strangely like common mortals.
They are pleasanter to look upon then than they are in their theatrical aspect.
It seems to come as natural to them to dress and act like other people as it is to put a friend's cedar pencil in your pocket when you are done using it.
But I can never have any confidence in the tinsel kings of the theatre after this.
It will be a great loss.
I used to take such a thrilling pleasure in them.
But, hereafter, I will turn me sadly away and say; "This does not answer--this isn't the style of king that I am acquainted with".
When they swagger around the stage in jeweled crowns and splendid robes, I shall feel bound to observe that all the Emperors that ever I was personally acquainted with wore the commonest sort of clothes, and did not swagger.
And when they come on the stage attended by a vast body-guard of supes in helmets and tin breastplates, it will be my duty as well as my pleasure to inform the ignorant that no crowned head of my acquaintance has a soldier any where about his house or his
Possibly it may be thought that our party tarried too long, or did other improper things, but such was not the case.
The company felt that they were occupying an unusually responsible position--they were representing the people of America, not the Government--and therefore they were careful to do their best to perform their high mission with credit.
On the other hand, the Imperial families, no doubt, considered that in entertaining us they were more especially entertaining the people of America than they could by showering attentions on a whole platoon of ministers plenipotentiary and therefore they
We took the kindnesses we received as attentions thus directed, of course, and not to ourselves as a party.
That we felt a personal pride in being received as the representatives of a nation, we do not deny; that we felt a national pride in the warm cordiality of that reception, can not be doubted.
Our poet has been rigidly suppressed, from the time we let go the anchor.
When it was announced that we were going to visit the Emperor of Russia, the fountains of his great deep were broken up, and he rained ineffable bosh for four-and-twenty hours.
Our original anxiety as to what we were going to do with ourselves, was suddenly transformed into anxiety about what we were going to do with our poet.
The problem was solved at last.
Two alternatives were offered him--he must either swear a dreadful oath that he would not issue a line of his poetry while he was in the Czar's dominions, or else remain under guard on board the ship until we were safe at Constantinople again.
He fought the dilemma long, but yielded at last.
It was a great deliverance.
Perhaps the savage reader would like a specimen of his style.
I do not mean this term to be offensive.
I only use it because "the gentle reader" has been used so often that any change from it can not but be refreshing: "Save us and sanctify us, and finally, then, See good provisions we enjoy while we journey to Jerusalem.
For so man proposes, which it is most true And time will wait for none, nor for us too".
The sea has been unusually rough all day.
However, we have had a lively time of it, anyhow.
We have had quite a run of visitors.
The Governor-General came, and we received him with a salute of nine guns.
He brought his family with him.
I observed that carpets were spread from the pier-head to his carriage for him to walk on, though I have seen him walk there without any carpet when he was not on business.
I thought may be he had what the accidental insurance people might call an extra-hazardous polish ("policy" joke, but not above mediocrity,) on his boots, and wished to protect them, but I examined and could not see that they were blacked any better than
It may have been that he had forgotten his carpet, before, but he did not have it with him, anyhow.
He was an exceedingly pleasant old gentleman; we all liked him, especially Blucher.
When he went away, Blucher invited him to come again and fetch his carpet along.
Prince Dolgorouki and a Grand Admiral or two, whom we had seen yesterday at the reception, came on board also.
I was a little distant with these parties, at first, because when I have been visiting Emperors I do not like to be too familiar with people I only know by reputation, and whose moral characters and standing in society I can not be thoroughly acquainted
I judged it best to be a little offish, at first.
I said to myself, Princes and Counts and Grand Admirals are very well, but they are not Emperors, and one can not be too particular about who he associates with.
Baron Wrangel came, also.
He used to be Russian Ambassador at Washington.
I told him I had an uncle who fell down a shaft and broke himself in two, as much as a year before that.
That was a falsehood, but then I was not going to let any man eclipse me on surprising adventures, merely for the want of a little invention.
The Baron is a fine man, and is said to stand high in the Emperor's confidence and esteem.
Baron Ungern-Sternberg, a boisterous, whole-souled old nobleman, came with the rest.
He is a man of progress and enterprise--a representative man of the age.
He is the Chief Director of the railway system of Russia--a sort of railroad king.
In his line he is making things move along in this country He has traveled extensively in America.
He says he has tried convict labor on his railroads, and with perfect success.
He says the convicts work well, and are quiet and peaceable.
He observed that he employs nearly ten thousand of them now.
This appeared to be another call on my resources.
I was equal to the emergency.
I said we had eighty thousand convicts employed on the railways in America--all of them under sentence of death for murder in the first degree.
That closed him out.
We had General Todtleben (the famous defender of Sebastopol, during the siege,) and many inferior army and also navy officers, and a number of unofficial Russian ladies and gentlemen.
Naturally, a champagne luncheon was in order, and was accomplished without loss of life.
Toasts and jokes were discharged freely, but no speeches were made save one thanking the Emperor and the Grand Duke, through the Governor-General, for our hospitable reception, and one by the Governor-General in reply, in which he returned the Emperor's
, etc.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
We returned to Constantinople, and after a day or two spent in exhausting marches about the city and voyages up the Golden Horn in caiques, we steamed away again.
We passed through the Sea of Marmora and the Dardanelles, and steered for a new land--a new one to us, at least--Asia.
We had as yet only acquired a bowing acquaintance with it, through pleasure excursions to Scutari and the regions round about.
We passed between Lemnos and Mytilene, and saw them as we had seen Elba and the Balearic Isles--mere bulky shapes, with the softening mists of distance upon them--whales in a fog, as it were.
Then we held our course southward, and began to "read up" celebrated Smyrna.
At all hours of the day and night the sailors in the forecastle amused themselves and aggravated us by burlesquing our visit to royalty.
The opening paragraph of our Address to the Emperor was framed as follows: "We are a handful of private citizens of America, traveling simply for recreation--and unostentatiously, as becomes our unofficial state--and, therefore, we have no excuse to tender
The third cook, crowned with a resplendent tin basin and wrapped royally in a table-cloth mottled with grease-spots and coffee stains, and bearing a sceptre that looked strangely like a belaying-pin, walked upon a dilapidated carpet and perched himself on
Then the visiting "watch below," transformed into graceless ladies and uncouth pilgrims, by rude travesties upon waterfalls, hoopskirts, white kid gloves and swallow-tail coats, moved solemnly up the companion way, and bowing low, began a system of
Then the mock consul, a slush-plastered deck-sweep, drew out a soiled fragment of paper and proceeded to read, laboriously: "To His Imperial Majesty, Alexander II.
, Emperor of Russia: "We are a handful of private citizens of America, traveling simply for recreation,--and unostentatiously, as becomes our unofficial state--and therefore, we have no excuse to tender for presenting ourselves before your Majesty--" The
--"Save the desire of offering our grateful acknowledgments to the lord of a realm which--" The Emperor--"Oh, d--n the Address!
--read it to the police.
Chamberlain, take these people over to my brother, the Grand Duke's, and give them a square meal.
Adieu!
I am happy--I am gratified--I am delighted--I am bored.
Adieu, adieu--vamos the ranch!
The First Groom of the Palace will proceed to count the portable articles of value belonging to the premises".
The farce then closed, to be repeated again with every change of the watches, and embellished with new and still more extravagant inventions of pomp and conversation.
At all times of the day and night the phraseology of that tiresome address fell upon our ears.
Grimy sailors came down out of the foretop placidly announcing themselves as "a handful of private citizens of America, traveling simply for recreation and unostentatiously," etc.
; the coal passers moved to their duties in the profound depths of the ship, explaining the blackness of their faces and their uncouthness of dress, with the reminder that they were "a handful of private citizens, traveling simply for recreation," etc.
, and when the cry rang through the vessel at midnight: "EIGHT BELLS!
--LARBOARD WATCH, TURN OUT"!
the larboard watch came gaping and stretching out of their den, with the everlasting formula: "Aye-aye, sir!
We are a handful of private citizens of America, traveling simply for recreation, and unostentatiously, as becomes our unofficial state"!
As I was a member of the committee, and helped to frame the Address, these sarcasms came home to me.
I never heard a sailor proclaiming himself as a handful of American citizens traveling for recreation, but I wished he might trip and fall overboard, and so reduce his handful by one individual, at least.
I never was so tired of any one phrase as the sailors made me of the opening sentence of the Address to the Emperor of Russia.
This seaport of Smyrna, our first notable acquaintance in Asia, is a closely packed city of one hundred and thirty thousand inhabitants, and, like Constantinople, it has no outskirts.
It is as closely packed at its outer edges as it is in the centre, and then the habitations leave suddenly off and the plain beyond seems houseless.
It is just like any other Oriental city.
That is to say, its Moslem houses are heavy and dark, and as comfortless as so many tombs; its streets are crooked, rudely and roughly paved, and as narrow as an ordinary staircase; the streets uniformly carry a man to any other place than the one he wants
Such is Oriental luxury--such is Oriental splendor!
We read about it all our days, but we comprehend it not until we see it.
Smyrna is a very old city.
Its name occurs several times in the Bible, one or two of the disciples of Christ visited it, and here was located one of the original seven apocalyptic churches spoken of in Revelations.
These churches were symbolized in the Scriptures as candlesticks, and on certain conditions there was a sort of implied promise that Smyrna should be endowed with a "crown of life".
She was to "be faithful unto death"--those were the terms.
She has not kept up her faith straight along, but the pilgrims that wander hither consider that she has come near enough to it to save her, and so they point to the fact that Smyrna to-day wears her crown of life, and is a great city, with a great commerce
So Smyrna really still possesses her crown of life, in a business point of view.
Her career, for eighteen centuries, has been a chequered one, and she has been under the rule of princes of many creeds, yet there has been no season during all that time, as far as we know, (and during such seasons as she was inhabited at all,) that she
Hers was the only church against which no threats were implied in the Revelations, and the only one which survived.
With Ephesus, forty miles from here, where was located another of the seven churches, the case was different.
The "candlestick" has been removed from Ephesus.
Her light has been put out.
Pilgrims, always prone to find prophecies in the Bible, and often where none exist, speak cheerfully and complacently of poor, ruined Ephesus as the victim of prophecy.
And yet there is no sentence that promises, without due qualification, the destruction of the city.
The words are: "Remember, therefore, from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent".
That is all; the other verses are singularly complimentary to Ephesus.
The threat is qualified.
There is no history to show that she did not repent.
But the cruelest habit the modern prophecy-savans have, is that one of coolly and arbitrarily fitting the prophetic shirt on to the wrong man.
They do it without regard to rhyme or reason.
Both the cases I have just mentioned are instances in point.
Those "prophecies" are distinctly leveled at the "churches of Ephesus, Smyrna," etc.
, and yet the pilgrims invariably make them refer to the cities instead.
No crown of life is promised to the town of Smyrna and its commerce, but to the handful of Christians who formed its "church".
If they were "faithful unto death," they have their crown now--but no amount of faithfulness and legal shrewdness combined could legitimately drag the city into a participation in the promises of the prophecy.
The stately language of the Bible refers to a crown of life whose lustre will reflect the day-beams of the endless ages of eternity, not the butterfly existence of a city built by men's hands, which must pass to dust with the builders and be forgotten even
The fashion of delving out fulfillments of prophecy where that prophecy consists of mere "ifs," trenches upon the absurd.
Suppose, a thousand years from now, a malarious swamp builds itself up in the shallow harbor of Smyrna, or something else kills the town; and suppose, also, that within that time the swamp that has filled the renowned harbor of Ephesus and rendered her
What would the prophecy-savans say?
They would coolly skip over our age of the world, and say: "Smyrna was not faithful unto death, and so her crown of life was denied her; Ephesus repented, and lo!
her candle-stick was not removed.
Behold these evidences!
How wonderful is prophecy"!
Smyrna has been utterly destroyed six times.
If her crown of life had been an insurance policy, she would have had an opportunity to collect on it the first time she fell.
But she holds it on sufferance and by a complimentary construction of language which does not refer to her.
Six different times, however, I suppose some infatuated prophecy-enthusiast blundered along and said, to the infinite disgust of Smyrna and the Smyrniotes: "In sooth, here is astounding fulfillment of prophecy!
Smyrna hath not been faithful unto death, and behold her crown of life is vanished from her head.
Verily, these things be astonishing"!
Such things have a bad influence.
They provoke worldly men into using light conversation concerning sacred subjects.
Thick-headed commentators upon the Bible, and stupid preachers and teachers, work more damage to religion than sensible, cool-brained clergymen can fight away again, toil as they may.
It is not good judgment to fit a crown of life upon a city which has been destroyed six times.
That other class of wiseacres who twist prophecy in such a manner as to make it promise the destruction and desolation of the same city, use judgment just as bad, since the city is in a very flourishing condition now, unhappily for them.
These things put arguments into the mouth of infidelity.
A portion of the city is pretty exclusively Turkish; the Jews have a quarter to themselves; the Franks another quarter; so, also, with the Armenians.
The Armenians, of course, are Christians.
Their houses are large, clean, airy, handsomely paved with black and white squares of marble, and in the centre of many of them is a square court, which has in it a luxuriant flower-garden and a sparkling fountain; the doors of all the rooms open on this.
A very wide hall leads to the street door, and in this the women sit, the most of the day.
In the cool of the evening they dress up in their best raiment and show themselves at the door.
They are all comely of countenance, and exceedingly neat and cleanly; they look as if they were just out of a band-box.
Some of the young ladies--many of them, I may say--are even very beautiful; they average a shade better than American girls--which treasonable words I pray may be forgiven me.
They are very sociable, and will smile back when a stranger smiles at them, bow back when he bows, and talk back if he speaks to them.
No introduction is required.
An hour's chat at the door with a pretty girl one never saw before, is easily obtained, and is very pleasant.
I have tried it.
I could not talk anything but English, and the girl knew nothing but Greek, or Armenian, or some such barbarous tongue, but we got along very well.
I find that in cases like these, the fact that you can not comprehend each other isn't much of a drawback.
In that Russia n town of Yalta I danced an astonishing sort of dance an hour long, and one I had not heard of before, with a very pretty girl, and we talked incessantly, and laughed exhaustingly, and neither one ever knew what the other was driving at.
But it was splendid.
There were twenty people in the set, and the dance was very lively and complicated.
It was complicated enough without me--with me it was more so.
I threw in a figure now and then that surprised those Russians.
But I have never ceased to think of that girl.
I have written to her, but I can not direct the epistle because her name is one of those nine-jointed Russian affairs, and there are not letters enough in our alphabet to hold out.
I am not reckless enough to try to pronounce it when I am awake, but I make a stagger at it in my dreams, and get up with the lockjaw in the morning.
I am fading.
I do not take my meals now, with any sort of regularity.
Her dear name haunts me still in my dreams.
It is awful on teeth.
It never comes out of my mouth but it fetches an old snag along with it.
And then the lockjaw closes down and nips off a couple of the last syllables--but they taste good.
Coming through the Dardanelles, we saw camel trains on shore with the glasses, but we were never close to one till we got to Smyrna.
These camels are very much larger than the scrawny specimens one sees in the menagerie.
They stride along these streets, in single file, a dozen in a train, with heavy loads on their backs, and a fancy-looking negro in Turkish costume, or an Arab, preceding them on a little donkey and completely overshadowed and rendered insignificant by the
To see a camel train laden with the spices of Arabia and the rare fabrics of Persia come marching through the narrow alleys of the bazaar, among porters with their burdens, money-changers, lamp-merchants, Al-naschars in the glassware business, portly
The picture lacks nothing.
It casts you back at once into your forgotten boyhood, and again you dream over the wonders of the Arabian Nights; again your companions are princes, your lord is the Caliph Haroun Al Raschid, and your servants are terrific giants and genii that come with
CHAPTER XXXIX.
We inquired, and learned that the lions of Smyrna consisted of the ruins of the ancient citadel, whose broken and prodigious battlements frown upon the city from a lofty hill just in the edge of the town--the Mount Pagus of Scripture, they call it; the
We took little donkeys and started.
We saw Polycarp's tomb, and then hurried on.
The "Seven Churches"--thus they abbreviate it--came next on the list.
We rode there--about a mile and a half in the sweltering sun--and visited a little Greek church which they said was built upon the ancient site; and we paid a small fee, and the holy attendant gave each of us a little wax candle as a remembrancer of the
Several of us argued as well as we could that the "church" mentioned in the Bible meant a party of Christians, and not a building; that the Bible spoke of them as being very poor--so poor, I thought, and so subject to persecution (as per Polycarp's
But the elders of the ship's family ruled us down and scouted our evidences.
However, retribution came to them afterward.
They found that they had been led astray and had gone to the wrong place; they discovered that the accepted site is in the city.
Riding through the town, we could see marks of the six Smyrnas that have existed here and been burned up by fire or knocked down by earthquakes.
The hills and the rocks are rent asunder in places, excavations expose great blocks of building-stone that have lain buried for ages, and all the mean houses and walls of modern Smyrna along the way are spotted white with broken pillars, capitals and
The ascent of the hill of the citadel is very steep, and we proceeded rather slowly.
But there were matters of interest about us.
In one place, five hundred feet above the sea, the perpendicular bank on the upper side of the road was ten or fifteen feet high, and the cut exposed three veins of oyster shells, just as we have seen quartz veins exposed in the cutting of a road in Nevada
The veins were about eighteen inches thick and two or three feet apart, and they slanted along downward for a distance of thirty feet or more, and then disappeared where the cut joined the road.
Heaven only knows how far a man might trace them by "stripping".
They were clean, nice oyster shells, large, and just like any other oyster shells.
They were thickly massed together, and none were scattered above or below the veins.
Each one was a well-defined lead by itself, and without a spur.
My first instinct was to set up the usual-- NOTICE: "We, the undersigned, claim five claims of two hundred feet each, (and one for discovery,) on this ledge or lode of oyster-shells, with all its dips, spurs, angles, variations and sinuosities, and fifty
, etc.
, according to the mining laws of Smyrna".
They were such perfectly natural-looking leads that I could hardly keep from "taking them up".
Among the oyster-shells were mixed many fragments of ancient, broken crockery ware.
Now how did those masses of oyster-shells get there?
I can not determine.
Broken crockery and oyster-shells are suggestive of restaurants--but then they could have had no such places away up there on that mountain side in our time, because nobody has lived up there.
A restaurant would not pay in such a stony, forbidding, desolate place.
And besides, there were no champagne corks among the shells.
If there ever was a restaurant there, it must have been in Smyrna's palmy days, when the hills were covered with palaces.
I could believe in one restaurant, on those terms; but then how about the three?
Did they have restaurants there at three different periods of the world?
--because there are two or three feet of solid earth between the oyster leads.
Evidently, the restaurant solution will not answer.
The hill might have been the bottom of the sea, once, and been lifted up, with its oyster-beds, by an earthquake--but, then, how about the crockery?
And moreover, how about three oyster beds, one above another, and thick strata of good honest earth between?
That theory will not do.
It is just possible that this hill is Mount Ararat, and that Noah's Ark rested here, and he ate oysters and threw the shells overboard.
But that will not do, either.
There are the three layers again and the solid earth between--and, besides, there were only eight in Noah's family, and they could not have eaten all these oysters in the two or three months they staid on top of that mountain.
The beasts--however, it is simply absurd to suppose he did not know any more than to feed the beasts on oyster suppers.
It is painful--it is even humiliating--but I am reduced at last to one slender theory: that the oysters climbed up there of their own accord.
But what object could they have had in view?
--what did they want up there?
What could any oyster want to climb a hill for?
To climb a hill must necessarily be fatiguing and annoying exercise for an oyster.
The most natural conclusion would be that the oysters climbed up there to look at the scenery.
Yet when one comes to reflect upon the nature of an oyster, it seems plain that he does not care for scenery.
An oyster has no taste for such things; he cares nothing for the beautiful.
An oyster is of a retiring disposition, and not lively--not even cheerful above the average, and never enterprising.
But above all, an oyster does not take any interest in scenery--he scorns it.
What have I arrived at now?
Simply at the point I started from, namely, those oyster shells are there, in regular layers, five hundred feet above the sea, and no man knows how they got there.
I have hunted up the guide-books, and the gist of what they say is this: "They are there, but how they got there is a mystery".
Twenty-five years ago, a multitude of people in America put on their ascension robes, took a tearful leave of their friends, and made ready to fly up into heaven at the first blast of the trumpet.
But the angel did not blow it.
Miller's resurrection day was a failure.
The Millerites were disgusted.
I did not suspect that there were Millers in Asia Minor, but a gentleman tells me that they had it all set for the world to come to an end in Smyrna one day about three years ago.
There was much buzzing and preparation for a long time previously, and it culminated in a wild excitement at the appointed time.
A vast number of the populace ascended the citadel hill early in the morning, to get out of the way of the general destruction, and many of the infatuated closed up their shops and retired from all earthly business.
But the strange part of it was that about three in the afternoon, while this gentleman and his friends were at dinner in the hotel, a terrific storm of rain, accompanied by thunder and lightning, broke forth and continued with dire fury for two or three
It was a thing unprecedented in Smyrna at that time of the year, and scared some of the most skeptical.
The streets ran rivers and the hotel floor was flooded with water.
The dinner had to be suspended.
When the storm finished and left every body drenched through and through, and melancholy and half-drowned, the ascensionists came down from the mountain as dry as so many charity-sermons!
They had been looking down upon the fearful storm going on below, and really believed that their proposed destruction of the world was proving a grand success.
A railway here in Asia--in the dreamy realm of the Orient--in the fabled land of the Arabian Nights--is a strange thing to think of.
And yet they have one already, and are building another.
The present one is well built and well conducted, by an English Company, but is not doing an immense amount of business.
The first year it carried a good many passengers, but its freight list only comprised eight hundred pounds of figs!
It runs almost to the very gates of Ephesus--a town great in all ages of the world--a city familiar to readers of the Bible, and one which was as old as the very hills when the disciples of Christ preached in its streets.
It dates back to the shadowy ages of tradition, and was the birthplace of gods renowned in Grecian mythology.
The idea of a locomotive tearing through such a place as this, and waking the phantoms of its old days of romance out of their dreams of dead and gone centuries, is curious enough.
We journey thither tomorrow to see the celebrated ruins.
CHAPTER XL.
This has been a stirring day.
The Superintendent of the railway put a train at our disposal, and did us the further kindness of accompanying us to Ephesus and giving to us his watchful care.
We brought sixty scarcely perceptible donkeys in the freight cars, for we had much ground to go over.
We have seen some of the most grotesque costumes, along the line of the railroad, that can be imagined.
I am glad that no possible combination of words could describe them, for I might then be foolish enough to attempt it.
At ancient Ayassalook, in the midst of a forbidding desert, we came upon long lines of ruined aqueducts, and other remnants of architectural grandeur, that told us plainly enough we were nearing what had been a metropolis, once.
We left the train and mounted the donkeys, along with our invited guests--pleasant young gentlemen from the officers' list of an American man-of-war.
The little donkeys had saddles upon them which were made very high in order that the rider's feet might not drag the ground.
The preventative did not work well in the cases of our tallest pilgrims, however.
There were no bridles--nothing but a single rope, tied to the bit.
It was purely ornamental, for the donkey cared nothing for it.
If he were drifting to starboard, you might put your helm down hard the other way, if it were any satisfaction to you to do it, but he would continue to drift to starboard all the same.
There was only one process which could be depended on, and it was to get down and lift his rear around until his head pointed in the right direction, or take him under your arm and carry him to a part of the road which he could not get out of without
The sun flamed down as hot as a furnace, and neck-scarfs, veils and umbrellas seemed hardly any protection; they served only to make the long procession look more than ever fantastic--for be it known the ladies were all riding astride because they could
It was a wilder picture than those solitudes had seen for many a day.
No donkeys ever existed that were as hard to navigate as these, I think, or that had so many vile, exasperating instincts.
Occasionally we grew so tired and breathless with fighting them that we had to desist,--and immediately the donkey would come down to a deliberate walk.
This, with the fatigue, and the sun, would put a man asleep; and soon as the man was asleep, the donkey would lie down.
My donkey shall never see his boyhood's home again.
He has lain down once too often.
He must die.
We all stood in the vast theatre of ancient Ephesus,--the stone-benched amphitheatre I mean--and had our picture taken.
We looked as proper there as we would look any where, I suppose.
We do not embellish the general desolation of a desert much.
We add what dignity we can to a stately ruin with our green umbrellas and jackasses, but it is little.
However, we mean well.
I wish to say a brief word of the aspect of Ephesus.
On a high, steep hill, toward the sea, is a gray ruin of ponderous blocks of marble, wherein, tradition says, St. Paul was imprisoned eighteen centuries ago.
From these old walls you have the finest view of the desolate scene where once stood Ephesus, the proudest city of ancient times, and whose Temple of Diana was so noble in design, and so exquisite of workmanship, that it ranked high in the list of the
Behind you is the sea; in front is a level green valley, (a marsh, in fact,) extending far away among the mountains; to the right of the front view is the old citadel of Ayassalook, on a high hill; the ruined Mosque of the Sultan Selim stands near it in
The scene is a pretty one, and yet desolate--for in that wide plain no man can live, and in it is no human habitation.
But for the crumbling arches and monstrous piers and broken walls that rise from the foot of the hill of Pion, one could not believe that in this place once stood a city whose renown is older than tradition itself.
It is incredible to reflect that things as familiar all over the world to-day as household words, belong in the history and in the shadowy legends of this silent, mournful solitude.
We speak of Apollo and of Diana--they were born here; of the metamorphosis of Syrinx into a reed--it was done here; of the great god Pan--he dwelt in the caves of this hill of Coressus; of the Amazons--this was their best prized home; of Bacchus and
32 he says: "If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus," &c.
, when many men still lived who had seen the Christ; here Mary Magdalen died, and here the Virgin Mary ended her days with John, albeit Rome has since judged it best to locate her grave elsewhere; six or seven hundred years ago--almost yesterday, as it
It makes me feel as old as these dreary hills to look down upon these moss-hung ruins, this historic desolation.
One may read the Scriptures and believe, but he can not go and stand yonder in the ruined theatre and in imagination people it again with the vanished multitudes who mobbed Paul's comrades there and shouted, with one voice, "Great is Diana of the
The idea of a shout in such a solitude as this almost makes one shudder.
It was a wonderful city, this Ephesus.
Go where you will about these broad plains, you find the most exquisitely sculptured marble fragments scattered thick among the dust and weeds; and protruding from the ground, or lying prone upon it, are beautiful fluted columns of porphyry and all
It is a world of precious relics, a wilderness of marred and mutilated gems.
And yet what are these things to the wonders that lie buried here under the ground?
At Constantinople, at Pisa, in the cities of Spain, are great mosques and cathedrals, whose grandest columns came from the temples and palaces of Ephesus, and yet one has only to scratch the ground here to match them.
We shall never know what magnificence is, until this imperial city is laid bare to the sun.
The finest piece of sculpture we have yet seen and the one that impressed us most, (for we do not know much about art and can not easily work up ourselves into ecstasies over it,) is one that lies in this old theatre of Ephesus which St. Paul's riot has
It is only the headless body of a man, clad in a coat of mail, with a Medusa head upon the breast-plate, but we feel persuaded that such dignity and such majesty were never thrown into a form of stone before.
What builders they were, these men of antiquity!
The massive arches of some of these ruins rest upon piers that are fifteen feet square and built entirely of solid blocks of marble, some of which are as large as a Saratoga trunk, and some the size of a boarding-house sofa.
They are not shells or shafts of stone filled inside with rubbish, but the whole pier is a mass of solid masonry.
Vast arches, that may have been the gates of the city, are built in the same way.
They have braved the storms and sieges of three thousand years, and have been shaken by many an earthquake, but still they stand.
When they dig alongside of them, they find ranges of ponderous masonry that are as perfect in every detail as they were the day those old Cyclopian giants finished them.
An English Company is going to excavate Ephesus--and then!
And now am I reminded of-- THE LEGEND OF THE SEVEN SLEEPERS.
In the Mount of Pion, yonder, is the Cave of the Seven Sleepers.
Once upon a time, about fifteen hundred years ago, seven young men lived near each other in Ephesus, who belonged to the despised sect of the Christians.
It came to pass that the good King Maximilianus, (I am telling this story for nice little boys and girls,) it came to pass, I say, that the good King Maximilianus fell to persecuting the Christians, and as time rolled on he made it very warm for them.
So the seven young men said one to the other, let us get up and travel.
And they got up and traveled.
They tarried not to bid their fathers and mothers good-bye, or any friend they knew.
They only took certain moneys which their parents had, and garments that belonged unto their friends, whereby they might remember them when far away; and they took also the dog Ketmehr, which was the property of their neighbor Malchus, because the beast
By-and-by they came to a marvelous cave in the Hill of Pion and entered into it and feasted, and presently they hurried on again.
But they forgot the bottles of curious liquors, and left them behind.
They traveled in many lands, and had many strange adventures.
They were virtuous young men, and lost no opportunity that fell in their way to make their livelihood.
Their motto was in these words, namely, "Procrastination is the thief of time".
And so, whenever they did come upon a man who was alone, they said, Behold, this person hath the wherewithal--let us go through him.
And they went through him.
At the end of five years they had waxed tired of travel and adventure, and longed to revisit their old home again and hear the voices and see the faces that were dear unto their youth.
Therefore they went through such parties as fell in their way where they sojourned at that time, and journeyed back toward Ephesus again.
For the good King Maximilianus was become converted unto the new faith, and the Christians rejoiced because they were no longer persecuted.
One day as the sun went down, they came to the cave in the Mount of Pion, and they said, each to his fellow, Let us sleep here, and go and feast and make merry with our friends when the morning cometh.
And each of the seven lifted up his voice and said, It is a whiz.
So they went in, and lo, where they had put them, there lay the bottles of strange liquors, and they judged that age had not impaired their excellence.
Wherein the wanderers were right, and the heads of the same were level.
So each of the young men drank six bottles, and behold they felt very tired, then, and lay down and slept soundly.
When they awoke, one of them, Johannes--surnamed Smithianus--said, We are naked.
And it was so.
Their raiment was all gone, and the money which they had gotten from a stranger whom they had proceeded through as they approached the city, was lying upon the ground, corroded and rusted and defaced.
Likewise the dog Ketmehr was gone, and nothing save the brass that was upon his collar remained.
They wondered much at these things.
But they took the money, and they wrapped about their bodies some leaves, and came up to the top of the hill.
Then were they perplexed.
The wonderful temple of Diana was gone; many grand edifices they had never seen before stood in the city; men in strange garbs moved about the streets, and every thing was changed.
Johannes said, It hardly seems like Ephesus.
Yet here is the great gymnasium; here is the mighty theatre, wherein I have seen seventy thousand men assembled; here is the Agora; there is the font where the sainted John the Baptist immersed the converts; yonder is the prison of the good St. Paul, where
How mighty is Ephesus become!
And wondering at what their eyes had seen, they went down into the city and purchased garments and clothed themselves.
And when they would have passed on, the merchant bit the coins which they had given him, with his teeth, and turned them about and looked curiously upon them, and cast them upon his counter, and listened if they rang; and then he said, These be bogus.
And they said, Depart thou to Hades, and went their way.
When they were come to their houses, they recognized them, albeit they seemed old and mean; and they rejoiced, and were glad.
They ran to the doors, and knocked, and strangers opened, and looked inquiringly upon them.
And they said, with great excitement, while their hearts beat high, and the color in their faces came and went, Where is my father?
Where is my mother?
Where are Dionysius and Serapion, and Pericles, and Decius?
And the strangers that opened said, We know not these.
The Seven said, How, you know them not?
How long have ye dwelt here, and whither are they gone that dwelt here before ye?
And the strangers said, Ye play upon us with a jest, young men; we and our fathers have sojourned under these roofs these six generations; the names ye utter rot upon the tombs, and they that bore them have run their brief race, have laughed and sung, have
Then the seven young men turned them away from their homes, and the strangers shut the doors upon them.
The wanderers marveled greatly, and looked into the faces of all they met, as hoping to find one that they knew; but all were strange, and passed them by and spake no friendly word.
They were sore distressed and sad.
Presently they spake unto a citizen and said, Who is King in Ephesus?
And the citizen answered and said, Whence come ye that ye know not that great Laertius reigns in Ephesus?
They looked one at the other, greatly perplexed, and presently asked again, Where, then, is the good King Maximilianus?
The citizen moved him apart, as one who is afraid, and said, Verily these men be mad, and dream dreams, else would they know that the King whereof they speak is dead above two hundred years agone.
Then the scales fell from the eyes of the Seven, and one said, Alas, that we drank of the curious liquors.
They have made us weary, and in dreamless sleep these two long centuries have we lain.
Our homes are desolate, our friends are dead.
Behold, the jig is up--let us die.
And that same day went they forth and laid them down and died.
And in that self-same day, likewise, the Seven-up did cease in Ephesus, for that the Seven that were up were down again, and departed and dead withal.
And the names that be upon their tombs, even unto this time, are Johannes Smithianus, Trumps, Gift, High, and Low, Jack, and The Game.
And with the sleepers lie also the bottles wherein were once the curious liquors: and upon them is writ, in ancient letters, such words as these--Dames of heathen gods of olden time, perchance: Rumpunch, Jinsling, Egnog.
Such is the story of the Seven Sleepers, (with slight variations,) and I know it is true, because I have seen the cave myself.
Really, so firm a faith had the ancients this legend, that as late as eight or nine hundred years ago, learned travelers held it in superstitious fear.
Two of them record that they ventured into it, but ran quickly out again, not daring to tarry lest they should fall asleep and outlive their great grand-children a century or so.
Even at this day the ignorant denizens of the neighboring country prefer not to sleep in it.
CHAPTER XLI.
When I last made a memorandum, we were at Ephesus.
We are in Syria, now, encamped in the mountains of Lebanon.
The interregnum has been long, both as to time and distance.
We brought not a relic from Ephesus!
After gathering up fragments of sculptured marbles and breaking ornaments from the interior work of the Mosques; and after bringing them at a cost of infinite trouble and fatigue, five miles on muleback to the railway depot, a government officer compelled
He had an order from Constantinople to look out for our party, and see that we carried nothing off.
It was a wise, a just, and a well-deserved rebuke, but it created a sensation.
I never resist a temptation to plunder a stranger's premises without feeling insufferably vain about it.
This time I felt proud beyond expression.
I was serene in the midst of the scoldings that were heaped upon the Ottoman government for its affront offered to a pleasuring party of entirely respectable gentlemen and ladies I said, "We that have free souls, it touches us not".
The shoe not only pinched our party, but it pinched hard; a principal sufferer discovered that the imperial order was inclosed in an envelop bearing the seal of the British Embassy at Constantinople, and therefore must have been inspired by the
This was bad--very bad.
Coming solely from the Ottomans, it might have signified only Ottoman hatred of Christians, and a vulgar ignorance as to genteel methods of expressing it; but coming from the Christianized, educated, politic British legation, it simply intimated that we
So the party regarded it, and were incensed accordingly.
The truth doubtless was, that the same precautions would have been taken against any travelers, because the English Company who have acquired the right to excavate Ephesus, and have paid a great sum for that right, need to be protected, and deserve to be.
They can not afford to run the risk of having their hospitality abused by travelers, especially since travelers are such notorious scorners of honest behavior.
We sailed from Smyrna, in the wildest spirit of expectancy, for the chief feature, the grand goal of the expedition, was near at hand--we were approaching the Holy Land!
Such a burrowing into the hold for trunks that had lain buried for weeks, yes for months; such a hurrying to and fro above decks and below; such a riotous system of packing and unpacking; such a littering up of the cabins with shirts and skirts, and
But it is all over now.
We are cut up into parties of six or eight, and by this time are scattered far and wide.
Ours is the only one, however, that is venturing on what is called "the long trip"--that is, out into Syria, by Baalbec to Damascus, and thence down through the full length of Palestine.
It would be a tedious, and also a too risky journey, at this hot season of the year, for any but strong, healthy men, accustomed somewhat to fatigue and rough life in the open air.
The other parties will take shorter journeys.
For the last two months we have been in a worry about one portion of this Holy Land pilgrimage.
I refer to transportation service.
We knew very well that Palestine was a country which did not do a large passenger business, and every man we came across who knew any thing about it gave us to understand that not half of our party would be able to get dragomen and animals.
At Constantinople every body fell to telegraphing the American Consuls at Alexandria and Beirout to give notice that we wanted dragomen and transportation.
We were desperate--would take horses, jackasses, cameleopards, kangaroos--any thing.
At Smyrna, more telegraphing was done, to the same end.
Also fearing for the worst, we telegraphed for a large number of seats in the diligence for Damascus, and horses for the ruins of Baalbec.
As might have been expected, a notion got abroad in Syria and Egypt that the whole population of the Province of America (the Turks consider us a trifling little province in some unvisited corner of the world,) were coming to the Holy Land--and so, when we
We had all intended to go by diligence to Damascus, and switch off to Baalbec as we went along--because we expected to rejoin the ship, go to Mount Carmel, and take to the woods from there.
However, when our own private party of eight found that it was possible, and proper enough, to make the "long trip," we adopted that programme.
We have never been much trouble to a Consul before, but we have been a fearful nuisance to our Consul at Beirout.
I mention this because I can not help admiring his patience, his industry, and his accommodating spirit.
I mention it also, because I think some of our ship's company did not give him as full credit for his excellent services as he deserved.
Well, out of our eight, three were selected to attend to all business connected with the expedition.
The rest of us had nothing to do but look at the beautiful city of Beirout, with its bright, new houses nestled among a wilderness of green shrubbery spread abroad over an upland that sloped gently down to the sea; and also at the mountains of Lebanon that
) We had also to range up and down through the town and look at the costumes.
These are picturesque and fanciful, but not so varied as at Constantinople and Smyrna; the women of Beirout add an agony--in the two former cities the sex wear a thin veil which one can see through (and they often expose their ancles,) but at Beirout they
A young gentleman (I believe he was a Greek,) volunteered to show us around the city, and said it would afford him great pleasure, because he was studying English and wanted practice in that language.
When we had finished the rounds, however, he called for remuneration--said he hoped the gentlemen would give him a trifle in the way of a few piastres (equivalent to a few five cent pieces.
) We did so.
The Consul was surprised when he heard it, and said he knew the young fellow's family very well, and that they were an old and highly respectable family and worth a hundred and fifty thousand dollars!
Some people, so situated, would have been ashamed of the berth he had with us and his manner of crawling into it.
At the appointed time our business committee reported, and said all things were in readdress--that we were to start to-day, with horses, pack animals, and tents, and go to Baalbec, Damascus, the Sea of Tiberias, and thence southward by the way of the scene
They said we would lie as well as at a hotel.
I had read something like that before, and did not shame my judgment by believing a word of it.
I said nothing, however, but packed up a blanket and a shawl to sleep in, pipes and tobacco, two or three woollen shirts, a portfolio, a guide-book, and a Bible.
I also took along a towel and a cake of soap, to inspire respect in the Arabs, who would take me for a king in disguise.
We were to select our horses at 3 P.M. At that hour Abraham, the dragoman, marshaled them before us.
With all solemnity I set it down here, that those horses were the hardest lot I ever did come across, and their accoutrements were in exquisite keeping with their style.
One brute had an eye out; another had his tail sawed off close, like a rabbit, and was proud of it; another had a bony ridge running from his neck to his tail, like one of those ruined aqueducts one sees about Rome, and had a neck on him like a bowsprit;
It was fearful.
Blucher shook his head and said: "That dragon is going to get himself into trouble fetching these old crates out of the hospital the way they are, unless he has got a permit".
I said nothing.
The display was exactly according to the guide-book, and were we not traveling by the guide-book?
I selected a certain horse because I thought I saw him shy, and I thought that a horse that had spirit enough to shy was not to be despised.
At 6 o'clock P.M., we came to a halt here on the breezy summit of a shapely mountain overlooking the sea, and the handsome valley where dwelt some of those enterprising Phoenicians of ancient times we read so much about; all around us are what were once
Shortly after six, our pack train arrived.
I had not seen it before, and a good right I had to be astonished.
We had nineteen serving men and twenty-six pack mules!
It was a perfect caravan.
It looked like one, too, as it wound among the rocks.
I wondered what in the very mischief we wanted with such a vast turn-out as that, for eight men.
I wondered awhile, but soon I began to long for a tin plate, and some bacon and beans.
I had camped out many and many a time before, and knew just what was coming.
I went off, without waiting for serving men, and unsaddled my horse, and washed such portions of his ribs and his spine as projected through his hide, and when I came back, behold five stately circus tents were up--tents that were brilliant, within, with
I was speechless.
Then they brought eight little iron bedsteads, and set them up in the tents; they put a soft mattress and pillows and good blankets and two snow-white sheets on each bed.
Next, they rigged a table about the centre-pole, and on it placed pewter pitchers, basins, soap, and the whitest of towels --one set for each man; they pointed to pockets in the tent, and said we could put our small trifles in them for convenience, and if
Then came the finishing touch--they spread carpets on the floor!
I simply said, "If you call this camping out, all right--but it isn't the style I am used to; my little baggage that I brought along is at a discount".
It grew dark, and they put candles on the tables--candles set in bright, new, brazen candlesticks.
And soon the bell--a genuine, simon-pure bell --rang, and we were invited to "the saloon".
I had thought before that we had a tent or so too many, but now here was one, at least, provided for; it was to be used for nothing but an eating-saloon.
Like the others, it was high enough for a family of giraffes to live in, and was very handsome and clean and bright-colored within.
It was a gem of a place.
A table for eight, and eight canvas chairs; a table-cloth and napkins whose whiteness and whose fineness laughed to scorn the things we were used to in the great excursion steamer; knives and forks, soup-plates, dinner-plates--every thing, in the
It was wonderful!
And they call this camping out.
Those stately fellows in baggy trowsers and turbaned fezzes brought in a dinner which consisted of roast mutton, roast chicken, roast goose, potatoes, bread, tea, pudding, apples, and delicious grapes; the viands were better cooked than any we had eaten
It is midnight, now, and we break camp at six in the morning.
They call this camping out.
At this rate it is a glorious privilege to be a pilgrim to the Holy Land.
CHAPTER XLII.
We are camped near Temnin-el-Foka--a name which the boys have simplified a good deal, for the sake of convenience in spelling.
They call it Jacksonville.
It sounds a little strangely, here in the Valley of Lebanon, but it has the merit of being easier to remember than the Arabic name.
"COME LIKE SPIRITS, SO DEPART".
"The night shall be filled with music, And the cares that infest the day Shall fold their tents like the Arabs, And as silently steal away".
I slept very soundly last night, yet when the dragoman's bell rang at half-past five this morning and the cry went abroad of "Ten minutes to dress for breakfast"!
I heard both.
It surprised me, because I have not heard the breakfast gong in the ship for a month, and whenever we have had occasion to fire a salute at daylight, I have only found it out in the course of conversation afterward.
However, camping out, even though it be in a gorgeous tent, makes one fresh and lively in the morning --especially if the air you are breathing is the cool, fresh air of the mountains.
I was dressed within the ten minutes, and came out.
The saloon tent had been stripped of its sides, and had nothing left but its roof; so when we sat down to table we could look out over a noble panorama of mountain, sea and hazy valley.
And sitting thus, the sun rose slowly up and suffused the picture with a world of rich coloring.
Hot mutton chops, fried chicken, omelettes, fried potatoes and coffee --all excellent.
This was the bill of fare.
It was sauced with a savage appetite purchased by hard riding the day before, and refreshing sleep in a pure atmosphere.
As I called for a second cup of coffee, I glanced over my shoulder, and behold our white village was gone--the splendid tents had vanished like magic!
It was wonderful how quickly those Arabs had "folded their tents;" and it was wonderful, also, how quickly they had gathered the thousand odds and ends of the camp together and disappeared with them.
By half-past six we were under way, and all the Syrian world seemed to be under way also.
The road was filled with mule trains and long processions of camels.
This reminds me that we have been trying for some time to think what a camel looks like, and now we have made it out.
When he is down on all his knees, flat on his breast to receive his load, he looks something like a goose swimming; and when he is upright he looks like an ostrich with an extra set of legs.
Camels are not beautiful, and their long under lip gives them an exceedingly "gallus"--[Excuse the slang, no other word will describe it]--expression.
They have immense, flat, forked cushions of feet, that make a track in the dust like a pie with a slice cut out of it.
They are not particular about their diet.
They would eat a tombstone if they could bite it.
A thistle grows about here which has needles on it that would pierce through leather, I think; if one touches you, you can find relief in nothing but profanity.
The camels eat these.
They show by their actions that they enjoy them.
I suppose it would be a real treat to a camel to have a keg of nails for supper.
While I am speaking of animals, I will mention that I have a horse now by the name of "Jericho".
He is a mare.
I have seen remarkable horses before, but none so remarkable as this.
I wanted a horse that could shy, and this one fills the bill.
I had an idea that shying indicated spirit.
If I was correct, I have got the most spirited horse on earth.
He shies at every thing he comes across, with the utmost impartiality.
He appears to have a mortal dread of telegraph poles, especially; and it is fortunate that these are on both sides of the road, because as it is now, I never fall off twice in succession on the same side.
If I fell on the same side always, it would get to be monotonous after a while.
This creature has scared at every thing he has seen to-day, except a haystack.
He walked up to that with an intrepidity and a recklessness that were astonishing.
And it would fill any one with admiration to see how he preserves his self-possession in the presence of a barley sack.
This dare-devil bravery will be the death of this horse some day.
He is not particularly fast, but I think he will get me through the Holy Land.
He has only one fault.
His tail has been chopped off or else he has sat down on it too hard, some time or other, and he has to fight the flies with his heels.
This is all very well, but when he tries to kick a fly off the top of his head with his hind foot, it is too much variety.
He is going to get himself into trouble that way some day.
He reaches around and bites my legs too.
I do not care particularly about that, only I do not like to see a horse too sociable.
I think the owner of this prize had a wrong opinion about him.
He had an idea that he was one of those fiery, untamed steeds, but he is not of that character.
I know the Arab had this idea, because when he brought the horse out for inspection in Beirout, he kept jerking at the bridle and shouting in Arabic, "Ho!
will you?
Do you want to run away, you ferocious beast, and break your neck"?
when all the time the horse was not doing anything in the world, and only looked like he wanted to lean up against something and think.
Whenever he is not shying at things, or reaching after a fly, he wants to do that yet.
How it would surprise his owner to know this.
We have been in a historical section of country all day.
At noon we camped three hours and took luncheon at Mekseh, near the junction of the Lebanon Mountains and the Jebel el Kuneiyiseh, and looked down into the immense, level, garden-like Valley of Lebanon.
To-night we are camping near the same valley, and have a very wide sweep of it in view.
We can see the long, whale-backed ridge of Mount Hermon projecting above the eastern hills.
The "dews of Hermon" are falling upon us now, and the tents are almost soaked with them.
Over the way from us, and higher up the valley, we can discern, through the glasses, the faint outlines of the wonderful ruins of Baalbec, the supposed Baal-Gad of Scripture.
Joshua, and another person, were the two spies who were sent into this land of Canaan by the children of Israel to report upon its character--I mean they were the spies who reported favorably.
They took back with them some specimens of the grapes of this country, and in the children's picture-books they are always represented as bearing one monstrous bunch swung to a pole between them, a respectable load for a pack-train.
The Sunday-school books exaggerated it a little.
The grapes are most excellent to this day, but the bunches are not as large as those in the pictures.
I was surprised and hurt when I saw them, because those colossal bunches of grapes were one of my most cherished juvenile traditions.
Joshua reported favorably, and the children of Israel journeyed on, with Moses at the head of the general government, and Joshua in command of the army of six hundred thousand fighting men.
Of women and children and civilians there was a countless swarm.
Of all that mighty host, none but the two faithful spies ever lived to set their feet in the Promised Land.
They and their descendants wandered forty years in the desert, and then Moses, the gifted warrior, poet, statesman and philosopher, went up into Pisgah and met his mysterious fate.
Where he was buried no man knows --for "* * * no man dug that sepulchre, And no man saw it e'er --For the Sons of God upturned the sod And laid the dead man there"!
Then Joshua began his terrible raid, and from Jericho clear to this Baal-Gad, he swept the land like the Genius of Destruction.
He slaughtered the people, laid waste their soil, and razed their cities to the ground.
He wasted thirty-one kings also.
One may call it that, though really it can hardly be called wasting them, because there were always plenty of kings in those days, and to spare.
At any rate, he destroyed thirty-one kings, and divided up their realms among his Israelites.
He divided up this valley stretched out here before us, and so it was once Jewish territory.
The Jews have long since disappeared from it, however.
Back yonder, an hour's journey from here, we passed through an Arab village of stone dry-goods boxes (they look like that,) where Noah's tomb lies under lock and key.
[Noah built the ark.
] Over these old hills and valleys the ark that contained all that was left of a vanished world once floated.
I make no apology for detailing the above information.
It will be news to some of my readers, at any rate.
Noah's tomb is built of stone, and is covered with a long stone building.
Bucksheesh let us in.
The building had to be long, because the grave of the honored old navigator is two hundred and ten feet long itself!
It is only about four feet high, though.
He must have cast a shadow like a lightning-rod.
The proof that this is the genuine spot where Noah was buried can only be doubted by uncommonly incredulous people.
The evidence is pretty straight.
Shem, the son of Noah, was present at the burial, and showed the place to his descendants, who transmitted the knowledge to their descendants, and the lineal descendants of these introduced themselves to us to-day.
It was pleasant to make the acquaintance of members of so respectable a family.
It was a thing to be proud of.
It was the next thing to being acquainted with Noah himself.
Noah's memorable voyage will always possess a living interest for me, henceforward.
If ever an oppressed race existed, it is this one we see fettered around us under the inhuman tyranny of the Ottoman Empire.
I wish Europe would let Russia annihilate Turkey a little--not much, but enough to make it difficult to find the place again without a divining-rod or a diving-bell.
The Syrians are very poor, and yet they are ground down by a system of taxation that would drive any other nation frantic.
Last year their taxes were heavy enough, in all conscience--but this year they have been increased by the addition of taxes that were forgiven them in times of famine in former years.
On top of this the Government has levied a tax of one-tenth of the whole proceeds of the land.
This is only half the story.
The Pacha of a Pachalic does not trouble himself with appointing tax-collectors.
He figures up what all these taxes ought to amount to in a certain district.
Then he farms the collection out.
He calls the rich men together, the highest bidder gets the speculation, pays the Pacha on the spot, and then sells out to smaller fry, who sell in turn to a piratical horde of still smaller fry.
These latter compel the peasant to bring his little trifle of grain to the village, at his own cost.
It must be weighed, the various taxes set apart, and the remainder returned to the producer.
But the collector delays this duty day after day, while the producer's family are perishing for bread; at last the poor wretch, who can not but understand the game, says, "Take a quarter--take half--take two-thirds if you will, and let me go"!
It is a most outrageous state of things.
These people are naturally good-hearted and intelligent, and with education and liberty, would be a happy and contented race.
They often appeal to the stranger to know if the great world will not some day come to their relief and save them.
The Sultan has been lavishing money like water in England and Paris, but his subjects are suffering for it now.
This fashion of camping out bewilders me.
We have boot-jacks and a bath-tub, now, and yet all the mysteries the pack-mules carry are not revealed.
What next?
CHAPTER XLIII.
We had a tedious ride of about five hours, in the sun, across the Valley of Lebanon.
It proved to be not quite so much of a garden as it had seemed from the hill-sides.
It was a desert, weed-grown waste, littered thickly with stones the size of a man's fist.
Here and there the natives had scratched the ground and reared a sickly crop of grain, but for the most part the valley was given up to a handful of shepherds, whose flocks were doing what they honestly could to get a living, but the chances were against
We saw rude piles of stones standing near the roadside, at intervals, and recognized the custom of marking boundaries which obtained in Jacob's time.
There were no walls, no fences, no hedges--nothing to secure a man's possessions but these random heaps of stones.
The Israelites held them sacred in the old patriarchal times, and these other Arabs, their lineal descendants, do so likewise.
An American, of ordinary intelligence, would soon widely extend his property, at an outlay of mere manual labor, performed at night, under so loose a system of fencing as this.
The plows these people use are simply a sharpened stick, such as Abraham plowed with, and they still winnow their wheat as he did--they pile it on the house-top, and then toss it by shovel-fulls into the air until the wind has blown all the chaff away.
They never invent any thing, never learn any thing.
We had a fine race, of a mile, with an Arab perched on a camel.
Some of the horses were fast, and made very good time, but the camel scampered by them without any very great effort.
The yelling and shouting, and whipping and galloping, of all parties interested, made it an exhilarating, exciting, and particularly boisterous race.
At eleven o'clock, our eyes fell upon the walls and columns of Baalbec, a noble ruin whose history is a sealed book.
It has stood there for thousands of years, the wonder and admiration of travelers; but who built it, or when it was built, are questions that may never be answered.
One thing is very sure, though.
Such grandeur of design, and such grace of execution, as one sees in the temples of Baalbec, have not been equaled or even approached in any work of men's hands that has been built within twenty centuries past.
The great Temple of the Sun, the Temple of Jupiter, and several smaller temples, are clustered together in the midst of one of these miserable Syrian villages, and look strangely enough in such plebeian company.
These temples are built upon massive substructions that might support a world, almost; the materials used are blocks of stone as large as an omnibus--very few, if any of them, are smaller than a carpenter's tool chest--and these substructions are traversed
With such foundations as these, it is little wonder that Baalbec has lasted so long.
The Temple of the Sun is nearly three hundred feet long and one hundred and sixty feet wide.
It had fifty-four columns around it, but only six are standing now--the others lie broken at its base, a confused and picturesque heap.
The six columns are their bases, Corinthian capitals and entablature--and six more shapely columns do not exist.
The columns and the entablature together are ninety feet high--a prodigious altitude for shafts of stone to reach, truly--and yet one only thinks of their beauty and symmetry when looking at them; the pillars look slender and delicate, the entablature,
But when you have gazed aloft till your eyes are weary, you glance at the great fragments of pillars among which you are standing, and find that they are eight feet through; and with them lie beautiful capitals apparently as large as a small cottage; and
You wonder where these monstrous things came from, and it takes some little time to satisfy yourself that the airy and graceful fabric that towers above your head is made up of their mates.
It seems too preposterous.
The Temple of Jupiter is a smaller ruin than the one I have been speaking of, and yet is immense.
It is in a tolerable state of preservation.
One row of nine columns stands almost uninjured.
They are sixty-five feet high and support a sort of porch or roof, which connects them with the roof of the building.
This porch-roof is composed of tremendous slabs of stone, which are so finely sculptured on the under side that the work looks like a fresco from below.
One or two of these slabs had fallen, and again I wondered if the gigantic masses of carved stone that lay about me were no larger than those above my head.
Within the temple, the ornamentation was elaborate and colossal.
What a wonder of architectural beauty and grandeur this edifice must have been when it was new!
And what a noble picture it and its statelier companion, with the chaos of mighty fragments scattered about them, yet makes in the moonlight!
I can not conceive how those immense blocks of stone were ever hauled from the quarries, or how they were ever raised to the dizzy heights they occupy in the temples.
And yet these sculptured blocks are trifles in size compared with the rough-hewn blocks that form the wide verandah or platform which surrounds the Great Temple.
One stretch of that platform, two hundred feet long, is composed of blocks of stone as large, and some of them larger, than a street-car.
They surmount a wall about ten or twelve feet high.
I thought those were large rocks, but they sank into insignificance compared with those which formed another section of the platform.
These were three in number, and I thought that each of them was about as long as three street cars placed end to end, though of course they are a third wider and a third higher than a street car.
Perhaps two railway freight cars of the largest pattern, placed end to end, might better represent their size.
In combined length these three stones stretch nearly two hundred feet; they are thirteen feet square; two of them are sixty-four feet long each, and the third is sixty-nine.
They are built into the massive wall some twenty feet above the ground.
They are there, but how they got there is the question.
I have seen the hull of a steamboat that was smaller than one of those stones.
All these great walls are as exact and shapely as the flimsy things we build of bricks in these days.
A race of gods or of giants must have inhabited Baalbec many a century ago.
Men like the men of our day could hardly rear such temples as these.
We went to the quarry from whence the stones of Baalbec were taken.
It was about a quarter of a mile off, and down hill.
In a great pit lay the mate of the largest stone in the ruins.
It lay there just as the giants of that old forgotten time had left it when they were called hence--just as they had left it, to remain for thousands of years, an eloquent rebuke unto such as are prone to think slightingly of the men who lived before them.
This enormous block lies there, squared and ready for the builders' hands--a solid mass fourteen feet by seventeen, and but a few inches less than seventy feet long!
Two buggies could be driven abreast of each other, on its surface, from one end of it to the other, and leave room enough for a man or two to walk on either side.
One might swear that all the John Smiths and George Wilkinsons, and all the other pitiful nobodies between Kingdom Come and Baalbec would inscribe their poor little names upon the walls of Baalbec's magnificent ruins, and would add the town, the county and
It is a pity some great ruin does not fall in and flatten out some of these reptiles, and scare their kind out of ever giving their names to fame upon any walls or monuments again, forever.
Properly, with the sorry relics we bestrode, it was a three days' journey to Damascus.
It was necessary that we should do it in less than two.
It was necessary because our three pilgrims would not travel on the Sabbath day.
We were all perfectly willing to keep the Sabbath day, but there are times when to keep the letter of a sacred law whose spirit is righteous, becomes a sin, and this was a case in point.
We pleaded for the tired, ill-treated horses, and tried to show that their faithful service deserved kindness in return, and their hard lot compassion.
But when did ever self-righteousness know the sentiment of pity?
What were a few long hours added to the hardships of some over-taxed brutes when weighed against the peril of those human souls?
It was not the most promising party to travel with and hope to gain a higher veneration for religion through the example of its devotees.
We said the Saviour who pitied dumb beasts and taught that the ox must be rescued from the mire even on the Sabbath day, would not have counseled a forced march like this.
We said the "long trip" was exhausting and therefore dangerous in the blistering heats of summer, even when the ordinary days' stages were traversed, and if we persisted in this hard march, some of us might be stricken down with the fevers of the country
Nothing could move the pilgrims.
They must press on.
Men might die, horses might die, but they must enter upon holy soil next week, with no Sabbath-breaking stain upon them.
Thus they were willing to commit a sin against the spirit of religious law, in order that they might preserve the letter of it.
It was not worth while to tell them "the letter kills".
I am talking now about personal friends; men whom I like; men who are good citizens; who are honorable, upright, conscientious; but whose idea of the Saviour's religion seems to me distorted.
They lecture our shortcomings unsparingly, and every night they call us together and read to us chapters from the Testament that are full of gentleness, of charity, and of tender mercy; and then all the next day they stick to their saddles clear up to the
Apply the Testament's gentleness, and charity, and tender mercy to a toiling, worn and weary horse?
--Nonsense--these are for God's human creatures, not His dumb ones.
What the pilgrims choose to do, respect for their almost sacred character demands that I should allow to pass--but I would so like to catch any other member of the party riding his horse up one of these exhausting hills once!
We have given the pilgrims a good many examples that might benefit them, but it is virtue thrown away.
They have never heard a cross word out of our lips toward each other--but they have quarreled once or twice.
We love to hear them at it, after they have been lecturing us.
The very first thing they did, coming ashore at Beirout, was to quarrel in the boat.
I have said I like them, and I do like them--but every time they read me a scorcher of a lecture I mean to talk back in print.
Not content with doubling the legitimate stages, they switched off the main road and went away out of the way to visit an absurd fountain called Figia, because Baalam's ass had drank there once.
So we journeyed on, through the terrible hills and deserts and the roasting sun, and then far into the night, seeking the honored pool of Baalam's ass, the patron saint of all pilgrims like us.
I find no entry but this in my note-book: "Rode to-day, altogether, thirteen hours, through deserts, partly, and partly over barren, unsightly hills, and latterly through wild, rocky scenery, and camped at about eleven o'clock at night on the banks of a
Do not know its name--do not wish to know it--want to go to bed.
Two horses lame (mine and Jack's) and the others worn out.
Jack and I walked three or four miles, over the hills, and led the horses.
Fun--but of a mild type".
Twelve or thirteen hours in the saddle, even in a Christian land and a Christian climate, and on a good horse, is a tiresome journey; but in an oven like Syria, in a ragged spoon of a saddle that slips fore-and-aft, and "thort-ships," and every way, and on
CHAPTER XLIV.
The next day was an outrage upon men and horses both.
It was another thirteen-hour stretch (including an hour's "nooning".
) It was over the barrenest chalk-hills and through the baldest canons that even Syria can show.
The heat quivered in the air every where.
In the canons we almost smothered in the baking atmosphere.
On high ground, the reflection from the chalk-hills was blinding.
It was cruel to urge the crippled horses, but it had to be done in order to make Damascus Saturday night.
We saw ancient tombs and temples of fanciful architecture carved out of the solid rock high up in the face of precipices above our heads, but we had neither time nor strength to climb up there and examine them.
The terse language of my note-book will answer for the rest of this day's experiences: "Broke camp at 7 A.M., and made a ghastly trip through the Zeb Dana valley and the rough mountains--horses limping and that Arab screech-owl that does most of the
Beautiful stream in a chasm, lined thick with pomegranate, fig, olive and quince orchards, and nooned an hour at the celebrated Baalam's Ass Fountain of Figia, second in size in Syria, and the coldest water out of Siberia--guide-books do not say Baalam's
Bathed in it--Jack and I. Only a second--ice-water.
It is the principal source of the Abana river --only one-half mile down to where it joins.
Beautiful place--giant trees all around--so shady and cool, if one could keep awake--vast stream gushes straight out from under the mountain in a torrent.
Over it is a very ancient ruin, with no known history --supposed to have been for the worship of the deity of the fountain or Baalam's ass or somebody.
Wretched nest of human vermin about the fountain--rags, dirt, sunken cheeks, pallor of sickness, sores, projecting bones, dull, aching misery in their eyes and ravenous hunger speaking from every eloquent fibre and muscle from head to foot.
How they sprang upon a bone, how they crunched the bread we gave them!
Such as these to swarm about one and watch every bite he takes, with greedy looks, and swallow unconsciously every time he swallows, as if they half fancied the precious morsel went down their own throats--hurry up the caravan!
--I never shall enjoy a meal in this distressful country.
To think of eating three times every day under such circumstances for three weeks yet--it is worse punishment than riding all day in the sun.
There are sixteen starving babies from one to six years old in the party, and their legs are no larger than broom handles.
Left the fountain at 1 P.M. (the fountain took us at least two hours out of our way,) and reached Mahomet's lookout perch, over Damascus, in time to get a good long look before it was necessary to move on.
Tired?
Ask of the winds that far away with fragments strewed the sea".
As the glare of day mellowed into twilight, we looked down upon a picture which is celebrated all over the world.
I think I have read about four hundred times that when Mahomet was a simple camel-driver he reached this point and looked down upon Damascus for the first time, and then made a certain renowned remark.
He said man could enter only one paradise; he preferred to go to the one above.
So he sat down there and feasted his eyes upon the earthly paradise of Damascus, and then went away without entering its gates.
They have erected a tower on the hill to mark the spot where he stood.
Damascus is beautiful from the mountain.
It is beautiful even to foreigners accustomed to luxuriant vegetation, and I can easily understand how unspeakably beautiful it must be to eyes that are only used to the God-forsaken barrenness and desolation of Syria.
I should think a Syrian would go wild with ecstacy when such a picture bursts upon him for the first time.
From his high perch, one sees before him and below him, a wall of dreary mountains, shorn of vegetation, glaring fiercely in the sun; it fences in a level desert of yellow sand, smooth as velvet and threaded far away with fine lines that stand for roads,
This is the picture you see spread far below you, with distance to soften it, the sun to glorify it, strong contrasts to heighten the effects, and over it and about it a drowsing air of repose to spiritualize it and make it seem rather a beautiful estray
And when you think of the leagues of blighted, blasted, sandy, rocky, sun-burnt, ugly, dreary, infamous country you have ridden over to get here, you think it is the most beautiful, beautiful picture that ever human eyes rested upon in all the broad
If I were to go to Damascus again, I would camp on Mahomet's hill about a week, and then go away.
There is no need to go inside the walls.
The Prophet was wise without knowing it when he decided not to go down into the paradise of Damascus.
There is an honored old tradition that the immense garden which Damascus stands in was the Garden of Eden, and modern writers have gathered up many chapters of evidence tending to show that it really was the Garden of Eden, and that the rivers Pharpar and
It may be so, but it is not paradise now, and one would be as happy outside of it as he would be likely to be within.
It is so crooked and cramped and dirty that one can not realize that he is in the splendid city he saw from the hill-top.
The gardens are hidden by high mud-walls, and the paradise is become a very sink of pollution and uncomeliness.
Damascus has plenty of clear, pure water in it, though, and this is enough, of itself, to make an Arab think it beautiful and blessed.
Water is scarce in blistered Syria.
We run railways by our large cities in America; in Syria they curve the roads so as to make them run by the meagre little puddles they call "fountains," and which are not found oftener on a journey than every four hours.
But the "rivers" of Pharpar and Abana of Scripture (mere creeks,) run through Damascus, and so every house and every garden have their sparkling fountains and rivulets of water.
With her forest of foliage and her abundance of water, Damascus must be a wonder of wonders to the Bedouin from the deserts.
Damascus is simply an oasis--that is what it is.
For four thousand years its waters have not gone dry or its fertility failed.
Now we can understand why the city has existed so long.
It could not die.
So long as its waters remain to it away out there in the midst of that howling desert, so long will Damascus live to bless the sight of the tired and thirsty wayfarer.
"Though old as history itself, thou art fresh as the breath of spring, blooming as thine own rose-bud, and fragrant as thine own orange flower, O Damascus, pearl of the East"!
Damascus dates back anterior to the days of Abraham, and is the oldest city in the world.
It was founded by Uz, the grandson of Noah.
"The early history of Damascus is shrouded in the mists of a hoary antiquity".
Leave the matters written of in the first eleven chapters of the Old Testament out, and no recorded event has occurred in the world but Damascus was in existence to receive the news of it.
Go back as far as you will into the vague past, there was always a Damascus.
In the writings of every century for more than four thousand years, its name has been mentioned and its praises sung.
To Damascus, years are only moments, decades are only flitting trifles of time.
She measures time, not by days and months and years, but by the empires she has seen rise, and prosper and crumble to ruin.
She is a type of immortality.
She saw the foundations of Baalbec, and Thebes, and Ephesus laid; she saw these villages grow into mighty cities, and amaze the world with their grandeur--and she has lived to see them desolate, deserted, and given over to the owls and the bats.
She saw the Israelitish empire exalted, and she saw it annihilated.
She saw Greece rise, and flourish two thousand years, and die.
In her old age she saw Rome built; she saw it overshadow the world with its power; she saw it perish.
The few hundreds of years of Genoese and Venetian might and splendor were, to grave old Damascus, only a trifling scintillation hardly worth remembering.
Damascus has seen all that has ever occurred on earth, and still she lives.
She has looked upon the dry bones of a thousand empires, and will see the tombs of a thousand more before she dies.
Though another claims the name, old Damascus is by right the Eternal City.
We reached the city gates just at sundown.
They do say that one can get into any walled city of Syria, after night, for bucksheesh, except Damascus.
But Damascus, with its four thousand years of respectability in the world, has many old fogy notions.
There are no street lamps there, and the law compels all who go abroad at night to carry lanterns, just as was the case in old days, when heroes and heroines of the Arabian Nights walked the streets of Damascus, or flew away toward Bagdad on enchanted
It was fairly dark a few minutes after we got within the wall, and we rode long distances through wonderfully crooked streets, eight to ten feet wide, and shut in on either side by the high mud-walls of the gardens.
At last we got to where lanterns could be seen flitting about here and there, and knew we were in the midst of the curious old city.
In a little narrow street, crowded with our pack-mules and with a swarm of uncouth Arabs, we alighted, and through a kind of a hole in the wall entered the hotel.
We stood in a great flagged court, with flowers and citron trees about us, and a huge tank in the centre that was receiving the waters of many pipes.
We crossed the court and entered the rooms prepared to receive four of us.
In a large marble-paved recess between the two rooms was a tank of clear, cool water, which was kept running over all the time by the streams that were pouring into it from half a dozen pipes.
Nothing, in this scorching, desolate land could look so refreshing as this pure water flashing in the lamp-light; nothing could look so beautiful, nothing could sound so delicious as this mimic rain to ears long unaccustomed to sounds of such a nature.
Our rooms were large, comfortably furnished, and even had their floors clothed with soft, cheerful-tinted carpets.
It was a pleasant thing to see a carpet again, for if there is any thing drearier than the tomb-like, stone-paved parlors and bed-rooms of Europe and Asia, I do not know what it is.
They make one think of the grave all the time.
A very broad, gaily caparisoned divan, some twelve or fourteen feet long, extended across one side of each room, and opposite were single beds with spring mattresses.
There were great looking-glasses and marble-top tables.
All this luxury was as grateful to systems and senses worn out with an exhausting day's travel, as it was unexpected--for one can not tell what to expect in a Turkish city of even a quarter of a million inhabitants.
I do not know, but I think they used that tank between the rooms to draw drinking water from; that did not occur to me, however, until I had dipped my baking head far down into its cool depths.
I thought of it then, and superb as the bath was, I was sorry I had taken it, and was about to go and explain to the landlord.
But a finely curled and scented poodle dog frisked up and nipped the calf of my leg just then, and before I had time to think, I had soused him to the bottom of the tank, and when I saw a servant coming with a pitcher I went off and left the pup trying to
Satisfied revenge was all I needed to make me perfectly happy, and when I walked in to supper that first night in Damascus I was in that condition.
We lay on those divans a long time, after supper, smoking narghilies and long-stemmed chibouks, and talking about the dreadful ride of the day, and I knew then what I had sometimes known before--that it is worth while to get tired out, because one so
In the morning we sent for donkeys.
It is worthy of note that we had to send for these things.
I said Damascus was an old fossil, and she is.
Any where else we would have been assailed by a clamorous army of donkey-drivers, guides, peddlers and beggars--but in Damascus they so hate the very sight of a foreign Christian that they want no intercourse whatever with him; only a year or two ago, his
It is the most fanatical Mohammedan purgatory out of Arabia.
Where you see one green turban of a Hadji elsewhere (the honored sign that my lord has made the pilgrimage to Mecca,) I think you will see a dozen in Damascus.
The Damascenes are the ugliest, wickedest looking villains we have seen.
All the veiled women we had seen yet, nearly, left their eyes exposed, but numbers of these in Damascus completely hid the face under a close-drawn black veil that made the woman look like a mummy.
If ever we caught an eye exposed it was quickly hidden from our contaminating Christian vision; the beggars actually passed us by without demanding bucksheesh; the merchants in the bazaars did not hold up their goods and cry out eagerly, "Hey, John"!
or "Look this, Howajji"!
On the contrary, they only scowled at us and said never a word.
The narrow streets swarmed like a hive with men and women in strange Oriental costumes, and our small donkeys knocked them right and left as we plowed through them, urged on by the merciless donkey-boys.
These persecutors run after the animals, shouting and goading them for hours together; they keep the donkey in a gallop always, yet never get tired themselves or fall behind.
The donkeys fell down and spilt us over their heads occasionally, but there was nothing for it but to mount and hurry on again.
We were banged against sharp corners, loaded porters, camels, and citizens generally; and we were so taken up with looking out for collisions and casualties that we had no chance to look about us at all.
We rode half through the city and through the famous "street which is called Straight" without seeing any thing, hardly.
Our bones were nearly knocked out of joint, we were wild with excitement, and our sides ached with the jolting we had suffered.
I do not like riding in the Damascus street-cars.
We were on our way to the reputed houses of Judas and Ananias.
About eighteen or nineteen hundred years ago, Saul, a native of Tarsus, was particularly bitter against the new sect called Christians, and he left Jerusalem and started across the country on a furious crusade against them.
He went forth "breathing threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord".
"And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus, and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven: "And he fell to the earth and heard a voice saying unto him, 'Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
' "And when he knew that it was Jesus that spoke to him he trembled, and was astonished, and said, 'Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?
'" He was told to arise and go into the ancient city and one would tell him what to do.
In the meantime his soldiers stood speechless and awe-stricken, for they heard the mysterious voice but saw no man.
Saul rose up and found that that fierce supernatural light had destroyed his sight, and he was blind, so "they led him by the hand and brought him to Damascus".
He was converted.
Paul lay three days, blind, in the house of Judas, and during that time he neither ate nor drank.
There came a voice to a citizen of Damascus, named Ananias, saying, "Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and inquire at the house of Judas, for one called Saul, of Tarsus; for behold, he prayeth".
Ananias did not wish to go at first, for he had heard of Saul before, and he had his doubts about that style of a "chosen vessel" to preach the gospel of peace.
However, in obedience to orders, he went into the "street called Straight" (how he found his way into it, and after he did, how he ever found his way out of it again, are mysteries only to be accounted for by the fact that he was acting under Divine
) He found Paul and restored him, and ordained him a preacher; and from this old house we had hunted up in the street which is miscalled Straight, he had started out on that bold missionary career which he prosecuted till his death.
It was not the house of the disciple who sold the Master for thirty pieces of silver.
I make this explanation in justice to Judas, who was a far different sort of man from the person just referred to.
A very different style of man, and lived in a very good house.
It is a pity we do not know more about him.
I have given, in the above paragraphs, some more information for people who will not read Bible history until they are defrauded into it by some such method as this.
I hope that no friend of progress and education will obstruct or interfere with my peculiar mission.
The street called Straight is straighter than a corkscrew, but not as straight as a rainbow.
St. Luke is careful not to commit himself; he does not say it is the street which is straight, but the "street which is called Straight".
It is a fine piece of irony; it is the only facetious remark in the Bible, I believe.
We traversed the street called Straight a good way, and then turned off and called at the reputed house of Ananias.
There is small question that a part of the original house is there still; it is an old room twelve or fifteen feet under ground, and its masonry is evidently ancient.
If Ananias did not live there in St. Paul's time, somebody else did, which is just as well.
I took a drink out of Ananias' well, and singularly enough, the water was just as fresh as if the well had been dug yesterday.
We went out toward the north end of the city to see the place where the disciples let Paul down over the Damascus wall at dead of night--for he preached Christ so fearlessly in Damascus that the people sought to kill him, just as they would to-day for the
Then we called at the tomb of Mahomet's children and at a tomb which purported to be that of St. George who killed the dragon, and so on out to the hollow place under a rock where Paul hid during his flight till his pursuers gave him up; and to the
They say those narrow streets ran blood for several days, and that men, women and children were butchered indiscriminately and left to rot by hundreds all through the Christian quarter; they say, further, that the stench was dreadful.
All the Christians who could get away fled from the city, and the Mohammedans would not defile their hands by burying the "infidel dogs".
The thirst for blood extended to the high lands of Hermon and Anti-Lebanon, and in a short time twenty-five thousand more Christians were massacred and their possessions laid waste.
How they hate a Christian in Damascus!
--and pretty much all over Turkeydom as well.
And how they will pay for it when Russia turns her guns upon them again!
It is soothing to the heart to abuse England and France for interposing to save the Ottoman Empire from the destruction it has so richly deserved for a thousand years.
It hurts my vanity to see these pagans refuse to eat of food that has been cooked for us; or to eat from a dish we have eaten from; or to drink from a goatskin which we have polluted with our Christian lips, except by filtering the water through a rag
I never disliked a Chinaman as I do these degraded Turks and Arabs, and when Russia is ready to war with them again, I hope England and France will not find it good breeding or good judgment to interfere.
In Damascus they think there are no such rivers in all the world as their little Abana and Pharpar.
The Damascenes have always thought that way.
In 2 Kings, chapter v.
, Naaman boasts extravagantly about them.
That was three thousand years ago.
He says: "Are not Abana and Pharpar rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel?
May I not wash in them and be clean"?
But some of my readers have forgotten who Naaman was, long ago.
Naaman was the commander of the Syrian armies.
He was the favorite of the king and lived in great state.
"He was a mighty man of valor, but he was a leper".
Strangely enough, the house they point out to you now as his, has been turned into a leper hospital, and the inmates expose their horrid deformities and hold up their hands and beg for bucksheesh when a stranger enters.
One can not appreciate the horror of this disease until he looks upon it in all its ghastliness, in Naaman's ancient dwelling in Damascus.
Bones all twisted out of shape, great knots protruding from face and body, joints decaying and dropping away--horrible!
CHAPTER XLV.
The last twenty-four hours we staid in Damascus I lay prostrate with a violent attack of cholera, or cholera morbus, and therefore had a good chance and a good excuse to lie there on that wide divan and take an honest rest.
I had nothing to do but listen to the pattering of the fountains and take medicine and throw it up again.
It was dangerous recreation, but it was pleasanter than traveling in Syria.
I had plenty of snow from Mount Hermon, and as it would not stay on my stomach, there was nothing to interfere with my eating it--there was always room for more.
I enjoyed myself very well.
Syrian travel has its interesting features, like travel in any other part of the world, and yet to break your leg or have the cholera adds a welcome variety to it.
We left Damascus at noon and rode across the plain a couple of hours, and then the party stopped a while in the shade of some fig-trees to give me a chance to rest.
It was the hottest day we had seen yet--the sun-flames shot down like the shafts of fire that stream out before a blow-pipe--the rays seemed to fall in a steady deluge on the head and pass downward like rain from a roof.
I imagined I could distinguish between the floods of rays--I thought I could tell when each flood struck my head, when it reached my shoulders, and when the next one came.
It was terrible.
All the desert glared so fiercely that my eyes were swimming in tears all the time.
The boys had white umbrellas heavily lined with dark green.
They were a priceless blessing.
I thanked fortune that I had one, too, notwithstanding it was packed up with the baggage and was ten miles ahead.
It is madness to travel in Syria without an umbrella.
They told me in Beirout (these people who always gorge you with advice) that it was madness to travel in Syria without an umbrella.
It was on this account that I got one.
But, honestly, I think an umbrella is a nuisance any where when its business is to keep the sun off.
No Arab wears a brim to his fez, or uses an umbrella, or any thing to shade his eyes or his face, and he always looks comfortable and proper in the sun.
But of all the ridiculous sights I ever have seen, our party of eight is the most so --they do cut such an outlandish figure.
They travel single file; they all wear the endless white rag of Constantinople wrapped round and round their hats and dangling down their backs; they all wear thick green spectacles, with side-glasses to them; they all hold white umbrellas, lined with
I do--I wonder at it.
I wouldn't let any such caravan go through a country of mine.
And when the sun drops below the horizon and the boys close their umbrellas and put them under their arms, it is only a variation of the picture, not a modification of its absurdity.
But may be you can not see the wild extravagance of my panorama.
You could if you were here.
Here, you feel all the time just as if you were living about the year 1200 before Christ--or back to the patriarchs--or forward to the New Era.
The scenery of the Bible is about you--the customs of the patriarchs are around you--the same people, in the same flowing robes, and in sandals, cross your path--the same long trains of stately camels go and come--the same impressive religious solemnity
It is Daniel in the lion's den with a green cotton umbrella under his arm, all over again.
My umbrella is with the baggage, and so are my green spectacles--and there they shall stay.
I will not use them.
I will show some respect for the eternal fitness of things.
It will be bad enough to get sun-struck, without looking ridiculous into the bargain.
If I fall, let me fall bearing about me the semblance of a Christian, at least.
Three or four hours out from Damascus we passed the spot where Saul was so abruptly converted, and from this place we looked back over the scorching desert, and had our last glimpse of beautiful Damascus, decked in its robes of shining green.
After nightfall we reached our tents, just outside of the nasty Arab village of Jonesborough.
Of course the real name of the place is El something or other, but the boys still refuse to recognize the Arab names or try to pronounce them.
When I say that that village is of the usual style, I mean to insinuate that all Syrian villages within fifty miles of Damascus are alike--so much alike that it would require more than human intelligence to tell wherein one differed from another.
A Syrian village is a hive of huts one story high (the height of a man,) and as square as a dry-goods box; it is mud-plastered all over, flat roof and all, and generally whitewashed after a fashion.
The same roof often extends over half the town, covering many of the streets, which are generally about a yard wide.
When you ride through one of these villages at noon-day, you first meet a melancholy dog, that looks up at you and silently begs that you won't run over him, but he does not offer to get out of the way; next you meet a young boy without any clothes on, and
--he don't really expect a cent, but then he learned to say that before he learned to say mother, and now he can not break himself of it; next you meet a woman with a black veil drawn closely over her face, and her bust exposed; finally, you come to
These are all the people you are likely to see.
The balance of the population are asleep within doors, or abroad tending goats in the plains and on the hill-sides.
The village is built on some consumptive little water-course, and about it is a little fresh-looking vegetation.
Beyond this charmed circle, for miles on every side, stretches a weary desert of sand and gravel, which produces a gray bunchy shrub like sage-brush.
A Syrian village is the sorriest sight in the world, and its surroundings are eminently in keeping with it.
I would not have gone into this dissertation upon Syrian villages but for the fact that Nimrod, the Mighty Hunter of Scriptural notoriety, is buried in Jonesborough, and I wished the public to know about how he is located.
Like Homer, he is said to be buried in many other places, but this is the only true and genuine place his ashes inhabit.
When the original tribes were dispersed, more than four thousand years ago, Nimrod and a large party traveled three or four hundred miles, and settled where the great city of Babylon afterwards stood.
Nimrod built that city.
He also began to build the famous Tower of Babel, but circumstances over which he had no control put it out of his power to finish it.
He ran it up eight stories high, however, and two of them still stand, at this day--a colossal mass of brickwork, rent down the centre by earthquakes, and seared and vitrified by the lightnings of an angry God.
But the vast ruin will still stand for ages, to shame the puny labors of these modern generations of men.
Its huge compartments are tenanted by owls and lions, and old Nimrod lies neglected in this wretched village, far from the scene of his grand enterprise.
We left Jonesborough very early in the morning, and rode forever and forever and forever, it seemed to me, over parched deserts and rocky hills, hungry, and with no water to drink.
We had drained the goat-skins dry in a little while.
At noon we halted before the wretched Arab town of El Yuba Dam, perched on the side of a mountain, but the dragoman said if we applied there for water we would be attacked by the whole tribe, for they did not love Christians.
We had to journey on.
Two hours later we reached the foot of a tall isolated mountain, which is crowned by the crumbling castle of Banias, the stateliest ruin of that kind on earth, no doubt.
It is a thousand feet long and two hundred wide, all of the most symmetrical, and at the same time the most ponderous masonry.
The massive towers and bastions are more than thirty feet high, and have been sixty.
From the mountain's peak its broken turrets rise above the groves of ancient oaks and olives, and look wonderfully picturesque.
It is of such high antiquity that no man knows who built it or when it was built.
It is utterly inaccessible, except in one place, where a bridle-path winds upward among the solid rocks to the old portcullis.
The horses' hoofs have bored holes in these rocks to the depth of six inches during the hundreds and hundreds of years that the castle was garrisoned.
We wandered for three hours among the chambers and crypts and dungeons of the fortress, and trod where the mailed heels of many a knightly Crusader had rang, and where Phenician heroes had walked ages before them.
We wondered how such a solid mass of masonry could be affected even by an earthquake, and could not understand what agency had made Banias a ruin; but we found the destroyer, after a while, and then our wonder was increased tenfold.
Seeds had fallen in crevices in the vast walls; the seeds had sprouted; the tender, insignificant sprouts had hardened; they grew larger and larger, and by a steady, imperceptible pressure forced the great stones apart, and now are bringing sure
Gnarled and twisted trees spring from the old walls every where, and beautify and overshadow the gray battlements with a wild luxuriance of foliage.
From these old towers we looked down upon a broad, far-reaching green plain, glittering with the pools and rivulets which are the sources of the sacred river Jordan.
It was a grateful vision, after so much desert.
And as the evening drew near, we clambered down the mountain, through groves of the Biblical oaks of Bashan, (for we were just stepping over the border and entering the long-sought Holy Land,) and at its extreme foot, toward the wide valley, we entered
Barring the proximity of the village, it is a sort of paradise.
The very first thing one feels like doing when he gets into camp, all burning up and dusty, is to hunt up a bath.
We followed the stream up to where it gushes out of the mountain side, three hundred yards from the tents, and took a bath that was so icy that if I did not know this was the main source of the sacred river, I would expect harm to come of it.
It was bathing at noonday in the chilly source of the Abana, "River of Damascus," that gave me the cholera, so Dr. B. said.
However, it generally does give me the cholera to take a bath.
The incorrigible pilgrims have come in with their pockets full of specimens broken from the ruins.
I wish this vandalism could be stopped.
They broke off fragments from Noah's tomb; from the exquisite sculptures of the temples of Baalbec; from the houses of Judas and Ananias, in Damascus; from the tomb of Nimrod the Mighty Hunter in Jonesborough; from the worn Greek and Roman inscriptions set
Heaven protect the Sepulchre when this tribe invades Jerusalem!
The ruins here are not very interesting.
There are the massive walls of a great square building that was once the citadel; there are many ponderous old arches that are so smothered with debris that they barely project above the ground; there are heavy-walled sewers through which the crystal brook
But trees and bushes grow above many of these ruins now; the miserable huts of a little crew of filthy Arabs are perched upon the broken masonry of antiquity, the whole place has a sleepy, stupid, rural look about it, and one can hardly bring himself to
The place was nevertheless the scene of an event whose effects have added page after page and volume after volume to the world's history.
For in this place Christ stood when he said to Peter: "Thou art Peter; and upon this rock will I build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
And I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven".
On those little sentences have been built up the mighty edifice of the Church of Rome; in them lie the authority for the imperial power of the Popes over temporal affairs, and their godlike power to curse a soul or wash it white from sin.
To sustain the position of "the only true Church," which Rome claims was thus conferred upon her, she has fought and labored and struggled for many a century, and will continue to keep herself busy in the same work to the end of time.
The memorable words I have quoted give to this ruined city about all the interest it possesses to people of the present day.
It seems curious enough to us to be standing on ground that was once actually pressed by the feet of the Saviour.
The situation is suggestive of a reality and a tangibility that seem at variance with the vagueness and mystery and ghostliness that one naturally attaches to the character of a god.
I can not comprehend yet that I am sitting where a god has stood, and looking upon the brook and the mountains which that god looked upon, and am surrounded by dusky men and women whose ancestors saw him, and even talked with him, face to face, and
I can not comprehend this; the gods of my understanding have been always hidden in clouds and very far away.
This morning, during breakfast, the usual assemblage of squalid humanity sat patiently without the charmed circle of the camp and waited for such crumbs as pity might bestow upon their misery.
There were old and young, brown-skinned and yellow.
Some of the men were tall and stalwart, (for one hardly sees any where such splendid-looking men as here in the East,) but all the women and children looked worn and sad, and distressed with hunger.
They reminded me much of Indians, did these people.
They had but little clothing, but such as they had was fanciful in character and fantastic in its arrangement.
Any little absurd gewgaw or gimcrack they had they disposed in such a way as to make it attract attention most readily.
They sat in silence, and with tireless patience watched our every motion with that vile, uncomplaining impoliteness which is so truly Indian, and which makes a white man so nervous and uncomfortable and savage that he wants to exterminate the whole tribe.
These people about us had other peculiarities, which I have noticed in the noble red man, too: they were infested with vermin, and the dirt had caked on them till it amounted to bark.
The little children were in a pitiable condition--they all had sore eyes, and were otherwise afflicted in various ways.
They say that hardly a native child in all the East is free from sore eyes, and that thousands of them go blind of one eye or both every year.
I think this must be so, for I see plenty of blind people every day, and I do not remember seeing any children that hadn't sore eyes.
And, would you suppose that an American mother could sit for an hour, with her child in her arms, and let a hundred flies roost upon its eyes all that time undisturbed?
I see that every day.
It makes my flesh creep.
Yesterday we met a woman riding on a little jackass, and she had a little child in her arms --honestly, I thought the child had goggles on as we approached, and I wondered how its mother could afford so much style.
But when we drew near, we saw that the goggles were nothing but a camp meeting of flies assembled around each of the child's eyes, and at the same time there was a detachment prospecting its nose.
The flies were happy, the child was contented, and so the mother did not interfere.
As soon as the tribe found out that we had a doctor in our party, they began to flock in from all quarters.
Dr. B., in the charity of his nature, had taken a child from a woman who sat near by, and put some sort of a wash upon its diseased eyes.
That woman went off and started the whole nation, and it was a sight to see them swarm!
The lame, the halt, the blind, the leprous--all the distempers that are bred of indolence, dirt, and iniquity--were represented in the Congress in ten minutes, and still they came!
Every woman that had a sick baby brought it along, and every woman that hadn't, borrowed one.
What reverent and what worshiping looks they bent upon that dread, mysterious power, the Doctor!
They watched him take his phials out; they watched him measure the particles of white powder; they watched him add drops of one precious liquid, and drops of another; they lost not the slightest movement; their eyes were riveted upon him with a fascination
I believe they thought he was gifted like a god.
When each individual got his portion of medicine, his eyes were radiant with joy --notwithstanding by nature they are a thankless and impassive race--and upon his face was written the unquestioning faith that nothing on earth could prevent the patient from
Christ knew how to preach to these simple, superstitious, disease-tortured creatures: He healed the sick.
They flocked to our poor human doctor this morning when the fame of what he had done to the sick child went abroad in the land, and they worshiped him with their eyes while they did not know as yet whether there was virtue in his simples or not.
The ancestors of these--people precisely like them in color, dress, manners, customs, simplicity--flocked in vast multitudes after Christ, and when they saw Him make the afflicted whole with a word, it is no wonder they worshiped Him.
No wonder His deeds were the talk of the nation.
No wonder the multitude that followed Him was so great that at one time--thirty miles from here--they had to let a sick man down through the roof because no approach could be made to the door; no wonder His audiences were so great at Galilee that He had to
Well, as I was saying, the doctor distributed medicine as long as he had any to distribute, and his reputation is mighty in Galilee this day.
Among his patients was the child of the Shiek's daughter--for even this poor, ragged handful of sores and sin has its royal Shiek--a poor old mummy that looked as if he would be more at home in a poor-house than in the Chief Magistracy of this tribe of
The princess--I mean the Shiek's daughter--was only thirteen or fourteen years old, and had a very sweet face and a pretty one.
She was the only Syrian female we have seen yet who was not so sinfully ugly that she couldn't smile after ten o'clock Saturday night without breaking the Sabbath.
Her child was a hard specimen, though--there wasn't enough of it to make a pie, and the poor little thing looked so pleadingly up at all who came near it (as if it had an idea that now was its chance or never,) that we were filled with compassion which was
But this last new horse I have got is trying to break his neck over the tent-ropes, and I shall have to go out and anchor him.
Jericho and I have parted company.
The new horse is not much to boast of, I think.
One of his hind legs bends the wrong way, and the other one is as straight and stiff as a tent-pole.
Most of his teeth are gone, and he is as blind as bat.
His nose has been broken at some time or other, and is arched like a culvert now.
His under lip hangs down like a camel's, and his ears are chopped off close to his head.
I had some trouble at first to find a name for him, but I finally concluded to call him Baalbec, because he is such a magnificent ruin.
I can not keep from talking about my horses, because I have a very long and tedious journey before me, and they naturally occupy my thoughts about as much as matters of apparently much greater importance.
We satisfied our pilgrims by making those hard rides from Baalbec to Damascus, but Dan's horse and Jack's were so crippled we had to leave them behind and get fresh animals for them.
The dragoman says Jack's horse died.
I swapped horses with Mohammed, the kingly-looking Egyptian who is our Ferguson's lieutenant.
By Ferguson I mean our dragoman Abraham, of course.
I did not take this horse on account of his personal appearance, but because I have not seen his back.
I do not wish to see it.
I have seen the backs of all the other horses, and found most of them covered with dreadful saddle-boils which I know have not been washed or doctored for years.
The idea of riding all day long over such ghastly inquisitions of torture is sickening.
My horse must be like the others, but I have at least the consolation of not knowing it to be so.
I hope that in future I may be spared any more sentimental praises of the Arab's idolatry of his horse.
In boyhood I longed to be an Arab of the desert and have a beautiful mare, and call her Selim or Benjamin or Mohammed, and feed her with my own hands, and let her come into the tent, and teach her to caress me and look fondly upon me with her great tender
Never with my life!
Away, tempter, I scorn thy gold"!
and then bound into the saddle and speed over the desert like the wind!
But I recall those aspirations.
If these Arabs be like the other Arabs, their love for their beautiful mares is a fraud.
These of my acquaintance have no love for their horses, no sentiment of pity for them, and no knowledge of how to treat them or care for them.
The Syrian saddle-blanket is a quilted mattress two or three inches thick.
It is never removed from the horse, day or night.
It gets full of dirt and hair, and becomes soaked with sweat.
It is bound to breed sores.
These pirates never think of washing a horse's back.
They do not shelter the horses in the tents, either--they must stay out and take the weather as it comes.
Look at poor cropped and dilapidated "Baalbec," and weep for the sentiment that has been wasted upon the Selims of romance!
CHAPTER XLVI.
About an hour's ride over a rough, rocky road, half flooded with water, and through a forest of oaks of Bashan, brought us to Dan.
From a little mound here in the plain issues a broad stream of limpid water and forms a large shallow pool, and then rushes furiously onward, augmented in volume.
This puddle is an important source of the Jordan.
Its banks, and those of the brook are respectably adorned with blooming oleanders, but the unutterable beauty of the spot will not throw a well-balanced man into convulsions, as the Syrian books of travel would lead one to suppose.
From the spot I am speaking of, a cannon-ball would carry beyond the confines of Holy Land and light upon profane ground three miles away.
We were only one little hour's travel within the borders of Holy Land--we had hardly begun to appreciate yet that we were standing upon any different sort of earth than that we had always been used to, and see how the historic names began already to
Dan--Bashan--Lake Huleh --the Sources of Jordan--the Sea of Galilee.
They were all in sight but the last, and it was not far away.
The little township of Bashan was once the kingdom so famous in Scripture for its bulls and its oaks.
Lake Huleh is the Biblical "Waters of Merom".
Dan was the northern and Beersheba the southern limit of Palestine--hence the expression "from Dan to Beersheba".
It is equivalent to our phrases "from Maine to Texas" --"from Baltimore to San Francisco".
Our expression and that of the Israelites both mean the same--great distance.
With their slow camels and asses, it was about a seven days' journey from Dan to Beersheba---say a hundred and fifty or sixty miles--it was the entire length of their country, and was not to be undertaken without great preparation and much ceremony.
When the Prodigal traveled to "a far country," it is not likely that he went more than eighty or ninety miles.
Palestine is only from forty to sixty miles wide.
The State of Missouri could be split into three Palestines, and there would then be enough material left for part of another--possibly a whole one.
From Baltimore to San Francisco is several thousand miles, but it will be only a seven days' journey in the cars when I am two or three years older.
--[The railroad has been completed since the above was written.
]--If I live I shall necessarily have to go across the continent every now and then in those cars, but one journey from Dan to Beersheba will be sufficient, no doubt.
It must be the most trying of the two.
Therefore, if we chance to discover that from Dan to Beersheba seemed a mighty stretch of country to the Israelites, let us not be airy with them, but reflect that it was and is a mighty stretch when one can not traverse it by rail.
The small mound I have mentioned a while ago was once occupied by the Phenician city of Laish.
A party of filibusters from Zorah and Eschol captured the place, and lived there in a free and easy way, worshiping gods of their own manufacture and stealing idols from their neighbors whenever they wore their own out.
Jeroboam set up a golden calf here to fascinate his people and keep them from making dangerous trips to Jerusalem to worship, which might result in a return to their rightful allegiance.
With all respect for those ancient Israelites, I can not overlook the fact that they were not always virtuous enough to withstand the seductions of a golden calf.
Human nature has not changed much since then.
Some forty centuries ago the city of Sodom was pillaged by the Arab princes of Mesopotamia, and among other prisoners they seized upon the patriarch Lot and brought him here on their way to their own possessions.
They brought him to Dan, and father Abraham, who was pursuing them, crept softly in at dead of night, among the whispering oleanders and under the shadows of the stately oaks, and fell upon the slumbering victors and startled them from their dreams with
He recaptured Lot and all the other plunder.
We moved on.
We were now in a green valley, five or six miles wide and fifteen long.
The streams which are called the sources of the Jordan flow through it to Lake Huleh, a shallow pond three miles in diameter, and from the southern extremity of the Lake the concentrated Jordan flows out.
The Lake is surrounded by a broad marsh, grown with reeds.
Between the marsh and the mountains which wall the valley is a respectable strip of fertile land; at the end of the valley, toward Dan, as much as half the land is solid and fertile, and watered by Jordan's sources.
There is enough of it to make a farm.
It almost warrants the enthusiasm of the spies of that rabble of adventurers who captured Dan.
They said: "We have seen the land, and behold it is very good.
* * * A place where there is no want of any thing that is in the earth".
Their enthusiasm was at least warranted by the fact that they had never seen a country as good as this.
There was enough of it for the ample support of their six hundred men and their families, too.
When we got fairly down on the level part of the Danite farm, we came to places where we could actually run our horses.
It was a notable circumstance.
We had been painfully clambering over interminable hills and rocks for days together, and when we suddenly came upon this astonishing piece of rockless plain, every man drove the spurs into his horse and sped away with a velocity he could surely enjoy to
Here were evidences of cultivation--a rare sight in this country--an acre or two of rich soil studded with last season's dead corn-stalks of the thickness of your thumb and very wide apart.
But in such a land it was a thrilling spectacle.
Close to it was a stream, and on its banks a great herd of curious-looking Syrian goats and sheep were gratefully eating gravel.
I do not state this as a petrified fact--I only suppose they were eating gravel, because there did not appear to be any thing else for them to eat.
The shepherds that tended them were the very pictures of Joseph and his brethren I have no doubt in the world.
They were tall, muscular, and very dark-skinned Bedouins, with inky black beards.
They had firm lips, unquailing eyes, and a kingly stateliness of bearing.
They wore the parti-colored half bonnet, half hood, with fringed ends falling upon their shoulders, and the full, flowing robe barred with broad black stripes--the dress one sees in all pictures of the swarthy sons of the desert.
These chaps would sell their younger brothers if they had a chance, I think.
They have the manners, the customs, the dress, the occupation and the loose principles of the ancient stock.
[They attacked our camp last night, and I bear them no good will.
] They had with them the pigmy jackasses one sees all over Syria and remembers in all pictures of the "Flight into Egypt," where Mary and the Young Child are riding and Joseph is walking alongside, towering high above the little donkey's shoulders.
But really, here the man rides and carries the child, as a general thing, and the woman walks.
The customs have not changed since Joseph's time.
We would not have in our houses a picture representing Joseph riding and Mary walking; we would see profanation in it, but a Syrian Christian would not.
I know that hereafter the picture I first spoke of will look odd to me.
We could not stop to rest two or three hours out from our camp, of course, albeit the brook was beside us.
So we went on an hour longer.
We saw water, then, but nowhere in all the waste around was there a foot of shade, and we were scorching to death.
"Like unto the shadow of a great rock in a weary land".
Nothing in the Bible is more beautiful than that, and surely there is no place we have wandered to that is able to give it such touching expression as this blistering, naked, treeless land.
Here you do not stop just when you please, but when you can.
We found water, but no shade.
We traveled on and found a tree at last, but no water.
We rested and lunched, and came on to this place, Ain Mellahah (the boys call it Baldwinsville.
) It was a very short day's run, but the dragoman does not want to go further, and has invented a plausible lie about the country beyond this being infested by ferocious Arabs, who would make sleeping in their midst a dangerous pastime.
Well, they ought to be dangerous.
They carry a rusty old weather-beaten flint-lock gun, with a barrel that is longer than themselves; it has no sights on it, it will not carry farther than a brickbat, and is not half so certain.
And the great sash they wear in many a fold around their waists has two or three absurd old horse-pistols in it that are rusty from eternal disuse --weapons that would hang fire just about long enough for you to walk out of range, and then burst and blow
Exceedingly dangerous these sons of the desert are.
It used to make my blood run cold to read Wm.
C. Grimes' hairbreadth escapes from Bedouins, but I think I could read them now without a tremor.
He never said he was attacked by Bedouins, I believe, or was ever treated uncivilly, but then in about every other chapter he discovered them approaching, any how, and he had a blood-curdling fashion of working up the peril; and of wondering how his
True the Bedouins never did any thing to him when he arrived, and never had any intention of doing any thing to him in the first place, and wondered what in the mischief he was making all that to-do about; but still I could not divest myself of the idea,
C. Grimes' Bedouins and sleep comfortably afterward.
But I believe the Bedouins to be a fraud, now.
I have seen the monster, and I can outrun him.
I shall never be afraid of his daring to stand behind his own gun and discharge it.
About fifteen hundred years before Christ, this camp-ground of ours by the Waters of Merom was the scene of one of Joshua's exterminating battles.
Jabin, King of Hazor, (up yonder above Dan,) called all the sheiks about him together, with their hosts, to make ready for Israel's terrible General who was approaching.
"And when all these Kings were met together, they came and pitched together by the Waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.
And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea-shore for multitude," etc.
But Joshua fell upon them and utterly destroyed them, root and branch.
That was his usual policy in war.
He never left any chance for newspaper controversies about who won the battle.
He made this valley, so quiet now, a reeking slaughter-pen.
Somewhere in this part of the country--I do not know exactly where --Israel fought another bloody battle a hundred years later.
Deborah, the prophetess, told Barak to take ten thousand men and sally forth against another King Jabin who had been doing something.
Barak came down from Mount Tabor, twenty or twenty-five miles from here, and gave battle to Jabin's forces, who were in command of Sisera.
Barak won the fight, and while he was making the victory complete by the usual method of exterminating the remnant of the defeated host, Sisera fled away on foot, and when he was nearly exhausted by fatigue and thirst, one Jael, a woman he seems to have
The weary soldier acceded readily enough, and Jael put him to bed.
He said he was very thirsty, and asked his generous preserver to get him a cup of water.
She brought him some milk, and he drank of it gratefully and lay down again, to forget in pleasant dreams his lost battle and his humbled pride.
Presently when he was asleep she came softly in with a hammer and drove a hideous tent-pen down through his brain!
"For he was fast asleep and weary.
So he died".
Such is the touching language of the Bible.
"The Song of Deborah and Barak" praises Jael for the memorable service she had rendered, in an exultant strain: "Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women in the tent.
"He asked for water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly dish.
"She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workman's hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.
"At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead".
Stirring scenes like these occur in this valley no more.
There is not a solitary village throughout its whole extent--not for thirty miles in either direction.
There are two or three small clusters of Bedouin tents, but not a single permanent habitation.
One may ride ten miles, hereabouts, and not see ten human beings.
To this region one of the prophecies is applied: "I will bring the land into desolation; and your enemies which dwell therein shall be astonished at it.
And I will scatter you among the heathen, and I will draw out a sword after you; and your land shall be desolate and your cities waste".
No man can stand here by deserted Ain Mellahah and say the prophecy has not been fulfilled.
In a verse from the Bible which I have quoted above, occurs the phrase "all these kings".
It attracted my attention in a moment, because it carries to my mind such a vastly different significance from what it always did at home.
I can see easily enough that if I wish to profit by this tour and come to a correct understanding of the matters of interest connected with it, I must studiously and faithfully unlearn a great many things I have somehow absorbed concerning Palestine.
I must begin a system of reduction.
Like my grapes which the spies bore out of the Promised Land, I have got every thing in Palestine on too large a scale.
Some of my ideas were wild enough.
The word Palestine always brought to my mind a vague suggestion of a country as large as the United States.
I do not know why, but such was the case.
I suppose it was because I could not conceive of a small country having so large a history.
I think I was a little surprised to find that the grand Sultan of Turkey was a man of only ordinary size.
I must try to reduce my ideas of Palestine to a more reasonable shape.
One gets large impressions in boyhood, sometimes, which he has to fight against all his life.
"All these kings".
When I used to read that in Sunday School, it suggested to me the several kings of such countries as England, France, Spain, Germany, Russia, etc.
, arrayed in splendid robes ablaze with jewels, marching in grave procession, with sceptres of gold in their hands and flashing crowns upon their heads.
But here in Ain Mellahah, after coming through Syria, and after giving serious study to the character and customs of the country, the phrase "all these kings" loses its grandeur.
It suggests only a parcel of petty chiefs--ill-clad and ill-conditioned savages much like our Indians, who lived in full sight of each other and whose "kingdoms" were large when they were five miles square and contained two thousand souls.
The combined monarchies of the thirty "kings" destroyed by Joshua on one of his famous campaigns, only covered an area about equal to four of our counties of ordinary size.
The poor old sheik we saw at Cesarea Philippi with his ragged band of a hundred followers, would have been called a "king" in those ancient times.
It is seven in the morning, and as we are in the country, the grass ought to be sparkling with dew, the flowers enriching the air with their fragrance, and the birds singing in the trees.
But alas, there is no dew here, nor flowers, nor birds, nor trees.
There is a plain and an unshaded lake, and beyond them some barren mountains.
The tents are tumbling, the Arabs are quarreling like dogs and cats, as usual, the campground is strewn with packages and bundles, the labor of packing them upon the backs of the mules is progressing with great activity, the horses are saddled, the
The white city of the Mellahah, resurrected for a moment out of the dead centuries, will have disappeared again and left no sign.
CHAPTER XLVII.
We traversed some miles of desolate country whose soil is rich enough, but is given over wholly to weeds--a silent, mournful expanse, wherein we saw only three persons--Arabs, with nothing on but a long coarse shirt like the "tow-linen" shirts which used
Shepherds they were, and they charmed their flocks with the traditional shepherd's pipe--a reed instrument that made music as exquisitely infernal as these same Arabs create when they sing.
In their pipes lingered no echo of the wonderful music the shepherd forefathers heard in the Plains of Bethlehem what time the angels sang "Peace on earth, good will to men".
Part of the ground we came over was not ground at all, but rocks--cream-colored rocks, worn smooth, as if by water; with seldom an edge or a corner on them, but scooped out, honey-combed, bored out with eye-holes, and thus wrought into all manner of quaint
Over this part of the route were occasional remains of an old Roman road like the Appian Way, whose paving-stones still clung to their places with Roman tenacity.
Gray lizards, those heirs of ruin, of sepulchres and desolation, glided in and out among the rocks or lay still and sunned themselves.
Where prosperity has reigned, and fallen; where glory has flamed, and gone out; where beauty has dwelt, and passed away; where gladness was, and sorrow is; where the pomp of life has been, and silence and death brood in its high places, there this reptile
His coat is the color of ashes: and ashes are the symbol of hopes that have perished, of aspirations that came to nought, of loves that are buried.
If he could speak, he would say, Build temples: I will lord it in their ruins; build palaces: I will inhabit them; erect empires: I will inherit them; bury your beautiful: I will watch the worms at their work; and you, who stand here and moralize over me:
A few ants were in this desert place, but merely to spend the summer.
They brought their provisions from Ain Mellahah--eleven miles.
Jack is not very well to-day, it is easy to see; but boy as he is, he is too much of a man to speak of it.
He exposed himself to the sun too much yesterday, but since it came of his earnest desire to learn, and to make this journey as useful as the opportunities will allow, no one seeks to discourage him by fault-finding.
We missed him an hour from the camp, and then found him some distance away, by the edge of a brook, and with no umbrella to protect him from the fierce sun.
If he had been used to going without his umbrella, it would have been well enough, of course; but he was not.
He was just in the act of throwing a clod at a mud-turtle which was sunning itself on a small log in the brook.
We said: "Don't do that, Jack.
What do you want to harm him for?
What has he done"?
"Well, then, I won't kill him, but I ought to, because he is a fraud".
We asked him why, but he said it was no matter.
We asked him why, once or twice, as we walked back to the camp but he still said it was no matter.
But late at night, when he was sitting in a thoughtful mood on the bed, we asked him again and he said: "Well, it don't matter; I don't mind it now, but I did not like it today, you know, because I don't tell any thing that isn't so, and I don't think the
But he did; he told us at prayers in the Pilgrims' tent, last night, and he seemed as if he was reading it out of the Bible, too, about this country flowing with milk and honey, and about the voice of the turtle being heard in the land.
I thought that was drawing it a little strong, about the turtles, any how, but I asked Mr. Church if it was so, and he said it was, and what Mr. Church tells me, I believe.
But I sat there and watched that turtle nearly an hour today, and I almost burned up in the sun; but I never heard him sing.
I believe I sweated a double handful of sweat---I know I did--because it got in my eyes, and it was running down over my nose all the time; and you know my pants are tighter than any body else's--Paris foolishness--and the buckskin seat of them got wet
Finally I said, This is a fraud--that is what it is, it is a fraud--and if I had had any sense I might have known a cursed mud-turtle couldn't sing.
And then I said, I don't wish to be hard on this fellow, and I will just give him ten minutes to commence; ten minutes--and then if he don't, down goes his building.
But he didn't commence, you know.
I had staid there all that time, thinking may be he might, pretty soon, because he kept on raising his head up and letting it down, and drawing the skin over his eyes for a minute and then opening them out again, as if he was trying to study up something
"It was a little hard, after you had waited so long".
"I should think so.
I said, Well, if you won't sing, you shan't sleep, any way; and if you fellows had let me alone I would have made him shin out of Galilee quicker than any turtle ever did yet.
But it isn't any matter now--let it go.
The skin is all off the back of my neck".
About ten in the morning we halted at Joseph's Pit.
This is a ruined Khan of the Middle Ages, in one of whose side courts is a great walled and arched pit with water in it, and this pit, one tradition says, is the one Joseph's brethren cast him into.
A more authentic tradition, aided by the geography of the country, places the pit in Dothan, some two days' journey from here.
However, since there are many who believe in this present pit as the true one, it has its interest.
It is hard to make a choice of the most beautiful passage in a book which is so gemmed with beautiful passages as the Bible; but it is certain that not many things within its lids may take rank above the exquisite story of Joseph.
Who taught those ancient writers their simplicity of language, their felicity of expression, their pathos, and above all, their faculty of sinking themselves entirely out of sight of the reader and making the narrative stand out alone and seem to tell
Shakspeare is always present when one reads his book; Macaulay is present when we follow the march of his stately sentences; but the Old Testament writers are hidden from view.
If the pit I have been speaking of is the right one, a scene transpired there, long ages ago, which is familiar to us all in pictures.
The sons of Jacob had been pasturing their flocks near there.
Their father grew uneasy at their long absence, and sent Joseph, his favorite, to see if any thing had gone wrong with them.
He traveled six or seven days' journey; he was only seventeen years old, and, boy like, he toiled through that long stretch of the vilest, rockiest, dustiest country in Asia, arrayed in the pride of his heart, his beautiful claw-hammer coat of many colors.
Joseph was the favorite, and that was one crime in the eyes of his brethren; he had dreamed dreams, and interpreted them to foreshadow his elevation far above all his family in the far future, and that was another; he was dressed well and had doubtless
These were crimes his elders fretted over among themselves and proposed to punish when the opportunity should offer.
When they saw him coming up from the Sea of Galilee, they recognized him and were glad.
They said, "Lo, here is this dreamer--let us kill him".
But Reuben pleaded for his life, and they spared it.
But they seized the boy, and stripped the hated coat from his back and pushed him into the pit.
They intended to let him die there, but Reuben intended to liberate him secretly.
However, while Reuben was away for a little while, the brethren sold Joseph to some Ishmaelitish merchants who were journeying towards Egypt.
Such is the history of the pit.
And the self-same pit is there in that place, even to this day; and there it will remain until the next detachment of image-breakers and tomb desecraters arrives from the Quaker City excursion, and they will infallibly dig it up and carry it away with
For behold in them is no reverence for the solemn monuments of the past, and whithersoever they go they destroy and spare not.
Joseph became rich, distinguished, powerful--as the Bible expresses it, "lord over all the land of Egypt".
Joseph was the real king, the strength, the brain of the monarchy, though Pharaoh held the title.
Joseph is one of the truly great men of the Old Testament.
And he was the noblest and the manliest, save Esau.
Why shall we not say a good word for the princely Bedouin?
The only crime that can be brought against him is that he was unfortunate.
Why must every body praise Joseph's great-hearted generosity to his cruel brethren, without stint of fervent language, and fling only a reluctant bone of praise to Esau for his still sublimer generosity to the brother who had wronged him?
Jacob took advantage of Esau's consuming hunger to rob him of his birthright and the great honor and consideration that belonged to the position; by treachery and falsehood he robbed him of his father's blessing; he made of him a stranger in his home, and
Yet after twenty years had passed away and Jacob met Esau and fell at his feet quaking with fear and begging piteously to be spared the punishment he knew he deserved, what did that magnificent savage do?
He fell upon his neck and embraced him!
When Jacob--who was incapable of comprehending nobility of character--still doubting, still fearing, insisted upon "finding grace with my lord" by the bribe of a present of cattle, what did the gorgeous son of the desert say?
"Nay, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast unto thyself"!
Esau found Jacob rich, beloved by wives and children, and traveling in state, with servants, herds of cattle and trains of camels--but he himself was still the uncourted outcast this brother had made him.
After thirteen years of romantic mystery, the brethren who had wronged Joseph, came, strangers in a strange land, hungry and humble, to buy "a little food"; and being summoned to a palace, charged with crime, they beheld in its owner their wronged brother;
What Joseph that ever lived would have thrown away such a chance to "show off"?
Who stands first--outcast Esau forgiving Jacob in prosperity, or Joseph on a king's throne forgiving the ragged tremblers whose happy rascality placed him there?
Just before we came to Joseph's Pit, we had "raised" a hill, and there, a few miles before us, with not a tree or a shrub to interrupt the view, lay a vision which millions of worshipers in the far lands of the earth would give half their possessions to
Therefore we tarried only a short time at the pit.
We rested the horses and ourselves, and felt for a few minutes the blessed shade of the ancient buildings.
We were out of water, but the two or three scowling Arabs, with their long guns, who were idling about the place, said they had none and that there was none in the vicinity.
They knew there was a little brackish water in the pit, but they venerated a place made sacred by their ancestor's imprisonment too much to be willing to see Christian dogs drink from it.
But Ferguson tied rags and handkerchiefs together till he made a rope long enough to lower a vessel to the bottom, and we drank and then rode on; and in a short time we dismounted on those shores which the feet of the Saviour have made holy ground.
At noon we took a swim in the Sea of Galilee--a blessed privilege in this roasting climate--and then lunched under a neglected old fig-tree at the fountain they call Ain-et-Tin, a hundred yards from ruined Capernaum.
Every rivulet that gurgles out of the rocks and sands of this part of the world is dubbed with the title of "fountain," and people familiar with the Hudson, the great lakes and the Mississippi fall into transports of admiration over them, and exhaust their
If all the poetry and nonsense that have been discharged upon the fountains and the bland scenery of this region were collected in a book, it would make a most valuable volume to burn.
During luncheon, the pilgrim enthusiasts of our party, who had been so light-hearted and so happy ever since they touched holy ground that they did little but mutter incoherent rhapsodies, could scarcely eat, so anxious were they to "take shipping" and
Their anxiety grew and their excitement augmented with every fleeting moment, until my fears were aroused and I began to have misgivings that in their present condition they might break recklessly loose from all considerations of prudence and buy a whole
I trembled to think of the ruined purses this day's performances might result in.
I could not help reflecting bodingly upon the intemperate zeal with which middle-aged men are apt to surfeit themselves upon a seductive folly which they have tasted for the first time.
And yet I did not feel that I had a right to be surprised at the state of things which was giving me so much concern.
These men had been taught from infancy to revere, almost to worship, the holy places whereon their happy eyes were resting now.
For many and many a year this very picture had visited their thoughts by day and floated through their dreams by night.
To stand before it in the flesh--to see it as they saw it now--to sail upon the hallowed sea, and kiss the holy soil that compassed it about: these were aspirations they had cherished while a generation dragged its lagging seasons by and left its furrows
To look upon this picture, and sail upon this sea, they had forsaken home and its idols and journeyed thousands and thousands of miles, in weariness and tribulation.
What wonder that the sordid lights of work-day prudence should pale before the glory of a hope like theirs in the full splendor of its fruition?
Let them squander millions!
I said--who speaks of money at a time like this?
In this frame of mind I followed, as fast as I could, the eager footsteps of the pilgrims, and stood upon the shore of the lake, and swelled, with hat and voice, the frantic hail they sent after the "ship" that was speeding by.
It was a success.
The toilers of the sea ran in and beached their barque.
Joy sat upon every countenance.
"How much?
--ask him how much, Ferguson!
--how much to take us all--eight of us, and you--to Bethsaida, yonder, and to the mouth of Jordan, and to the place where the swine ran down into the sea--quick!
--and we want to coast around every where--every where!
--all day long!
--I could sail a year in these waters!
--and tell him we'll stop at Magdala and finish at Tiberias!
--ask him how much?
--any thing--any thing whatever!
--tell him we don't care what the expense is"!
[I said to myself, I knew how it would be.
] Ferguson--(interpreting)--"He says two Napoleons--eight dollars".
One or two countenances fell.
Then a pause.
"Too much!
--we'll give him one"!
I never shall know how it was--I shudder yet when I think how the place is given to miracles--but in a single instant of time, as it seemed to me, that ship was twenty paces from the shore, and speeding away like a frightened thing!
Eight crestfallen creatures stood upon the shore, and O, to think of it!
this--this--after all that overmastering ecstacy!
Oh, shameful, shameful ending, after such unseemly boasting!
It was too much like "Ho!
let me at him"!
followed by a prudent "Two of you hold him--one can hold me"!
Instantly there was wailing and gnashing of teeth in the camp.
The two Napoleons were offered--more if necessary--and pilgrims and dragoman shouted themselves hoarse with pleadings to the retreating boatmen to come back.
But they sailed serenely away and paid no further heed to pilgrims who had dreamed all their lives of some day skimming over the sacred waters of Galilee and listening to its hallowed story in the whisperings of its waves, and had journeyed countless
Impertinent Mohammedan Arabs, to think such things of gentlemen of another faith!
Well, there was nothing to do but just submit and forego the privilege of voyaging on Genessaret, after coming half around the globe to taste that pleasure.
There was a time, when the Saviour taught here, that boats were plenty among the fishermen of the coasts--but boats and fishermen both are gone, now; and old Josephus had a fleet of men-of-war in these waters eighteen centuries ago--a hundred and thirty
They battle here no more by sea, and the commercial marine of Galilee numbers only two small ships, just of a pattern with the little skiffs the disciples knew.
One was lost to us for good--the other was miles away and far out of hail.
So we mounted the horses and rode grimly on toward Magdala, cantering along in the edge of the water for want of the means of passing over it.
How the pilgrims abused each other!
Each said it was the other's fault, and each in turn denied it.
No word was spoken by the sinners--even the mildest sarcasm might have been dangerous at such a time.
Sinners that have been kept down and had examples held up to them, and suffered frequent lectures, and been so put upon in a moral way and in the matter of going slow and being serious and bottling up slang, and so crowded in regard to the matter of being
Otherwise they would.
But they did do it, though--and it did them a world of good to hear the pilgrims abuse each other, too.
We took an unworthy satisfaction in seeing them fall out, now and then, because it showed that they were only poor human people like us, after all.
So we all rode down to Magdala, while the gnashing of teeth waxed and waned by turns, and harsh words troubled the holy calm of Galilee.
Lest any man think I mean to be ill-natured when I talk about our pilgrims as I have been talking, I wish to say in all sincerity that I do not.
I would not listen to lectures from men I did not like and could not respect; and none of these can say I ever took their lectures unkindly, or was restive under the infliction, or failed to try to profit by what they said to me.
They are better men than I am; I can say that honestly; they are good friends of mine, too--and besides, if they did not wish to be stirred up occasionally in print, why in the mischief did they travel with me?
They knew me.
They knew my liberal way--that I like to give and take--when it is for me to give and other people to take.
When one of them threatened to leave me in Damascus when I had the cholera, he had no real idea of doing it--I know his passionate nature and the good impulses that underlie it.
And did I not overhear Church, another pilgrim, say he did not care who went or who staid, he would stand by me till I walked out of Damascus on my own feet or was carried out in a coffin, if it was a year?
And do I not include Church every time I abuse the pilgrims--and would I be likely to speak ill-naturedly of him?
I wish to stir them up and make them healthy; that is all.
We had left Capernaum behind us.
It was only a shapeless ruin.
It bore no semblance to a town, and had nothing about it to suggest that it had ever been a town.
But all desolate and unpeopled as it was, it was illustrious ground.
From it sprang that tree of Christianity whose broad arms overshadow so many distant lands to-day.
After Christ was tempted of the devil in the desert, he came here and began his teachings; and during the three or four years he lived afterward, this place was his home almost altogether.
He began to heal the sick, and his fame soon spread so widely that sufferers came from Syria and beyond Jordan, and even from Jerusalem, several days' journey away, to be cured of their diseases.
Here he healed the centurion's servant and Peter's mother-in-law, and multitudes of the lame and the blind and persons possessed of devils; and here, also, he raised Jairus's daughter from the dead.
He went into a ship with his disciples, and when they roused him from sleep in the midst of a storm, he quieted the winds and lulled the troubled sea to rest with his voice.
He passed over to the other side, a few miles away and relieved two men of devils, which passed into some swine.
After his return he called Matthew from the receipt of customs, performed some cures, and created scandal by eating with publicans and sinners.
Then he went healing and teaching through Galilee, and even journeyed to Tyre and Sidon.
He chose the twelve disciples, and sent them abroad to preach the new gospel.
He worked miracles in Bethsaida and Chorazin--villages two or three miles from Capernaum.
It was near one of them that the miraculous draft of fishes is supposed to have been taken, and it was in the desert places near the other that he fed the thousands by the miracles of the loaves and fishes.
He cursed them both, and Capernaum also, for not repenting, after all the great works he had done in their midst, and prophesied against them.
They are all in ruins, now--which is gratifying to the pilgrims, for, as usual, they fit the eternal words of gods to the evanescent things of this earth; Christ, it is more probable, referred to the people, not their shabby villages of wigwams: he said it
It would not affect the prophecy in the least --it would neither prove it or disprove it--if these towns were splendid cities now instead of the almost vanished ruins they are.
Christ visited Magdala, which is near by Capernaum, and he also visited Cesarea Philippi.
He went up to his old home at Nazareth, and saw his brothers Joses, and Judas, and James, and Simon--those persons who, being own brothers to Jesus Christ, one would expect to hear mentioned sometimes, yet who ever saw their names in a newspaper or heard
Who ever inquires what manner of youths they were; and whether they slept with Jesus, played with him and romped about him; quarreled with him concerning toys and trifles; struck him in anger, not suspecting what he was?
Who ever wonders what they thought when they saw him come back to Nazareth a celebrity, and looked long at his unfamiliar face to make sure, and then said, "It is Jesus"?
Who wonders what passed in their minds when they saw this brother, (who was only a brother to them, however much he might be to others a mysterious stranger who was a god and had stood face to face with God above the clouds,) doing strange miracles with
Who wonders if the brothers of Jesus asked him to come home with them, and said his mother and his sisters were grieved at his long absence, and would be wild with delight to see his face again?
Who ever gives a thought to the sisters of Jesus at all?
--yet he had sisters; and memories of them must have stolen into his mind often when he was ill-treated among strangers; when he was homeless and said he had not where to lay his head; when all deserted him, even Peter, and he stood alone among his
Christ did few miracles in Nazareth, and staid but a little while.
The people said, "This the Son of God!
Why, his father is nothing but a carpenter.
We know the family.
We see them every day.
Are not his brothers named so and so, and his sisters so and so, and is not his mother the person they call Mary?
This is absurd".
He did not curse his home, but he shook its dust from his feet and went away.
Capernaum lies close to the edge of the little sea, in a small plain some five miles long and a mile or two wide, which is mildly adorned with oleanders which look all the better contrasted with the bald hills and the howling deserts which surround them,
If one be calm and resolute he can look upon their comeliness and live.
One of the most astonishing things that have yet fallen under our observation is the exceedingly small portion of the earth from which sprang the now flourishing plant of Christianity.
The longest journey our Saviour ever performed was from here to Jerusalem--about one hundred to one hundred and twenty miles.
The next longest was from here to Sidon--say about sixty or seventy miles.
Instead of being wide apart--as American appreciation of distances would naturally suggest--the places made most particularly celebrated by the presence of Christ are nearly all right here in full view, and within cannon-shot of Capernaum.
Leaving out two or three short journeys of the Saviour, he spent his life, preached his gospel, and performed his miracles within a compass no larger than an ordinary county in the United States.
It is as much as I can do to comprehend this stupefying fact.
How it wears a man out to have to read up a hundred pages of history every two or three miles--for verily the celebrated localities of Palestine occur that close together.
How wearily, how bewilderingly they swarm about your path!
In due time we reached the ancient village of Magdala.
CHAPTER XLVIII.
Magdala is not a beautiful place.
It is thoroughly Syrian, and that is to say that it is thoroughly ugly, and cramped, squalid, uncomfortable, and filthy--just the style of cities that have adorned the country since Adam's time, as all writers have labored hard to prove, and have
The streets of Magdala are any where from three to six feet wide, and reeking with uncleanliness.
The houses are from five to seven feet high, and all built upon one arbitrary plan--the ungraceful form of a dry-goods box.
The sides are daubed with a smooth white plaster, and tastefully frescoed aloft and alow with disks of camel-dung placed there to dry.
This gives the edifice the romantic appearance of having been riddled with cannon-balls, and imparts to it a very warlike aspect.
When the artist has arranged his materials with an eye to just proportion --the small and the large flakes in alternate rows, and separated by carefully-considered intervals--I know of nothing more cheerful to look upon than a spirited Syrian fresco.
The flat, plastered roof is garnished by picturesque stacks of fresco materials, which, having become thoroughly dried and cured, are placed there where it will be convenient.
It is used for fuel.
There is no timber of any consequence in Palestine--none at all to waste upon fires--and neither are there any mines of coal.
If my description has been intelligible, you will perceive, now, that a square, flat-roofed hovel, neatly frescoed, with its wall-tops gallantly bastioned and turreted with dried camel-refuse, gives to a landscape a feature that is exceedingly festive and
There are no windows to a Syrian hut, and no chimneys.
When I used to read that they let a bed-ridden man down through the roof of a house in Capernaum to get him into the presence of the Saviour, I generally had a three-story brick in my mind, and marveled that they did not break his neck with the strange
I perceive now, however, that they might have taken him by the heels and thrown him clear over the house without discommoding him very much.
Palestine is not changed any since those days, in manners, customs, architecture, or people.
As we rode into Magdala not a soul was visible.
But the ring of the horses' hoofs roused the stupid population, and they all came trooping out--old men and old women, boys and girls, the blind, the crazy, and the crippled, all in ragged, soiled and scanty raiment, and all abject beggars by nature,
How the vermin-tortured vagabonds did swarm!
How they showed their scars and sores, and piteously pointed to their maimed and crooked limbs, and begged with their pleading eyes for charity!
We had invoked a spirit we could not lay.
They hung to the horses's tails, clung to their manes and the stirrups, closed in on every aide in scorn of dangerous hoofs--and out of their infidel throats, with one accord, burst an agonizing and most infernal chorus: "Howajji, bucksheesh!
howajji, bucksheesh!
howajji, bucksheesh!
bucksheesh!
bucksheesh"!
I never was in a storm like that before.
As we paid the bucksheesh out to sore-eyed children and brown, buxom girls with repulsively tattooed lips and chins, we filed through the town and by many an exquisite fresco, till we came to a bramble-infested inclosure and a Roman-looking ruin which had
The guide believed it, and so did I. I could not well do otherwise, with the house right there before my eyes as plain as day.
The pilgrims took down portions of the front wall for specimens, as is their honored custom, and then we departed.
We are camped in this place, now, just within the city walls of Tiberias.
We went into the town before nightfall and looked at its people--we cared nothing about its houses.
Its people are best examined at a distance.
They are particularly uncomely Jews, Arabs, and negroes.
Squalor and poverty are the pride of Tiberias.
The young women wear their dower strung upon a strong wire that curves downward from the top of the head to the jaw--Turkish silver coins which they have raked together or inherited.
Most of these maidens were not wealthy, but some few had been very kindly dealt with by fortune.
I saw heiresses there worth, in their own right--worth, well, I suppose I might venture to say, as much as nine dollars and a half.
But such cases are rare.
When you come across one of these, she naturally puts on airs.
She will not ask for bucksheesh.
She will not even permit of undue familiarity.
She assumes a crushing dignity and goes on serenely practicing with her fine-tooth comb and quoting poetry just the same as if you were not present at all.
Some people can not stand prosperity.
They say that the long-nosed, lanky, dyspeptic-looking body-snatchers, with the indescribable hats on, and a long curl dangling down in front of each ear, are the old, familiar, self-righteous Pharisees we read of in the Scriptures.
Verily, they look it.
Judging merely by their general style, and without other evidence, one might easily suspect that self-righteousness was their specialty.
From various authorities I have culled information concerning Tiberias.
It was built by Herod Antipas, the murderer of John the Baptist, and named after the Emperor Tiberius.
It is believed that it stands upon the site of what must have been, ages ago, a city of considerable architectural pretensions, judging by the fine porphyry pillars that are scattered through Tiberias and down the lake shore southward.
These were fluted, once, and yet, although the stone is about as hard as iron, the flutings are almost worn away.
These pillars are small, and doubtless the edifices they adorned were distinguished more for elegance than grandeur.
This modern town--Tiberias--is only mentioned in the New Testament; never in the Old.
The Sanhedrim met here last, and for three hundred years Tiberias was the metropolis of the Jews in Palestine.
It is one of the four holy cities of the Israelites, and is to them what Mecca is to the Mohammedan and Jerusalem to the Christian.
It has been the abiding place of many learned and famous Jewish rabbins.
They lie buried here, and near them lie also twenty-five thousand of their faith who traveled far to be near them while they lived and lie with them when they died.
The great Rabbi Ben Israel spent three years here in the early part of the third century.
He is dead, now.
The celebrated Sea of Galilee is not so large a sea as Lake Tahoe --[I measure all lakes by Tahoe, partly because I am far more familiar with it than with any other, and partly because I have such a high admiration for it and such a world of pleasant
]--by a good deal--it is just about two-thirds as large.
And when we come to speak of beauty, this sea is no more to be compared to Tahoe than a meridian of longitude is to a rainbow.
The dim waters of this pool can not suggest the limpid brilliancy of Tahoe; these low, shaven, yellow hillocks of rocks and sand, so devoid of perspective, can not suggest the grand peaks that compass Tahoe like a wall, and whose ribbed and chasmed fronts
Silence and solitude brood over Tahoe; and silence and solitude brood also over this lake of Genessaret.
But the solitude of the one is as cheerful and fascinating as the solitude of the other is dismal and repellant.
In the early morning one watches the silent battle of dawn and darkness upon the waters of Tahoe with a placid interest; but when the shadows sulk away and one by one the hidden beauties of the shore unfold themselves in the full splendor of noon; when the
It is solitude, for birds and squirrels on the shore and fishes in the water are all the creatures that are near to make it otherwise, but it is not the sort of solitude to make one dreary.
Come to Galilee for that.
If these unpeopled deserts, these rusty mounds of barrenness, that never, never, never do shake the glare from their harsh outlines, and fade and faint into vague perspective; that melancholy ruin of Capernaum; this stupid village of Tiberias, slumbering
But I should not offer the evidence for the prosecution and leave the defense unheard.
Wm.
C. Grimes deposes as follows:-- "We had taken ship to go over to the other side.
The sea was not more than six miles wide.
Of the beauty of the scene, however, I can not say enough, nor can I imagine where those travelers carried their eyes who have described the scenery of the lake as tame or uninteresting.
The first great characteristic of it is the deep basin in which it lies.
This is from three to four hundred feet deep on all sides except at the lower end, and the sharp slope of the banks, which are all of the richest green, is broken and diversified by the wadys and water-courses which work their way down through the sides of
Near Tiberias these banks are rocky, and ancient sepulchres open in them, with their doors toward the water.
They selected grand spots, as did the Egyptians of old, for burial places, as if they designed that when the voice of God should reach the sleepers, they should walk forth and open their eyes on scenes of glorious beauty.
On the east, the wild and desolate mountains contrast finely with the deep blue lake; and toward the north, sublime and majestic, Hermon looks down on the sea, lifting his white crown to heaven with the pride of a hill that has seen the departing footsteps
On the north-east shore of the sea was a single tree, and this is the only tree of any size visible from the water of the lake, except a few lonely palms in the city of Tiberias, and by its solitary position attracts more attention than would a forest.
The whole appearance of the scene is precisely what we would expect and desire the scenery of Genessaret to be, grand beauty, but quiet calm.
The very mountains are calm".
It is an ingeniously written description, and well calculated to deceive.
But if the paint and the ribbons and the flowers be stripped from it, a skeleton will be found beneath.
So stripped, there remains a lake six miles wide and neutral in color; with steep green banks, unrelieved by shrubbery; at one end bare, unsightly rocks, with (almost invisible) holes in them of no consequence to the picture; eastward, "wild and desolate
No ingenuity could make such a picture beautiful--to one's actual vision.
I claim the right to correct misstatements, and have so corrected the color of the water in the above recapitulation.
The waters of Genessaret are of an exceedingly mild blue, even from a high elevation and a distance of five miles.
Close at hand (the witness was sailing on the lake,) it is hardly proper to call them blue at all, much less "deep" blue.
I wish to state, also, not as a correction, but as matter of opinion, that Mount Hermon is not a striking or picturesque mountain by any means, being too near the height of its immediate neighbors to be so.
That is all.
I do not object to the witness dragging a mountain forty-five miles to help the scenery under consideration, because it is entirely proper to do it, and besides, the picture needs it.
"C.
W. E.," (of "Life in the Holy Land,") deposes as follows:-- "A beautiful sea lies unbosomed among the Galilean hills, in the midst of that land once possessed by Zebulon and Naphtali, Asher and Dan.
The azure of the sky penetrates the depths of the lake, and the waters are sweet and cool.
On the west, stretch broad fertile plains; on the north the rocky shores rise step by step until in the far distance tower the snowy heights of Hermon; on the east through a misty veil are seen the high plains of Perea, which stretch away in rugged
Flowers bloom in this terrestrial paradise, once beautiful and verdant with waving trees; singing birds enchant the ear; the turtle-dove soothes with its soft note; the crested lark sends up its song toward heaven, and the grave and stately stork inspires
Life here was once idyllic, charming; here were once no rich, no poor, no high, no low.
It was a world of ease, simplicity, and beauty; now it is a scene of desolation and misery".
This is not an ingenious picture.
It is the worst I ever saw.
It describes in elaborate detail what it terms a "terrestrial paradise," and closes with the startling information that this paradise is "a scene of desolation and misery".
I have given two fair, average specimens of the character of the testimony offered by the majority of the writers who visit this region.
One says, "Of the beauty of the scene I can not say enough," and then proceeds to cover up with a woof of glittering sentences a thing which, when stripped for inspection, proves to be only an unobtrusive basin of water, some mountainous desolation, and
The other, after a conscientious effort to build a terrestrial paradise out of the same materials, with the addition of a "grave and stately stork," spoils it all by blundering upon the ghastly truth at the last.
Nearly every book concerning Galilee and its lake describes the scenery as beautiful.
No--not always so straightforward as that.
Sometimes the impression intentionally conveyed is that it is beautiful, at the same time that the author is careful not to say that it is, in plain Saxon.
But a careful analysis of these descriptions will show that the materials of which they are formed are not individually beautiful and can not be wrought into combinations that are beautiful.
The veneration and the affection which some of these men felt for the scenes they were speaking of, heated their fancies and biased their judgment; but the pleasant falsities they wrote were full of honest sincerity, at any rate.
Others wrote as they did, because they feared it would be unpopular to write otherwise.
Others were hypocrites and deliberately meant to deceive.
Any of them would say in a moment, if asked, that it was always right and always best to tell the truth.
They would say that, at any rate, if they did not perceive the drift of the question.
But why should not the truth be spoken of this region?
Is the truth harmful?
Has it ever needed to hide its face?
God made the Sea of Galilee and its surroundings as they are.
Is it the province of Mr. Grimes to improve upon the work?
I am sure, from the tenor of books I have read, that many who have visited this land in years gone by, were Presbyterians, and came seeking evidences in support of their particular creed; they found a Presbyterian Palestine, and they had already made up
Others were Baptists, seeking Baptist evidences and a Baptist Palestine.
Others were Catholics, Methodists, Episcopalians, seeking evidences indorsing their several creeds, and a Catholic, a Methodist, an Episcopalian Palestine.
Honest as these men's intentions may have been, they were full of partialities and prejudices, they entered the country with their verdicts already prepared, and they could no more write dispassionately and impartially about it than they could about their
Our pilgrims have brought their verdicts with them.
They have shown it in their conversation ever since we left Beirout.
I can almost tell, in set phrase, what they will say when they see Tabor, Nazareth, Jericho and Jerusalem--because I have the books they will "smouch" their ideas from.
These authors write pictures and frame rhapsodies, and lesser men follow and see with the author's eyes instead of their own, and speak with his tongue.
What the pilgrims said at Cesarea Philippi surprised me with its wisdom.
I found it afterwards in Robinson.
What they said when Genessaret burst upon their vision, charmed me with its grace.
I find it in Mr. Thompson's "Land and the Book".
They have spoken often, in happily worded language which never varied, of how they mean to lay their weary heads upon a stone at Bethel, as Jacob did, and close their dim eyes, and dream, perchance, of angels descending out of heaven on a ladder.
It was very pretty.
But I have recognized the weary head and the dim eyes, finally.
They borrowed the idea--and the words--and the construction--and the punctuation--from Grimes.
The pilgrims will tell of Palestine, when they get home, not as it appeared to them, but as it appeared to Thompson and Robinson and Grimes--with the tints varied to suit each pilgrim's creed.
Pilgrims, sinners and Arabs are all abed, now, and the camp is still.
Labor in loneliness is irksome.
Since I made my last few notes, I have been sitting outside the tent for half an hour.
Night is the time to see Galilee.
Genessaret under these lustrous stars has nothing repulsive about it.
Genessaret with the glittering reflections of the constellations flecking its surface, almost makes me regret that I ever saw the rude glare of the day upon it.
Its history and its associations are its chiefest charm, in any eyes, and the spells they weave are feeble in the searching light of the sun.
Then, we scarcely feel the fetters.
Our thoughts wander constantly to the practical concerns of life, and refuse to dwell upon things that seem vague and unreal.
But when the day is done, even the most unimpressible must yield to the dreamy influences of this tranquil starlight.
The old traditions of the place steal upon his memory and haunt his reveries, and then his fancy clothes all sights and sounds with the supernatural.
In the lapping of the waves upon the beach, he hears the dip of ghostly oars; in the secret noises of the night he hears spirit voices; in the soft sweep of the breeze, the rush of invisible wings.
Phantom ships are on the sea, the dead of twenty centuries come forth from the tombs, and in the dirges of the night wind the songs of old forgotten ages find utterance again.
In the starlight, Galilee has no boundaries but the broad compass of the heavens, and is a theatre meet for great events; meet for the birth of a religion able to save a world; and meet for the stately Figure appointed to stand upon its stage and proclaim
But in the sunlight, one says: Is it for the deeds which were done and the words which were spoken in this little acre of rocks and sand eighteen centuries gone, that the bells are ringing to-day in the remote islands of the sea and far and wide over
One can comprehend it only when night has hidden all incongruities and created a theatre proper for so grand a drama.
CHAPTER XLIX.
We took another swim in the Sea of Galilee at twilight yesterday, and another at sunrise this morning.
We have not sailed, but three swims are equal to a sail, are they not?
There were plenty of fish visible in the water, but we have no outside aids in this pilgrimage but "Tent Life in the Holy Land," "The Land and the Book," and other literature of like description--no fishing-tackle.
There were no fish to be had in the village of Tiberias.
True, we saw two or three vagabonds mending their nets, but never trying to catch any thing with them.
We did not go to the ancient warm baths two miles below Tiberias.
I had no desire in the world to go there.
This seemed a little strange, and prompted me to try to discover what the cause of this unreasonable indifference was.
It turned out to be simply because Pliny mentions them.
I have conceived a sort of unwarrantable unfriendliness toward Pliny and St. Paul, because it seems as if I can never ferret out a place that I can have to myself.
It always and eternally transpires that St. Paul has been to that place, and Pliny has "mentioned" it.
In the early morning we mounted and started.
And then a weird apparition marched forth at the head of the procession--a pirate, I thought, if ever a pirate dwelt upon land.
It was a tall Arab, as swarthy as an Indian; young-say thirty years of age.
On his head he had closely bound a gorgeous yellow and red striped silk scarf, whose ends, lavishly fringed with tassels, hung down between his shoulders and dallied with the wind.
From his neck to his knees, in ample folds, a robe swept down that was a very star-spangled banner of curved and sinuous bars of black and white.
Out of his back, somewhere, apparently, the long stem of a chibouk projected, and reached far above his right shoulder.
Athwart his back, diagonally, and extending high above his left shoulder, was an Arab gun of Saladin's time, that was splendid with silver plating from stock clear up to the end of its measureless stretch of barrel.
About his waist was bound many and many a yard of elaborately figured but sadly tarnished stuff that came from sumptuous Persia, and among the baggy folds in front the sunbeams glinted from a formidable battery of old brass-mounted horse-pistols and the
There were holsters for more pistols appended to the wonderful stack of long-haired goat-skins and Persian carpets, which the man had been taught to regard in the light of a saddle; and down among the pendulous rank of vast tassels that swung from that
The fringed and bedizened prince whose privilege it is to ride the pony and lead the elephant into a country village is poor and naked compared to this chaos of paraphernalia, and the happy vanity of the one is the very poverty of satisfaction compared to
"Who is this?
What is this"?
That was the trembling inquiry all down the line.
"Our guard!
From Galilee to the birthplace of the Savior, the country is infested with fierce Bedouins, whose sole happiness it is, in this life, to cut and stab and mangle and murder unoffending Christians.
Allah be with us"!
"Then hire a regiment!
Would you send us out among these desperate hordes, with no salvation in our utmost need but this old turret"?
The dragoman laughed--not at the facetiousness of the simile, for verily, that guide or that courier or that dragoman never yet lived upon earth who had in him the faintest appreciation of a joke, even though that joke were so broad and so ponderous that
In straits like these, when a man laughs, it is encouraging when he winks, it is positively reassuring.
He finally intimated that one guard would be sufficient to protect us, but that that one was an absolute necessity.
It was because of the moral weight his awful panoply would have with the Bedouins.
Then I said we didn't want any guard at all.
If one fantastic vagabond could protect eight armed Christians and a pack of Arab servants from all harm, surely that detachment could protect themselves.
He shook his head doubtfully.
Then I said, just think of how it looks--think of how it would read, to self-reliant Americans, that we went sneaking through this deserted wilderness under the protection of this masquerading Arab, who would break his neck getting out of the country if a
It was a mean, low, degrading position.
Why were we ever told to bring navy revolvers with us if we had to be protected at last by this infamous star-spangled scum of the desert?
These appeals were vain--the dragoman only smiled and shook his head.
I rode to the front and struck up an acquaintance with King Solomon-in-all-his-glory, and got him to show me his lingering eternity of a gun.
It had a rusty flint lock; it was ringed and barred and plated with silver from end to end, but it was as desperately out of the perpendicular as are the billiard cues of '49 that one finds yet in service in the ancient mining camps of California.
The muzzle was eaten by the rust of centuries into a ragged filigree-work, like the end of a burnt-out stove-pipe.
I shut one eye and peered within--it was flaked with iron rust like an old steamboat boiler.
I borrowed the ponderous pistols and snapped them.
They were rusty inside, too--had not been loaded for a generation.
I went back, full of encouragement, and reported to the guide, and asked him to discharge this dismantled fortress.
It came out, then.
This fellow was a retainer of the Sheik of Tiberias.
He was a source of Government revenue.
He was to the Empire of Tiberias what the customs are to America.
The Sheik imposed guards upon travelers and charged them for it.
It is a lucrative source of emolument, and sometimes brings into the national treasury as much as thirty-five or forty dollars a year.
I knew the warrior's secret now; I knew the hollow vanity of his rusty trumpery, and despised his asinine complacency.
I told on him, and with reckless daring the cavalcade rode straight ahead into the perilous solitudes of the desert, and scorned his frantic warnings of the mutilation and death that hovered about them on every side.
Arrived at an elevation of twelve hundred feet above the lake, (I ought to mention that the lake lies six hundred feet below the level of the Mediterranean--no traveler ever neglects to flourish that fragment of news in his letters,) as bald and
Yet it was so crowded with historical interest, that if all the pages that have been written about it were spread upon its surface, they would flag it from horizon to horizon like a pavement.
Among the localities comprised in this view, were Mount Hermon; the hills that border Cesarea Philippi, Dan, the Sources of the Jordan and the Waters of Merom; Tiberias; the Sea of Galilee; Joseph's Pit; Capernaum; Bethsaida; the supposed scenes of the
And down toward the southeast lay a landscape that suggested to my mind a quotation (imperfectly remembered, no doubt:) "The Ephraimites, not being called upon to share in the rich spoils of the Ammonitish war, assembled a mighty host to fight against
To make his victory the more secure, he stationed guards at the different fords and passages of the Jordan, with instructions to let none pass who could not say Shibboleth.
The Ephraimites, being of a different tribe, could not frame to pronounce the word right, but called it Sibboleth, which proved them enemies and cost them their lives; wherefore, forty and two thousand fell at the different fords and passages of the Jordan
We jogged along peacefully over the great caravan route from Damascus to Jerusalem and Egypt, past Lubia and other Syrian hamlets, perched, in the unvarying style, upon the summit of steep mounds and hills, and fenced round about with giant cactuses, (the
It is a grand, irregular plateau, and looks as if it might have been created for a battle-field.
Here the peerless Saladin met the Christian host some seven hundred years ago, and broke their power in Palestine for all time to come.
There had long been a truce between the opposing forces, but according to the Guide-Book, Raynauld of Chatillon, Lord of Kerak, broke it by plundering a Damascus caravan, and refusing to give up either the merchants or their goods when Saladin demanded
This conduct of an insolent petty chieftain stung the Sultan to the quick, and he swore that he would slaughter Raynauld with his own hand, no matter how, or when, or where he found him.
Both armies prepared for war.
Under the weak King of Jerusalem was the very flower of the Christian chivalry.
He foolishly compelled them to undergo a long, exhausting march, in the scorching sun, and then, without water or other refreshment, ordered them to encamp in this open plain.
The splendidly mounted masses of Moslem soldiers swept round the north end of Genessaret, burning and destroying as they came, and pitched their camp in front of the opposing lines.
At dawn the terrific fight began.
Surrounded on all sides by the Sultan's swarming battalions, the Christian Knights fought on without a hope for their lives.
They fought with desperate valor, but to no purpose; the odds of heat and numbers, and consuming thirst, were too great against them.
Towards the middle of the day the bravest of their band cut their way through the Moslem ranks and gained the summit of a little hill, and there, hour after hour, they closed around the banner of the Cross, and beat back the charging squadrons of the
But the doom of the Christian power was sealed.
Sunset found Saladin Lord of Palestine, the Christian chivalry strewn in heaps upon the field, and the King of Jerusalem, the Grand Master of the Templars, and Raynauld of Chatillon, captives in the Sultan's tent.
Saladin treated two of the prisoners with princely courtesy, and ordered refreshments to be set before them.
When the King handed an iced Sherbet to Chatillon, the Sultan said, "It is thou that givest it to him, not I." He remembered his oath, and slaughtered the hapless Knight of Chatillon with his own hand.
It was hard to realize that this silent plain had once resounded with martial music and trembled to the tramp of armed men.
It was hard to people this solitude with rushing columns of cavalry, and stir its torpid pulses with the shouts of victors, the shrieks of the wounded, and the flash of banner and steel above the surging billows of war.
A desolation is here that not even imagination can grace with the pomp of life and action.
We reached Tabor safely, and considerably in advance of that old iron-clad swindle of a guard.
We never saw a human being on the whole route, much less lawless hordes of Bedouins.
Tabor stands solitary and alone, a giant sentinel above the Plain of Esdraelon.
It rises some fourteen hundred feet above the surrounding level, a green, wooden cone, symmetrical and full of grace--a prominent landmark, and one that is exceedingly pleasant to eyes surfeited with the repulsive monotony of desert Syria.
We climbed the steep path to its summit, through breezy glades of thorn and oak.
The view presented from its highest peak was almost beautiful.
Below, was the broad, level plain of Esdraelon, checkered with fields like a chess-board, and full as smooth and level, seemingly; dotted about its borders with white, compact villages, and faintly penciled, far and near, with the curving lines of roads
When it is robed in the fresh verdure of spring, it must form a charming picture, even by itself.
Skirting its southern border rises "Little Hermon," over whose summit a glimpse of Gilboa is caught.
Nain, famous for the raising of the widow's son, and Endor, as famous for the performances of her witch are in view.
To the eastward lies the Valley of the Jordan and beyond it the mountains of Gilead.
Westward is Mount Carmel.
Hermon in the north--the table-lands of Bashan--Safed, the holy city, gleaming white upon a tall spur of the mountains of Lebanon --a steel-blue corner of the Sea of Galilee--saddle-peaked Hattin, traditional "Mount of Beatitudes" and mute witness to brave
To glance at the salient features of this landscape through the picturesque framework of a ragged and ruined stone window--arch of the time of Christ, thus hiding from sight all that is unattractive, is to secure to yourself a pleasure worth climbing the
One must stand on his head to get the best effect in a fine sunset, and set a landscape in a bold, strong framework that is very close at hand, to bring out all its beauty.
One learns this latter truth never more to forget it, in that mimic land of enchantment, the wonderful garden of my lord the Count Pallavicini, near Genoa.
You go wandering for hours among hills and wooded glens, artfully contrived to leave the impression that Nature shaped them and not man; following winding paths and coming suddenly upon leaping cascades and rustic bridges; finding sylvan lakes where you
So, from marvel to marvel you have drifted on, thinking all the time that the one last seen must be the chiefest.
And, verily, the chiefest wonder is reserved until the last, but you do not see it until you step ashore, and passing through a wilderness of rare flowers, collected from every corner of the earth, you stand at the door of one more mimic temple.
Right in this place the artist taxed his genius to the utmost, and fairly opened the gates of fairy land.
You look through an unpretending pane of glass, stained yellow--the first thing you see is a mass of quivering foliage, ten short steps before you, in the midst of which is a ragged opening like a gateway-a thing that is common enough in nature, and not
a few broad tropic leaves and brilliant flowers.
All of a sudden, through this bright, bold gateway, you catch a glimpse of the faintest, softest, richest picture that ever graced the dream of a dying Saint, since John saw the New Jerusalem glimmering above the clouds of Heaven.
A broad sweep of sea, flecked with careening sails; a sharp, jutting cape, and a lofty lighthouse on it; a sloping lawn behind it; beyond, a portion of the old "city of palaces," with its parks and hills and stately mansions; beyond these, a prodigious
The ocean is gold, the city is gold, the meadow, the mountain, the sky--every thing is golden-rich, and mellow, and dreamy as a vision of Paradise.
No artist could put upon canvas, its entrancing beauty, and yet, without the yellow glass, and the carefully contrived accident of a framework that cast it into enchanted distance and shut out from it all unattractive features, it was not a picture to fall
Such is life, and the trail of the serpent is over us all.
There is nothing for it now but to come back to old Tabor, though the subject is tiresome enough, and I can not stick to it for wandering off to scenes that are pleasanter to remember.
I think I will skip, any how.
There is nothing about Tabor (except we concede that it was the scene of the Transfiguration,) but some gray old ruins, stacked up there in all ages of the world from the days of stout Gideon and parties that flourished thirty centuries ago to the fresh
It has its Greek Convent, and the coffee there is good, but never a splinter of the true cross or bone of a hallowed saint to arrest the idle thoughts of worldlings and turn them into graver channels.
A Catholic church is nothing to me that has no relics.
The plain of Esdraelon--"the battle-field of the nations"--only sets one to dreaming of Joshua, and Benhadad, and Saul, and Gideon; Tamerlane, Tancred, Coeur de Lion, and Saladin; the warrior Kings of Persia, Egypt's heroes, and Napoleon--for they all
If the magic of the moonlight could summon from the graves of forgotten centuries and many lands the countless myriads that have battled on this wide, far-reaching floor, and array them in the thousand strange Costumes of their hundred nationalities, and
But the magic of the moonlight is a vanity and a fraud; and whoso putteth his trust in it shall suffer sorrow and disappointment.
Down at the foot of Tabor, and just at the edge of the storied Plain of Esdraelon, is the insignificant village of Deburieh, where Deborah, prophetess of Israel, lived.
It is just like Magdala.
CHAPTER L. We descended from Mount Tabor, crossed a deep ravine, followed a hilly, rocky road to Nazareth--distant two hours.
All distances in the East are measured by hours, not miles.
A good horse will walk three miles an hour over nearly any kind of a road; therefore, an hour, here, always stands for three miles.
This method of computation is bothersome and annoying; and until one gets thoroughly accustomed to it, it carries no intelligence to his mind until he has stopped and translated the pagan hours into Christian miles, just as people do with the spoken words
Distances traveled by human feet are also estimated by hours and minutes, though I do not know what the base of the calculation is.
In Constantinople you ask, "How far is it to the Consulate"?
and they answer, "About ten minutes".
"How far is it to the Lloyds' Agency"?
"Quarter of an hour".
"How far is it to the lower bridge"?
"Four minutes".
I can not be positive about it, but I think that there, when a man orders a pair of pantaloons, he says he wants them a quarter of a minute in the legs and nine seconds around the waist.
Two hours from Tabor to Nazareth--and as it was an uncommonly narrow, crooked trail, we necessarily met all the camel trains and jackass caravans between Jericho and Jacksonville in that particular place and nowhere else.
The donkeys do not matter so much, because they are so small that you can jump your horse over them if he is an animal of spirit, but a camel is not jumpable.
A camel is as tall as any ordinary dwelling-house in Syria--which is to say a camel is from one to two, and sometimes nearly three feet taller than a good-sized man.
In this part of the country his load is oftenest in the shape of colossal sacks--one on each side.
He and his cargo take up as much room as a carriage.
Think of meeting this style of obstruction in a narrow trail.
The camel would not turn out for a king.
He stalks serenely along, bringing his cushioned stilts forward with the long, regular swing of a pendulum, and whatever is in the way must get out of the way peaceably, or be wiped out forcibly by the bulky sacks.
It was a tiresome ride to us, and perfectly exhausting to the horses.
We were compelled to jump over upwards of eighteen hundred donkeys, and only one person in the party was unseated less than sixty times by the camels.
This seems like a powerful statement, but the poet has said, "Things are not what they seem".
I can not think of any thing, now, more certain to make one shudder, than to have a soft-footed camel sneak up behind him and touch him on the ear with its cold, flabby under-lip.
A camel did this for one of the boys, who was drooping over his saddle in a brown study.
He glanced up and saw the majestic apparition hovering above him, and made frantic efforts to get out of the way, but the camel reached out and bit him on the shoulder before he accomplished it.
This was the only pleasant incident of the journey.
At Nazareth we camped in an olive grove near the Virgin Mary's fountain, and that wonderful Arab "guard" came to collect some bucksheesh for his "services" in following us from Tiberias and warding off invisible dangers with the terrors of his armament.
The dragoman had paid his master, but that counted as nothing--if you hire a man to sneeze for you, here, and another man chooses to help him, you have got to pay both.
They do nothing whatever without pay.
How it must have surprised these people to hear the way of salvation offered to them "without money and without price".
If the manners, the people or the customs of this country have changed since the Saviour's time, the figures and metaphors of the Bible are not the evidences to prove it by.
We entered the great Latin Convent which is built over the traditional dwelling-place of the Holy Family.
We went down a flight of fifteen steps below the ground level, and stood in a small chapel tricked out with tapestry hangings, silver lamps, and oil paintings.
A spot marked by a cross, in the marble floor, under the altar, was exhibited as the place made forever holy by the feet of the Virgin when she stood up to receive the message of the angel.
So simple, so unpretending a locality, to be the scene of so mighty an event!
The very scene of the Annunciation--an event which has been commemorated by splendid shrines and august temples all over the civilized world, and one which the princes of art have made it their loftiest ambition to picture worthily on their canvas; a spot
It was easy to think these thoughts.
But it was not easy to bring myself up to the magnitude of the situation.
I could sit off several thousand miles and imagine the angel appearing, with shadowy wings and lustrous countenance, and note the glory that streamed downward upon the Virgin's head while the message from the Throne of God fell upon her ears--any one can
I saw the little recess from which the angel stepped, but could not fill its void.
The angels that I know are creatures of unstable fancy--they will not fit in niches of substantial stone.
Imagination labors best in distant fields.
I doubt if any man can stand in the Grotto of the Annunciation and people with the phantom images of his mind its too tangible walls of stone.
They showed us a broken granite pillar, depending from the roof, which they said was hacked in two by the Moslem conquerors of Nazareth, in the vain hope of pulling down the sanctuary.
But the pillar remained miraculously suspended in the air, and, unsupported itself, supported then and still supports the roof.
By dividing this statement up among eight, it was found not difficult to believe it.
These gifted Latin monks never do any thing by halves.
If they were to show you the Brazen Serpent that was elevated in the wilderness, you could depend upon it that they had on hand the pole it was elevated on also, and even the hole it stood in.
They have got the "Grotto" of the Annunciation here; and just as convenient to it as one's throat is to his mouth, they have also the Virgin's Kitchen, and even her sitting-room, where she and Joseph watched the infant Saviour play with Hebrew toys
All under one roof, and all clean, spacious, comfortable "grottoes".
It seems curious that personages intimately connected with the Holy Family always lived in grottoes--in Nazareth, in Bethlehem, in imperial Ephesus--and yet nobody else in their day and generation thought of doing any thing of the kind.
If they ever did, their grottoes are all gone, and I suppose we ought to wonder at the peculiar marvel of the preservation of these I speak of.
When the Virgin fled from Herod's wrath, she hid in a grotto in Bethlehem, and the same is there to this day.
The slaughter of the innocents in Bethlehem was done in a grotto; the Saviour was born in a grotto--both are shown to pilgrims yet.
It is exceedingly strange that these tremendous events all happened in grottoes--and exceedingly fortunate, likewise, because the strongest houses must crumble to ruin in time, but a grotto in the living rock will last forever.
It is an imposture--this grotto stuff--but it is one that all men ought to thank the Catholics for.
Wherever they ferret out a lost locality made holy by some Scriptural event, they straightway build a massive--almost imperishable--church there, and preserve the memory of that locality for the gratification of future generations.
If it had been left to Protestants to do this most worthy work, we would not even know where Jerusalem is to-day, and the man who could go and put his finger on Nazareth would be too wise for this world.
The world owes the Catholics its good will even for the happy rascality of hewing out these bogus grottoes in the rock; for it is infinitely more satisfactory to look at a grotto, where people have faithfully believed for centuries that the Virgin once
There is too large a scope of country.
The imagination can not work.
There is no one particular spot to chain your eye, rivet your interest, and make you think.
The memory of the Pilgrims can not perish while Plymouth Rock remains to us.
The old monks are wise.
They know how to drive a stake through a pleasant tradition that will hold it to its place forever.
We visited the places where Jesus worked for fifteen years as a carpenter, and where he attempted to teach in the synagogue and was driven out by a mob.
Catholic chapels stand upon these sites and protect the little fragments of the ancient walls which remain.
Our pilgrims broke off specimens.
We visited, also, a new chapel, in the midst of the town, which is built around a boulder some twelve feet long by four feet thick; the priests discovered, a few years ago, that the disciples had sat upon this rock to rest, once, when they had walked up
They hastened to preserve the relic.
Relics are very good property.
Travelers are expected to pay for seeing them, and they do it cheerfully.
We like the idea.
One's conscience can never be the worse for the knowledge that he has paid his way like a man.
Our pilgrims would have liked very well to get out their lampblack and stencil-plates and paint their names on that rock, together with the names of the villages they hail from in America, but the priests permit nothing of that kind.
To speak the strict truth, however, our party seldom offend in that way, though we have men in the ship who never lose an opportunity to do it.
Our pilgrims' chief sin is their lust for "specimens".
I suppose that by this time they know the dimensions of that rock to an inch, and its weight to a ton; and I do not hesitate to charge that they will go back there to-night and try to carry it off.
This "Fountain of the Virgin" is the one which tradition says Mary used to get water from, twenty times a day, when she was a girl, and bear it away in a jar upon her head.
The water streams through faucets in the face of a wall of ancient masonry which stands removed from the houses of the village.
The young girls of Nazareth still collect about it by the dozen and keep up a riotous laughter and sky-larking.
The Nazarene girls are homely.
Some of them have large, lustrous eyes, but none of them have pretty faces.
These girls wear a single garment, usually, and it is loose, shapeless, of undecided color; it is generally out of repair, too.
They wear, from crown to jaw, curious strings of old coins, after the manner of the belles of Tiberias, and brass jewelry upon their wrists and in their ears.
They wear no shoes and stockings.
They are the most human girls we have found in the country yet, and the best natured.
But there is no question that these picturesque maidens sadly lack comeliness.
A pilgrim--the "Enthusiast"--said: "See that tall, graceful girl!
look at the Madonna-like beauty of her countenance"!
Another pilgrim came along presently and said: "Observe that tall, graceful girl; what queenly Madonna-like gracefulness of beauty is in her countenance".
I said: "She is not tall, she is short; she is not beautiful, she is homely; she is graceful enough, I grant, but she is rather boisterous".
The third and last pilgrim moved by, before long, and he said: "Ah, what a tall, graceful girl!
what Madonna-like gracefulness of queenly beauty"!
The verdicts were all in.
It was time, now, to look up the authorities for all these opinions.
I found this paragraph, which follows.
Written by whom?
Wm.
C. Grimes: "After we were in the saddle, we rode down to the spring to have a last look at the women of Nazareth, who were, as a class, much the prettiest that we had seen in the East.
As we approached the crowd a tall girl of nineteen advanced toward Miriam and offered her a cup of water.
Her movement was graceful and queenly.
We exclaimed on the spot at the Madonna-like beauty of her countenance.
Whitely was suddenly thirsty, and begged for water, and drank it slowly, with his eyes over the top of the cup, fixed on her large black eyes, which gazed on him quite as curiously as he on her.
Then Moreright wanted water.
She gave it to him and he managed to spill it so as to ask for another cup, and by the time she came to me she saw through the operation; her eyes were full of fun as she looked at me.
I laughed outright, and she joined me in as gay a shout as ever country maiden in old Orange county.
I wished for a picture of her.
A Madonna, whose face was a portrait of that beautiful Nazareth girl, would be a 'thing of beauty' and 'a joy forever.
'" That is the kind of gruel which has been served out from Palestine for ages.
Commend me to Fennimore Cooper to find beauty in the Indians, and to Grimes to find it in the Arabs.
Arab men are often fine looking, but Arab women are not.
We can all believe that the Virgin Mary was beautiful; it is not natural to think otherwise; but does it follow that it is our duty to find beauty in these present women of Nazareth?
I love to quote from Grimes, because he is so dramatic.
And because he is so romantic.
And because he seems to care but little whether he tells the truth or not, so he scares the reader or excites his envy or his admiration.
He went through this peaceful land with one hand forever on his revolver, and the other on his pocket-handkerchief.
Always, when he was not on the point of crying over a holy place, he was on the point of killing an Arab.
More surprising things happened to him in Palestine than ever happened to any traveler here or elsewhere since Munchausen died.
At Beit Jin, where nobody had interfered with him, he crept out of his tent at dead of night and shot at what he took to be an Arab lying on a rock, some distance away, planning evil.
The ball killed a wolf.
Just before he fired, he makes a dramatic picture of himself--as usual, to scare the reader: "Was it imagination, or did I see a moving object on the surface of the rock?
If it were a man, why did he not now drop me?
He had a beautiful shot as I stood out in my black boornoose against the white tent.
I had the sensation of an entering bullet in my throat, breast, brain".
Reckless creature!
Riding toward Genessaret, they saw two Bedouins, and "we looked to our pistols and loosened them quietly in our shawls," etc.
Always cool.
In Samaria, he charged up a hill, in the face of a volley of stones; he fired into the crowd of men who threw them.
He says: "I never lost an opportunity of impressing the Arabs with the perfection of American and English weapons, and the danger of attacking any one of the armed Franks.
I think the lesson of that ball not lost".
At Beit Jin he gave his whole band of Arab muleteers a piece of his mind, and then-- "I contented myself with a solemn assurance that if there occurred another instance of disobedience to orders I would thrash the responsible party as he never dreamed of
He rode down the perpendicular path in the rocks, from the Castle of Banias to the oak grove, at a flying gallop, his horse striding "thirty feet" at every bound.
I stand prepared to bring thirty reliable witnesses to prove that Putnam's famous feat at Horseneck was insignificant compared to this.
Behold him--always theatrical--looking at Jerusalem--this time, by an oversight, with his hand off his pistol for once.
"I stood in the road, my hand on my horse's neck, and with my dim eyes sought to trace the outlines of the holy places which I had long before fixed in my mind, but the fast-flowing tears forbade my succeeding.
There were our Mohammedan servants, a Latin monk, two Armenians and a Jew in our cortege, and all alike gazed with overflowing eyes".
If Latin monks and Arabs cried, I know to a moral certainty that the horses cried also, and so the picture is complete.
But when necessity demanded, he could be firm as adamant.
In the Lebanon Valley an Arab youth--a Christian; he is particular to explain that Mohammedans do not steal--robbed him of a paltry ten dollars' worth of powder and shot.
He convicted him before a sheik and looked on while he was punished by the terrible bastinado.
Hear him: "He (Mousa) was on his back in a twinkling, howling, shouting, screaming, but he was carried out to the piazza before the door, where we could see the operation, and laid face down.
One man sat on his back and one on his legs, the latter holding up his feet, while a third laid on the bare soles a rhinoceros-hide koorbash --["A Koorbash is Arabic for cowhide, the cow being a rhinoceros.
It is the most cruel whip known to fame.
Heavy as lead, and flexible as India-rubber, usually about forty inches long and tapering gradually from an inch in diameter to a point, it administers a blow which leaves its mark for time".
--Scow Life in Egypt, by the same author.
]--that whizzed through the air at every stroke.
Poor Moreright was in agony, and Nama and Nama the Second (mother and sister of Mousa,) were on their faces begging and wailing, now embracing my knees and now Whitely's, while the brother, outside, made the air ring with cries louder than Mousa's.
Even Yusef came and asked me on his knees to relent, and last of all, Betuni--the rascal had lost a feed-bag in their house and had been loudest in his denunciations that morning--besought the Howajji to have mercy on the fellow".
But not he!
The punishment was "suspended," at the fifteenth blow to hear the confession.
Then Grimes and his party rode away, and left the entire Christian family to be fined and as severely punished as the Mohammedan sheik should deem proper.
"As I mounted, Yusef once more begged me to interfere and have mercy on them, but I looked around at the dark faces of the crowd, and I couldn't find one drop of pity in my heart for them".
He closes his picture with a rollicking burst of humor which contrasts finely with the grief of the mother and her children.
One more paragraph: "Then once more I bowed my head.
It is no shame to have wept in Palestine.
I wept, when I saw Jerusalem, I wept when I lay in the starlight at Bethlehem.
I wept on the blessed shores of Galilee.
My hand was no less firm on the rein, my anger did not tremble on the trigger of my pistol when I rode with it in my right hand along the shore of the blue sea" (weeping.
) "My eye was not dimmed by those tears nor my heart in aught weakened.
Let him who would sneer at my emotion close this volume here, for he will find little to his taste in my journeyings through Holy Land".
He never bored but he struck water.
I am aware that this is a pretty voluminous notice of Mr. Grimes' book.
However, it is proper and legitimate to speak of it, for "Nomadic Life in Palestine" is a representative book--the representative of a class of Palestine books--and a criticism upon it will serve for a criticism upon them all.
And since I am treating it in the comprehensive capacity of a representative book, I have taken the liberty of giving to both book and author fictitious names.
Perhaps it is in better taste, any how, to do this.
CHAPTER LI.
Nazareth is wonderfully interesting because the town has an air about it of being precisely as Jesus left it, and one finds himself saying, all the time, "The boy Jesus has stood in this doorway--has played in that street--has touched these stones with his
Whoever shall write the boyhood of Jesus ingeniously will make a book which will possess a vivid interest for young and old alike.
I judge so from the greater interest we found in Nazareth than any of our speculations upon Capernaum and the Sea of Galilee gave rise to.
It was not possible, standing by the Sea of Galilee, to frame more than a vague, far-away idea of the majestic Personage who walked upon the crested waves as if they had been solid earth, and who touched the dead and they rose up and spoke.
I read among my notes, now, with a new interest, some sentences from an edition of 1621 of the Apocryphal New Testament.
[Extract.
] "Christ, kissed by a bride made dumb by sorcerers, cures her.
A leprous girl cured by the water in which the infant Christ was washed, and becomes the servant of Joseph and Mary.
The leprous son of a Prince cured in like manner.
"A young man who had been bewitched and turned into a mule, miraculously cured by the infant Savior being put on his back, and is married to the girl who had been cured of leprosy.
Whereupon the bystanders praise God.
"Chapter 16.
Christ miraculously widens or contracts gates, milk-pails, sieves or boxes, not properly made by Joseph, he not being skillful at his carpenter's trade.
The King of Jerusalem gives Joseph an order for a throne.
Joseph works on it for two years and makes it two spans too short.
The King being angry with him, Jesus comforts him--commands him to pull one side of the throne while he pulls the other, and brings it to its proper dimensions.
"Chapter 19.
Jesus, charged with throwing a boy from the roof of a house, miraculously causes the dead boy to speak and acquit him; fetches water for his mother, breaks the pitcher and miraculously gathers the water in his mantle and brings it home.
"Sent to a schoolmaster, refuses to tell his letters, and the schoolmaster going to whip him, his hand withers".
Further on in this quaint volume of rejected gospels is an epistle of St. Clement to the Corinthians, which was used in the churches and considered genuine fourteen or fifteen hundred years ago.
In it this account of the fabled phoenix occurs: "1.
Let us consider that wonderful type of the resurrection, which is seen in the Eastern countries, that is to say, in Arabia.
"2.
There is a certain bird called a phoenix.
Of this there is never but one at a time, and that lives five hundred years.
And when the time of its dissolution draws near, that it must die, it makes itself a nest of frankincense, and myrrh, and other spices, into which, when its time is fulfilled, it enters and dies.
"3.
But its flesh, putrefying, breeds a certain worm, which, being nourished by the juice of the dead bird, brings forth feathers; and when it is grown to a perfect state, it takes up the nest in which the bones of its parent lie, and carries it from Arabia
And flying in open day in the sight of all men, lays it upon the altar of the sun, and so returns from whence it came.
"5.
The priests then search into the records of the time, and find that it returned precisely at the end of five hundred years".
Business is business, and there is nothing like punctuality, especially in a phoenix.
The few chapters relating to the infancy of the Saviour contain many things which seem frivolous and not worth preserving.
A large part of the remaining portions of the book read like good Scripture, however.
There is one verse that ought not to have been rejected, because it so evidently prophetically refers to the general run of Congresses of the United States: "199.
They carry themselves high, and as prudent men; and though they are fools, yet would seem to be teachers".
I have set these extracts down, as I found them.
Everywhere among the cathedrals of France and Italy, one finds traditions of personages that do not figure in the Bible, and of miracles that are not mentioned in its pages.
But they are all in this Apocryphal New Testament, and though they have been ruled out of our modern Bible, it is claimed that they were accepted gospel twelve or fifteen centuries ago, and ranked as high in credit as any.
One needs to read this book before he visits those venerable cathedrals, with their treasures of tabooed and forgotten tradition.
They imposed another pirate upon us at Nazareth--another invincible Arab guard.
We took our last look at the city, clinging like a whitewashed wasp's nest to the hill-side, and at eight o'clock in the morning departed.
We dismounted and drove the horses down a bridle-path which I think was fully as crooked as a corkscrew, which I know to be as steep as the downward sweep of a rainbow, and which I believe to be the worst piece of road in the geography, except one in the
Often, in this narrow path the horse had to poise himself nicely on a rude stone step and then drop his fore-feet over the edge and down something more than half his own height.
This brought his nose near the ground, while his tail pointed up toward the sky somewhere, and gave him the appearance of preparing to stand on his head.
A horse cannot look dignified in this position.
We accomplished the long descent at last, and trotted across the great Plain of Esdraelon.
Some of us will be shot before we finish this pilgrimage.
The pilgrims read "Nomadic Life" and keep themselves in a constant state of Quixotic heroism.
They have their hands on their pistols all the time, and every now and then, when you least expect it, they snatch them out and take aim at Bedouins who are not visible, and draw their knives and make savage passes at other Bedouins who do not exist.
I am in deadly peril always, for these spasms are sudden and irregular, and of course I cannot tell when to be getting out of the way.
If I am accidentally murdered, some time, during one of these romantic frenzies of the pilgrims, Mr. Grimes must be rigidly held to answer as an accessory before the fact.
If the pilgrims would take deliberate aim and shoot at a man, it would be all right and proper--because that man would not be in any danger; but these random assaults are what I object to.
I do not wish to see any more places like Esdraelon, where the ground is level and people can gallop.
It puts melodramatic nonsense into the pilgrims' heads.
All at once, when one is jogging along stupidly in the sun, and thinking about something ever so far away, here they come, at a stormy gallop, spurring and whooping at those ridgy old sore-backed plugs till their heels fly higher than their heads, and as
Now that I have begun this pilgrimage, I intend to go through with it, though sooth to say, nothing but the most desperate valor has kept me to my purpose up to the present time.
I do not mind Bedouins,--I am not afraid of them; because neither Bedouins nor ordinary Arabs have shown any disposition to harm us, but I do feel afraid of my own comrades.
Arriving at the furthest verge of the Plain, we rode a little way up a hill and found ourselves at Endor, famous for its witch.
Her descendants are there yet.
They were the wildest horde of half-naked savages we have found thus far.
They swarmed out of mud bee-hives; out of hovels of the dry-goods box pattern; out of gaping caves under shelving rocks; out of crevices in the earth.
In five minutes the dead solitude and silence of the place were no more, and a begging, screeching, shouting mob were struggling about the horses' feet and blocking the way.
"Bucksheesh!
bucksheesh!
bucksheesh!
howajji, bucksheesh"!
It was Magdala over again, only here the glare from the infidel eyes was fierce and full of hate.
The population numbers two hundred and fifty, and more than half the citizens live in caves in the rock.
Dirt, degradation and savagery are Endor's specialty.
We say no more about Magdala and Deburieh now.
Endor heads the list.
It is worse than any Indian 'campoodie'.
The hill is barren, rocky, and forbidding.
No sprig of grass is visible, and only one tree.
This is a fig-tree, which maintains a precarious footing among the rocks at the mouth of the dismal cavern once occupied by the veritable Witch of Endor.
In this cavern, tradition says, Saul, the king, sat at midnight, and stared and trembled, while the earth shook, the thunders crashed among the hills, and out of the midst of fire and smoke the spirit of the dead prophet rose up and confronted him.
Saul had crept to this place in the darkness, while his army slept, to learn what fate awaited him in the morrow's battle.
He went away a sad man, to meet disgrace and death.
A spring trickles out of the rock in the gloomy recesses of the cavern, and we were thirsty.
The citizens of Endor objected to our going in there.
They do not mind dirt; they do not mind rags; they do not mind vermin; they do not mind barbarous ignorance and savagery; they do not mind a reasonable degree of starvation, but they do like to be pure and holy before their god, whoever he may be, and
We had no wanton desire to wound even their feelings or trample upon their prejudices, but we were out of water, thus early in the day, and were burning up with thirst.
It was at this time, and under these circumstances, that I framed an aphorism which has already become celebrated.
I said: "Necessity knows no law".
We went in and drank.
We got away from the noisy wretches, finally, dropping them in squads and couples as we filed over the hills--the aged first, the infants next, the young girls further on; the strong men ran beside us a mile, and only left when they had secured the last
In an hour, we reached Nain, where Christ raised the widow's son to life.
Nain is Magdala on a small scale.
It has no population of any consequence.
Within a hundred yards of it is the original graveyard, for aught I know; the tombstones lie flat on the ground, which is Jewish fashion in Syria.
I believe the Moslems do not allow them to have upright tombstones.
A Moslem grave is usually roughly plastered over and whitewashed, and has at one end an upright projection which is shaped into exceedingly rude attempts at ornamentation.
In the cities, there is often no appearance of a grave at all; a tall, slender marble tombstone, elaborately lettred, gilded and painted, marks the burial place, and this is surmounted by a turban, so carved and shaped as to signify the dead man's rank in
They showed a fragment of ancient wall which they said was one side of the gate out of which the widow's dead son was being brought so many centuries ago when Jesus met the procession: "Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold there was a dead
"And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said, Weep not.
"And he came and touched the bier: and they that bare him stood still.
And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, arise.
"And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak.
And he delivered him to his mother.
"And there came a fear on all.
And they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is risen up among us; and That God hath visited his people".
A little mosque stands upon the spot which tradition says was occupied by the widow's dwelling.
Two or three aged Arabs sat about its door.
We entered, and the pilgrims broke specimens from the foundation walls, though they had to touch, and even step, upon the "praying carpets" to do it.
It was almost the same as breaking pieces from the hearts of those old Arabs.
To step rudely upon the sacred praying mats, with booted feet--a thing not done by any Arab--was to inflict pain upon men who had not offended us in any way.
Suppose a party of armed foreigners were to enter a village church in America and break ornaments from the altar railings for curiosities, and climb up and walk upon the Bible and the pulpit cushions?
However, the cases are different.
One is the profanation of a temple of our faith--the other only the profanation of a pagan one.
We descended to the Plain again, and halted a moment at a well--of Abraham's time, no doubt.
It was in a desert place.
It was walled three feet above ground with squared and heavy blocks of stone, after the manner of Bible pictures.
Around it some camels stood, and others knelt.
There was a group of sober little donkeys with naked, dusky children clambering about them, or sitting astride their rumps, or pulling their tails.
Tawny, black-eyed, barefooted maids, arrayed in rags and adorned with brazen armlets and pinchbeck ear-rings, were poising water-jars upon their heads, or drawing water from the well.
A flock of sheep stood by, waiting for the shepherds to fill the hollowed stones with water, so that they might drink--stones which, like those that walled the well, were worn smooth and deeply creased by the chafing chins of a hundred generations of
Picturesque Arabs sat upon the ground, in groups, and solemnly smoked their long-stemmed chibouks.
Other Arabs were filling black hog-skins with water--skins which, well filled, and distended with water till the short legs projected painfully out of the proper line, looked like the corpses of hogs bloated by drowning.
Here was a grand Oriental picture which I had worshiped a thousand times in soft, rich steel engravings!
But in the engraving there was no desolation; no dirt; no rags; no fleas; no ugly features; no sore eyes; no feasting flies; no besotted ignorance in the countenances; no raw places on the donkeys' backs; no disagreeable jabbering in unknown tongues; no
Oriental scenes look best in steel engravings.
I cannot be imposed upon any more by that picture of the Queen of Sheba visiting Solomon.
I shall say to myself, You look fine, Madam but your feet are not clean and you smell like a camel.
Presently a wild Arab in charge of a camel train recognized an old friend in Ferguson, and they ran and fell upon each other's necks and kissed each other's grimy, bearded faces upon both cheeks.
It explained instantly a something which had always seemed to me only a farfetched Oriental figure of speech.
I refer to the circumstance of Christ's rebuking a Pharisee, or some such character, and reminding him that from him he had received no "kiss of welcome".
It did not seem reasonable to me that men should kiss each other, but I am aware, now, that they did.
There was reason in it, too.
The custom was natural and proper; because people must kiss, and a man would not be likely to kiss one of the women of this country of his own free will and accord.
One must travel, to learn.
Every day, now, old Scriptural phrases that never possessed any significance for me before, take to themselves a meaning.
We journeyed around the base of the mountain--"Little Hermon,"--past the old Crusaders' castle of El Fuleh, and arrived at Shunem.
This was another Magdala, to a fraction, frescoes and all.
Here, tradition says, the prophet Samuel was born, and here the Shunamite woman built a little house upon the city wall for the accommodation of the prophet Elisha.
Elisha asked her what she expected in return.
It was a perfectly natural question, for these people are and were in the habit of proffering favors and services and then expecting and begging for pay.
Elisha knew them well.
He could not comprehend that any body should build for him that humble little chamber for the mere sake of old friendship, and with no selfish motive whatever.
It used to seem a very impolite, not to say a rude, question, for Elisha to ask the woman, but it does not seem so to me now.
The woman said she expected nothing.
Then for her goodness and her unselfishness, he rejoiced her heart with the news that she should bear a son.
It was a high reward--but she would not have thanked him for a daughter--daughters have always been unpopular here.
The son was born, grew, waxed strong, died.
Elisha restored him to life in Shunem.
We found here a grove of lemon trees--cool, shady, hung with fruit.
One is apt to overestimate beauty when it is rare, but to me this grove seemed very beautiful.
It was beautiful.
I do not overestimate it.
I must always remember Shunem gratefully, as a place which gave to us this leafy shelter after our long, hot ride.
We lunched, rested, chatted, smoked our pipes an hour, and then mounted and moved on.
As we trotted across the Plain of Jezreel, we met half a dozen Digger Indians (Bedouins) with very long spears in their hands, cavorting around on old crowbait horses, and spearing imaginary enemies; whooping, and fluttering their rags in the wind, and
At last, here were the "wild, free sons of the desert, speeding over the plain like the wind, on their beautiful Arabian mares" we had read so much about and longed so much to see!
Here were the "picturesque costumes"!
This was the "gallant spectacle"!
Tatterdemalion vagrants--cheap braggadocio--"Arabian mares" spined and necked like the ichthyosaurus in the museum, and humped and cornered like a dromedary!
To glance at the genuine son of the desert is to take the romance out of him forever--to behold his steed is to long in charity to strip his harness off and let him fall to pieces.
Presently we came to a ruinous old town on a hill, the same being the ancient Jezreel.
Ahab, King of Samaria, (this was a very vast kingdom, for those days, and was very nearly half as large as Rhode Island) dwelt in the city of Jezreel, which was his capital.
Near him lived a man by the name of Naboth, who had a vineyard.
The King asked him for it, and when he would not give it, offered to buy it.
But Naboth refused to sell it.
In those days it was considered a sort of crime to part with one's inheritance at any price--and even if a man did part with it, it reverted to himself or his heirs again at the next jubilee year.
So this spoiled child of a King went and lay down on the bed with his face to the wall, and grieved sorely.
The Queen, a notorious character in those days, and whose name is a by-word and a reproach even in these, came in and asked him wherefore he sorrowed, and he told her.
Jezebel said she could secure the vineyard; and she went forth and forged letters to the nobles and wise men, in the King's name, and ordered them to proclaim a fast and set Naboth on high before the people, and suborn two witnesses to swear that he had
They did it, and the people stoned the accused by the city wall, and he died.
Then Jezebel came and told the King, and said, Behold, Naboth is no more--rise up and seize the vineyard.
So Ahab seized the vineyard, and went into it to possess it.
But the Prophet Elijah came to him there and read his fate to him, and the fate of Jezebel; and said that in the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, dogs should also lick his blood--and he said, likewise, the dogs should eat Jezebel by the wall of
In the course of time, the King was killed in battle, and when his chariot wheels were washed in the pool of Samaria, the dogs licked the blood.
In after years, Jehu, who was King of Israel, marched down against Jezreel, by order of one of the Prophets, and administered one of those convincing rebukes so common among the people of those days: he killed many kings and their subjects, and as he came
A servant did it, and Jehu's horse trampled her under foot.
Then Jehu went in and sat down to dinner; and presently he said, Go and bury this cursed woman, for she is a King's daughter.
The spirit of charity came upon him too late, however, for the prophecy had already been fulfilled--the dogs had eaten her, and they "found no more of her than the skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands".
Ahab, the late King, had left a helpless family behind him, and Jehu killed seventy of the orphan sons.
Then he killed all the relatives, and teachers, and servants and friends of the family, and rested from his labors, until he was come near to Samaria, where he met forty-two persons and asked them who they were; they said they were brothers of the King of
He killed them.
When he got to Samaria, he said he would show his zeal for the Lord; so he gathered all the priests and people together that worshiped Baal, pretending that he was going to adopt that worship and offer up a great sacrifice; and when they were all shut up
Then Jehu, the good missionary, rested from his labors once more.
We went back to the valley, and rode to the Fountain of Ain Jelud.
They call it the Fountain of Jezreel, usually.
It is a pond about one hundred feet square and four feet deep, with a stream of water trickling into it from under an overhanging ledge of rocks.
It is in the midst of a great solitude.
Here Gideon pitched his camp in the old times; behind Shunem lay the "Midianites, the Amalekites, and the Children of the East," who were "as grasshoppers for multitude; both they and their camels were without number, as the sand by the sea-side for
Which means that there were one hundred and thirty-five thousand men, and that they had transportation service accordingly.
Gideon, with only three hundred men, surprised them in the night, and stood by and looked on while they butchered each other until a hundred and twenty thousand lay dead on the field.
We camped at Jenin before night, and got up and started again at one o'clock in the morning.
Somewhere towards daylight we passed the locality where the best authenticated tradition locates the pit into which Joseph's brethren threw him, and about noon, after passing over a succession of mountain tops, clad with groves of fig and olive trees, with
We climbed a high hill to visit the city of Samaria, where the woman may have hailed from who conversed with Christ at Jacob's Well, and from whence, no doubt, came also the celebrated Good Samaritan.
Herod the Great is said to have made a magnificent city of this place, and a great number of coarse limestone columns, twenty feet high and two feet through, that are almost guiltless of architectural grace of shape and ornament, are pointed out by many
They would not have been considered handsome in ancient Greece, however.
The inhabitants of this camp are particularly vicious, and stoned two parties of our pilgrims a day or two ago who brought about the difficulty by showing their revolvers when they did not intend to use them--a thing which is deemed bad judgment in the Far
In the new Territories, when a man puts his hand on a weapon, he knows that he must use it; he must use it instantly or expect to be shot down where he stands.
Those pilgrims had been reading Grimes.
There was nothing for us to do in Samaria but buy handfuls of old Roman coins at a franc a dozen, and look at a dilapidated church of the Crusaders and a vault in it which once contained the body of John the Baptist.
This relic was long ago carried away to Genoa.
Samaria stood a disastrous siege, once, in the days of Elisha, at the hands of the King of Syria.
Provisions reached such a figure that "an ass' head was sold for eighty pieces of silver and the fourth part of a cab of dove's dung for five pieces of silver".
An incident recorded of that heavy time will give one a very good idea of the distress that prevailed within these crumbling walls.
As the King was walking upon the battlements one day, "a woman cried out, saying, Help, my lord, O King!
And the King said, What aileth thee?
and she answered, This woman said unto me, Give thy son, that we may eat him to-day, and we will eat my son to-morrow.
So we boiled my son, and did eat him; and I said unto her on the next day, Give thy son that we may eat him; and she hath hid her son".
The prophet Elisha declared that within four and twenty hours the prices of food should go down to nothing, almost, and it was so.
The Syrian army broke camp and fled, for some cause or other, the famine was relieved from without, and many a shoddy speculator in dove's dung and ass's meat was ruined.
We were glad to leave this hot and dusty old village and hurry on.
At two o'clock we stopped to lunch and rest at ancient Shechem, between the historic Mounts of Gerizim and Ebal, where in the old times the books of the law, the curses and the blessings, were read from the heights to the Jewish multitudes below.
CHAPTER LII.
The narrow canon in which Nablous, or Shechem, is situated, is under high cultivation, and the soil is exceedingly black and fertile.
It is well watered, and its affluent vegetation gains effect by contrast with the barren hills that tower on either side.
One of these hills is the ancient Mount of Blessings and the other the Mount of Curses and wise men who seek for fulfillments of prophecy think they find here a wonder of this kind--to wit, that the Mount of Blessings is strangely fertile and its mate as
We could not see that there was really much difference between them in this respect, however.
Shechem is distinguished as one of the residences of the patriarch Jacob, and as the seat of those tribes that cut themselves loose from their brethren of Israel and propagated doctrines not in conformity with those of the original Jewish creed.
For thousands of years this clan have dwelt in Shechem under strict tabu, and having little commerce or fellowship with their fellow men of any religion or nationality.
For generations they have not numbered more than one or two hundred, but they still adhere to their ancient faith and maintain their ancient rites and ceremonies.
Talk of family and old descent!
Princes and nobles pride themselves upon lineages they can trace back some hundreds of years.
What is this trifle to this handful of old first families of Shechem who can name their fathers straight back without a flaw for thousands --straight back to a period so remote that men reared in a country where the days of two hundred years ago are called
Here is respectability for you--here is "family"--here is high descent worth talking about.
This sad, proud remnant of a once mighty community still hold themselves aloof from all the world; they still live as their fathers lived, labor as their fathers labored, think as they did, feel as they did, worship in the same place, in sight of the same
I found myself gazing at any straggling scion of this strange race with a riveted fascination, just as one would stare at a living mastodon, or a megatherium that had moved in the grey dawn of creation and seen the wonders of that mysterious world that was
Carefully preserved among the sacred archives of this curious community is a MSS.
copy of the ancient Jewish law, which is said to be the oldest document on earth.
It is written on vellum, and is some four or five thousand years old.
Nothing but bucksheesh can purchase a sight.
Its fame is somewhat dimmed in these latter days, because of the doubts so many authors of Palestine travels have felt themselves privileged to cast upon it.
Speaking of this MSS.
reminds me that I procured from the high-priest of this ancient Samaritan community, at great expense, a secret document of still higher antiquity and far more extraordinary interest, which I propose to publish as soon as I have finished translating it.
Joshua gave his dying injunction to the children of Israel at Shechem, and buried a valuable treasure secretly under an oak tree there about the same time.
The superstitious Samaritans have always been afraid to hunt for it.
They believe it is guarded by fierce spirits invisible to men.
About a mile and a half from Shechem we halted at the base of Mount Ebal before a little square area, inclosed by a high stone wall, neatly whitewashed.
Across one end of this inclosure is a tomb built after the manner of the Moslems.
It is the tomb of Joseph.
No truth is better authenticated than this.
When Joseph was dying he prophesied that exodus of the Israelites from Egypt which occurred four hundred years afterwards.
At the same time he exacted of his people an oath that when they journeyed to the land of Canaan they would bear his bones with them and bury them in the ancient inheritance of his fathers.
The oath was kept.
"And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for a hundred pieces of silver".
Few tombs on earth command the veneration of so many races and men of divers creeds as this of Joseph.
"Samaritan and Jew, Moslem and Christian alike, revere it, and honor it with their visits.
The tomb of Joseph, the dutiful son, the affectionate, forgiving brother, the virtuous man, the wise Prince and ruler.
Egypt felt his influence--the world knows his history".
In this same "parcel of ground" which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor for a hundred pieces of silver, is Jacob's celebrated well.
It is cut in the solid rock, and is nine feet square and ninety feet deep.
The name of this unpretending hole in the ground, which one might pass by and take no notice of, is as familiar as household words to even the children and the peasants of many a far-off country.
It is more famous than the Parthenon; it is older than the Pyramids.
It was by this well that Jesus sat and talked with a woman of that strange, antiquated Samaritan community I have been speaking of, and told her of the mysterious water of life.
As descendants of old English nobles still cherish in the traditions of their houses how that this king or that king tarried a day with some favored ancestor three hundred years ago, no doubt the descendants of the woman of Samaria, living there in
It is not likely that they undervalue a distinction such as this.
Samaritan nature is human nature, and human nature remembers contact with the illustrious, always.
For an offense done to the family honor, the sons of Jacob exterminated all Shechem once.
We left Jacob's Well and traveled till eight in the evening, but rather slowly, for we had been in the saddle nineteen hours, and the horses were cruelly tired.
We got so far ahead of the tents that we had to camp in an Arab village, and sleep on the ground.
We could have slept in the largest of the houses; but there were some little drawbacks: it was populous with vermin, it had a dirt floor, it was in no respect cleanly, and there was a family of goats in the only bedroom, and two donkeys in the parlor.
Outside there were no inconveniences, except that the dusky, ragged, earnest-eyed villagers of both sexes and all ages grouped themselves on their haunches all around us, and discussed us and criticised us with noisy tongues till midnight.
We did not mind the noise, being tired, but, doubtless, the reader is aware that it is almost an impossible thing to go to sleep when you know that people are looking at you.
We went to bed at ten, and got up again at two and started once more.
Thus are people persecuted by dragomen, whose sole ambition in life is to get ahead of each other.
About daylight we passed Shiloh, where the Ark of the Covenant rested three hundred years, and at whose gates good old Eli fell down and "brake his neck" when the messenger, riding hard from the battle, told him of the defeat of his people, the death of
It is little wonder that under circumstances like these he fell down and brake his neck.
But Shiloh had no charms for us.
We were so cold that there was no comfort but in motion, and so drowsy we could hardly sit upon the horses.
After a while we came to a shapeless mass of ruins, which still bears the name of Bethel.
It was here that Jacob lay down and had that superb vision of angels flitting up and down a ladder that reached from the clouds to earth, and caught glimpses of their blessed home through the open gates of Heaven.
The pilgrims took what was left of the hallowed ruin, and we pressed on toward the goal of our crusade, renowned Jerusalem.
The further we went the hotter the sun got, and the more rocky and bare, repulsive and dreary the landscape became.
There could not have been more fragments of stone strewn broadcast over this part of the world, if every ten square feet of the land had been occupied by a separate and distinct stonecutter's establishment for an age.
There was hardly a tree or a shrub any where.
Even the olive and the cactus, those fast friends of a worthless soil, had almost deserted the country.
No landscape exists that is more tiresome to the eye than that which bounds the approaches to Jerusalem.
The only difference between the roads and the surrounding country, perhaps, is that there are rather more rocks in the roads than in the surrounding country.
We passed Ramah, and Beroth, and on the right saw the tomb of the prophet Samuel, perched high upon a commanding eminence.
Still no Jerusalem came in sight.
We hurried on impatiently.
We halted a moment at the ancient Fountain of Beira, but its stones, worn deeply by the chins of thirsty animals that are dead and gone centuries ago, had no interest for us--we longed to see Jerusalem.
We spurred up hill after hill, and usually began to stretch our necks minutes before we got to the top--but disappointment always followed:--more stupid hills beyond--more unsightly landscape--no Holy City.
At last, away in the middle of the day, ancient bite of wall and crumbling arches began to line the way--we toiled up one more hill, and every pilgrim and every sinner swung his hat on high!
Jerusalem!
Perched on its eternal hills, white and domed and solid, massed together and hooped with high gray walls, the venerable city gleamed in the sun.
So small!
Why, it was no larger than an American village of four thousand inhabitants, and no larger than an ordinary Syrian city of thirty thousand.
Jerusalem numbers only fourteen thousand people.
We dismounted and looked, without speaking a dozen sentences, across the wide intervening valley for an hour or more; and noted those prominent features of the city that pictures make familiar to all men from their school days till their death.
We could recognize the Tower of Hippicus, the Mosque of Omar, the Damascus Gate, the Mount of Olives, the Valley of Jehoshaphat, the Tower of David, and the Garden of Gethsemane--and dating from these landmarks could tell very nearly the localities of many
I record it here as a notable but not discreditable fact that not even our pilgrims wept.
I think there was no individual in the party whose brain was not teeming with thoughts and images and memories invoked by the grand history of the venerable city that lay before us, but still among them all was no "voice of them that wept".
There was no call for tears.
Tears would have been out of place.
The thoughts Jerusalem suggests are full of poetry, sublimity, and more than all, dignity.
Such thoughts do not find their appropriate expression in the emotions of the nursery.
Just after noon we entered these narrow, crooked streets, by the ancient and the famed Damascus Gate, and now for several hours I have been trying to comprehend that I am actually in the illustrious old city where Solomon dwelt, where Abraham held converse
CHAPTER LIII.
A fast walker could go outside the walls of Jerusalem and walk entirely around the city in an hour.
I do not know how else to make one understand how small it is.
The appearance of the city is peculiar.
It is as knobby with countless little domes as a prison door is with bolt-heads.
Every house has from one to half a dozen of these white plastered domes of stone, broad and low, sitting in the centre of, or in a cluster upon, the flat roof.
Wherefore, when one looks down from an eminence, upon the compact mass of houses (so closely crowded together, in fact, that there is no appearance of streets at all, and so the city looks solid,) he sees the knobbiest town in the world, except
It looks as if it might be roofed, from centre to circumference, with inverted saucers.
The monotony of the view is interrupted only by the great Mosque of Omar, the Tower of Hippicus, and one or two other buildings that rise into commanding prominence.
The houses are generally two stories high, built strongly of masonry, whitewashed or plastered outside, and have a cage of wooden lattice-work projecting in front of every window.
To reproduce a Jerusalem street, it would only be necessary to up-end a chicken-coop and hang it before each window in an alley of American houses.
The streets are roughly and badly paved with stone, and are tolerably crooked--enough so to make each street appear to close together constantly and come to an end about a hundred yards ahead of a pilgrim as long as he chooses to walk in it.
Projecting from the top of the lower story of many of the houses is a very narrow porch-roof or shed, without supports from below; and I have several times seen cats jump across the street from one shed to the other when they were out calling.
The cats could have jumped double the distance without extraordinary exertion.
I mention these things to give an idea of how narrow the streets are.
Since a cat can jump across them without the least inconvenience, it is hardly necessary to state that such streets are too narrow for carriages.
These vehicles cannot navigate the Holy City.
The population of Jerusalem is composed of Moslems, Jews, Greeks, Latins, Armenians, Syrians, Copts, Abyssinians, Greek Catholics, and a handful of Protestants.
One hundred of the latter sect are all that dwell now in this birthplace of Christianity.
The nice shades of nationality comprised in the above list, and the languages spoken by them, are altogether too numerous to mention.
It seems to me that all the races and colors and tongues of the earth must be represented among the fourteen thousand souls that dwell in Jerusalem.
Rags, wretchedness, poverty and dirt, those signs and symbols that indicate the presence of Moslem rule more surely than the crescent-flag itself, abound.
Lepers, cripples, the blind, and the idiotic, assail you on every hand, and they know but one word of but one language apparently--the eternal "bucksheesh".
To see the numbers of maimed, malformed and diseased humanity that throng the holy places and obstruct the gates, one might suppose that the ancient days had come again, and that the angel of the Lord was expected to descend at any moment to stir the
Jerusalem is mournful, and dreary, and lifeless.
I would not desire to live here.
One naturally goes first to the Holy Sepulchre.
It is right in the city, near the western gate; it and the place of the Crucifixion, and, in fact, every other place intimately connected with that tremendous event, are ingeniously massed together and covered by one roof--the dome of the Church of the
Entering the building, through the midst of the usual assemblage of beggars, one sees on his left a few Turkish guards--for Christians of different sects will not only quarrel, but fight, also, in this sacred place, if allowed to do it.
Before you is a marble slab, which covers the Stone of Unction, whereon the Saviour's body was laid to prepare it for burial.
It was found necessary to conceal the real stone in this way in order to save it from destruction.
Pilgrims were too much given to chipping off pieces of it to carry home.
Near by is a circular railing which marks the spot where the Virgin stood when the Lord's body was anointed.
Entering the great Rotunda, we stand before the most sacred locality in Christendom--the grave of Jesus.
It is in the centre of the church, and immediately under the great dome.
It is inclosed in a sort of little temple of yellow and white stone, of fanciful design.
Within the little temple is a portion of the very stone which was rolled away from the door of the Sepulchre, and on which the angel was sitting when Mary came thither "at early dawn".
Stooping low, we enter the vault--the Sepulchre itself.
It is only about six feet by seven, and the stone couch on which the dead Saviour lay extends from end to end of the apartment and occupies half its width.
It is covered with a marble slab which has been much worn by the lips of pilgrims.
This slab serves as an altar, now.
Over it hang some fifty gold and silver lamps, which are kept always burning, and the place is otherwise scandalized by trumpery, gewgaws, and tawdry ornamentation.
All sects of Christians (except Protestants,) have chapels under the roof of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, and each must keep to itself and not venture upon another's ground.
It has been proven conclusively that they can not worship together around the grave of the Saviour of the World in peace.
The chapel of the Syrians is not handsome; that of the Copts is the humblest of them all.
It is nothing but a dismal cavern, roughly hewn in the living rock of the Hill of Calvary.
In one side of it two ancient tombs are hewn, which are claimed to be those in which Nicodemus and Joseph of Aramathea were buried.
As we moved among the great piers and pillars of another part of the church, we came upon a party of black-robed, animal-looking Italian monks, with candles in their hands, who were chanting something in Latin, and going through some kind of religious
It was there that the risen Saviour appeared to Mary Magdalen in the likeness of a gardener.
Near by was a similar stone, shaped like a star--here the Magdalen herself stood, at the same time.
Monks were performing in this place also.
They perform everywhere--all over the vast building, and at all hours.
Their candles are always flitting about in the gloom, and making the dim old church more dismal than there is any necessity that it should be, even though it is a tomb.
We were shown the place where our Lord appeared to His mother after the Resurrection.
Here, also, a marble slab marks the place where St. Helena, the mother of the Emperor Constantine, found the crosses about three hundred years after the Crucifixion.
According to the legend, this great discovery elicited extravagant demonstrations of joy.
But they were of short duration.
The question intruded itself: "Which bore the blessed Saviour, and which the thieves"?
To be in doubt, in so mighty a matter as this--to be uncertain which one to adore--was a grievous misfortune.
It turned the public joy to sorrow.
But when lived there a holy priest who could not set so simple a trouble as this at rest?
One of these soon hit upon a plan that would be a certain test.
A noble lady lay very ill in Jerusalem.
The wise priests ordered that the three crosses be taken to her bedside one at a time.
It was done.
When her eyes fell upon the first one, she uttered a scream that was heard beyond the Damascus Gate, and even upon the Mount of Olives, it was said, and then fell back in a deadly swoon.
They recovered her and brought the second cross.
Instantly she went into fearful convulsions, and it was with the greatest difficulty that six strong men could hold her.
They were afraid, now, to bring in the third cross.
They began to fear that possibly they had fallen upon the wrong crosses, and that the true cross was not with this number at all.
However, as the woman seemed likely to die with the convulsions that were tearing her, they concluded that the third could do no more than put her out of her misery with a happy dispatch.
So they brought it, and behold, a miracle!
The woman sprang from her bed, smiling and joyful, and perfectly restored to health.
When we listen to evidence like this, we cannot but believe.
We would be ashamed to doubt, and properly, too.
Even the very part of Jerusalem where this all occurred is there yet.
So there is really no room for doubt.
The priests tried to show us, through a small screen, a fragment of the genuine Pillar of Flagellation, to which Christ was bound when they scourged him.
But we could not see it, because it was dark inside the screen.
However, a baton is kept here, which the pilgrim thrusts through a hole in the screen, and then he no longer doubts that the true Pillar of Flagellation is in there.
He can not have any excuse to doubt it, for he can feel it with the stick.
He can feel it as distinctly as he could feel any thing.
Not far from here was a niche where they used to preserve a piece of the True Cross, but it is gone, now.
This piece of the cross was discovered in the sixteenth century.
The Latin priests say it was stolen away, long ago, by priests of another sect.
That seems like a hard statement to make, but we know very well that it was stolen, because we have seen it ourselves in several of the cathedrals of Italy and France.
But the relic that touched us most was the plain old sword of that stout Crusader, Godfrey of Bulloigne--King Godfrey of Jerusalem.
No blade in Christendom wields such enchantment as this--no blade of all that rust in the ancestral halls of Europe is able to invoke such visions of romance in the brain of him who looks upon it--none that can prate of such chivalric deeds or tell such
It stirs within a man every memory of the Holy Wars that has been sleeping in his brain for years, and peoples his thoughts with mail-clad images, with marching armies, with battles and with sieges.
It speaks to him of Baldwin, and Tancred, the princely Saladin, and great Richard of the Lion Heart.
It was with just such blades as these that these splendid heroes of romance used to segregate a man, so to speak, and leave the half of him to fall one way and the other half the other.
This very sword has cloven hundreds of Saracen Knights from crown to chin in those old times when Godfrey wielded it.
It was enchanted, then, by a genius that was under the command of King Solomon.
When danger approached its master's tent it always struck the shield and clanged out a fierce alarm upon the startled ear of night.
In times of doubt, or in fog or darkness, if it were drawn from its sheath it would point instantly toward the foe, and thus reveal the way--and it would also attempt to start after them of its own accord.
A Christian could not be so disguised that it would not know him and refuse to hurt him--nor a Moslem so disguised that it would not leap from its scabbard and take his life.
These statements are all well authenticated in many legends that are among the most trustworthy legends the good old Catholic monks preserve.
I can never forget old Godfrey's sword, now.
I tried it on a Moslem, and clove him in twain like a doughnut.
The spirit of Grimes was upon me, and if I had had a graveyard I would have destroyed all the infidels in Jerusalem.
I wiped the blood off the old sword and handed it back to the priest--I did not want the fresh gore to obliterate those sacred spots that crimsoned its brightness one day six hundred years ago and thus gave Godfrey warning that before the sun went down his
Still moving through the gloom of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre we came to a small chapel, hewn out of the rock--a place which has been known as "The Prison of Our Lord" for many centuries.
Tradition says that here the Saviour was confined just previously to the crucifixion.
Under an altar by the door was a pair of stone stocks for human legs.
These things are called the "Bonds of Christ," and the use they were once put to has given them the name they now bear.
The Greek Chapel is the most roomy, the richest and the showiest chapel in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
Its altar, like that of all the Greek churches, is a lofty screen that extends clear across the chapel, and is gorgeous with gilding and pictures.
The numerous lamps that hang before it are of gold and silver, and cost great sums.
But the feature of the place is a short column that rises from the middle of the marble pavement of the chapel, and marks the exact centre of the earth.
The most reliable traditions tell us that this was known to be the earth's centre, ages ago, and that when Christ was upon earth he set all doubts upon the subject at rest forever, by stating with his own lips that the tradition was correct.
Remember, He said that that particular column stood upon the centre of the world.
If the centre of the world changes, the column changes its position accordingly.
This column has moved three different times of its own accord.
This is because, in great convulsions of nature, at three different times, masses of the earth --whole ranges of mountains, probably--have flown off into space, thus lessening the diameter of the earth, and changing the exact locality of its centre by a
This is a very curious and interesting circumstance, and is a withering rebuke to those philosophers who would make us believe that it is not possible for any portion of the earth to fly off into space.
To satisfy himself that this spot was really the centre of the earth, a sceptic once paid well for the privilege of ascending to the dome of the church to see if the sun gave him a shadow at noon.
He came down perfectly convinced.
The day was very cloudy and the sun threw no shadows at all; but the man was satisfied that if the sun had come out and made shadows it could not have made any for him.
Proofs like these are not to be set aside by the idle tongues of cavilers.
To such as are not bigoted, and are willing to be convinced, they carry a conviction that nothing can ever shake.
If even greater proofs than those I have mentioned are wanted, to satisfy the headstrong and the foolish that this is the genuine centre of the earth, they are here.
The greatest of them lies in the fact that from under this very column was taken the dust from which Adam was made.
This can surely be regarded in the light of a settler.
It is not likely that the original first man would have been made from an inferior quality of earth when it was entirely convenient to get first quality from the world's centre.
This will strike any reflecting mind forcibly.
That Adam was formed of dirt procured in this very spot is amply proven by the fact that in six thousand years no man has ever been able to prove that the dirt was not procured here whereof he was made.
It is a singular circumstance that right under the roof of this same great church, and not far away from that illustrious column, Adam himself, the father of the human race, lies buried.
There is no question that he is actually buried in the grave which is pointed out as his --there can be none--because it has never yet been proven that that grave is not the grave in which he is buried.
The tomb of Adam!
How touching it was, here in a land of strangers, far away from home, and friends, and all who cared for me, thus to discover the grave of a blood relation.
True, a distant one, but still a relation.
The unerring instinct of nature thrilled its recognition.
The fountain of my filial affection was stirred to its profoundest depths, and I gave way to tumultuous emotion.
I leaned upon a pillar and burst into tears.
I deem it no shame to have wept over the grave of my poor dead relative.
Let him who would sneer at my emotion close this volume here, for he will find little to his taste in my journeyings through Holy Land.
Noble old man--he did not live to see me--he did not live to see his child.
And I--I--alas, I did not live to see him.
Weighed down by sorrow and disappointment, he died before I was born--six thousand brief summers before I was born.
But let us try to bear it with fortitude.
Let us trust that he is better off where he is.
Let us take comfort in the thought that his loss is our eternal gain.
The next place the guide took us to in the holy church was an altar dedicated to the Roman soldier who was of the military guard that attended at the Crucifixion to keep order, and who--when the vail of the Temple was rent in the awful darkness that
Where this altar stands now, that Roman soldier stood then, in full view of the crucified Saviour--in full sight and hearing of all the marvels that were transpiring far and wide about the circumference of the Hill of Calvary.
And in this self-same spot the priests of the Temple beheaded him for those blasphemous words he had spoken.
In this altar they used to keep one of the most curious relics that human eyes ever looked upon--a thing that had power to fascinate the beholder in some mysterious way and keep him gazing for hours together.
It was nothing less than the copper plate Pilate put upon the Saviour's cross, and upon which he wrote, "THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS".
I think St. Helena, the mother of Constantine, found this wonderful memento when she was here in the third century.
She traveled all over Palestine, and was always fortunate.
Whenever the good old enthusiast found a thing mentioned in her Bible, Old or New, she would go and search for that thing, and never stop until she found it.
If it was Adam, she would find Adam; if it was the Ark, she would find the Ark; if it was Goliath, or Joshua, she would find them.
She found the inscription here that I was speaking of, I think.
She found it in this very spot, close to where the martyred Roman soldier stood.
That copper plate is in one of the churches in Rome, now.
Any one can see it there.
The inscription is very distinct.
We passed along a few steps and saw the altar built over the very spot where the good Catholic priests say the soldiers divided the raiment of the Saviour.
Then we went down into a cavern which cavilers say was once a cistern.
It is a chapel, now, however--the Chapel of St. Helena.
It is fifty-one feet long by forty-three wide.
In it is a marble chair which Helena used to sit in while she superintended her workmen when they were digging and delving for the True Cross.
In this place is an altar dedicated to St. Dimas, the penitent thief.
A new bronze statue is here--a statue of St. Helena.
It reminded us of poor Maximilian, so lately shot.
He presented it to this chapel when he was about to leave for his throne in Mexico.
From the cistern we descended twelve steps into a large roughly-shaped grotto, carved wholly out of the living rock.
Helena blasted it out when she was searching for the true Cross.
She had a laborious piece of work, here, but it was richly rewarded.
Out of this place she got the crown of thorns, the nails of the cross, the true Cross itself, and the cross of the penitent thief.
When she thought she had found every thing and was about to stop, she was told in a dream to continue a day longer.
It was very fortunate.
She did so, and found the cross of the other thief.
The walls and roof of this grotto still weep bitter tears in memory of the event that transpired on Calvary, and devout pilgrims groan and sob when these sad tears fall upon them from the dripping rock.
The monks call this apartment the "Chapel of the Invention of the Cross"--a name which is unfortunate, because it leads the ignorant to imagine that a tacit acknowledgment is thus made that the tradition that Helena found the true Cross here is a
It is a happiness to know, however, that intelligent people do not doubt the story in any of its particulars.
Priests of any of the chapels and denominations in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre can visit this sacred grotto to weep and pray and worship the gentle Redeemer.
Two different congregations are not allowed to enter at the same time, however, because they always fight.
Still marching through the venerable Church of the Holy Sepulchre, among chanting priests in coarse long robes and sandals; pilgrims of all colors and many nationalities, in all sorts of strange costumes; under dusky arches and by dingy piers and columns;
Under the altar was a fragment of a marble column; this was the seat Christ sat on when he was reviled, and mockingly made King, crowned with a crown of thorns and sceptred with a reed.
It was here that they blindfolded him and struck him, and said in derision, "Prophesy who it is that smote thee".
The tradition that this is the identical spot of the mocking is a very ancient one.
The guide said that Saewulf was the first to mention it.
I do not know Saewulf, but still, I cannot well refuse to receive his evidence--none of us can.
They showed us where the great Godfrey and his brother Baldwin, the first Christian Kings of Jerusalem, once lay buried by that sacred sepulchre they had fought so long and so valiantly to wrest from the hands of the infidel.
But the niches that had contained the ashes of these renowned crusaders were empty.
Even the coverings of their tombs were gone --destroyed by devout members of the Greek Church, because Godfrey and Baldwin were Latin princes, and had been reared in a Christian faith whose creed differed in some unimportant respects from theirs.
We passed on, and halted before the tomb of Melchisedek!
You will remember Melchisedek, no doubt; he was the King who came out and levied a tribute on Abraham the time that he pursued Lot's captors to Dan, and took all their property from them.
That was about four thousand years ago, and Melchisedek died shortly afterward.
However, his tomb is in a good state of preservation.
When one enters the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, the Sepulchre itself is the first thing he desires to see, and really is almost the first thing he does see.
The next thing he has a strong yearning to see is the spot where the Saviour was crucified.
But this they exhibit last.
It is the crowning glory of the place.
One is grave and thoughtful when he stands in the little Tomb of the Saviour--he could not well be otherwise in such a place--but he has not the slightest possible belief that ever the Lord lay there, and so the interest he feels in the spot is very, very
He looks at the place where Mary stood, in another part of the church, and where John stood, and Mary Magdalen; where the mob derided the Lord; where the angel sat; where the crown of thorns was found, and the true Cross; where the risen Saviour appeared
But the place of the Crucifixion affects him differently.
He fully believes that he is looking upon the very spot where the Savior gave up his life.
He remembers that Christ was very celebrated, long before he came to Jerusalem; he knows that his fame was so great that crowds followed him all the time; he is aware that his entry into the city produced a stirring sensation, and that his reception was a
To publicly execute such a personage was sufficient in itself to make the locality of the execution a memorable place for ages; added to this, the storm, the darkness, the earthquake, the rending of the vail of the Temple, and the untimely waking of the
Fathers would tell their sons about the strange affair, and point out the spot; the sons would transmit the story to their children, and thus a period of three hundred years would easily be spanned--[The thought is Mr. Prime's, not mine, and is full of
I borrowed it from his "Tent Life".
--M.
T.]--at which time Helena came and built a church upon Calvary to commemorate the death and burial of the Lord and preserve the sacred place in the memories of men; since that time there has always been a church there.
It is not possible that there can be any mistake about the locality of the Crucifixion.
Not half a dozen persons knew where they buried the Saviour, perhaps, and a burial is not a startling event, any how; therefore, we can be pardoned for unbelief in the Sepulchre, but not in the place of the Crucifixion.
Five hundred years hence there will be no vestige of Bunker Hill Monument left, but America will still know where the battle was fought and where Warren fell.
The crucifixion of Christ was too notable an event in Jerusalem, and the Hill of Calvary made too celebrated by it, to be forgotten in the short space of three hundred years.
I climbed the stairway in the church which brings one to the top of the small inclosed pinnacle of rock, and looked upon the place where the true cross once stood, with a far more absorbing interest than I had ever felt in any thing earthly before.
I could not believe that the three holes in the top of the rock were the actual ones the crosses stood in, but I felt satisfied that those crosses had stood so near the place now occupied by them, that the few feet of possible difference were a matter of
When one stands where the Saviour was crucified, he finds it all he can do to keep it strictly before his mind that Christ was not crucified in a Catholic Church.
He must remind himself every now and then that the great event transpired in the open air, and not in a gloomy, candle-lighted cell in a little corner of a vast church, up-stairs --a small cell all bejeweled and bespangled with flashy ornamentation, in
Under a marble altar like a table, is a circular hole in the marble floor, corresponding with the one just under it in which the true Cross stood.
The first thing every one does is to kneel down and take a candle and examine this hole.
He does this strange prospecting with an amount of gravity that can never be estimated or appreciated by a man who has not seen the operation.
Then he holds his candle before a richly engraved picture of the Saviour, done on a messy slab of gold, and wonderfully rayed and starred with diamonds, which hangs above the hole within the altar, and his solemnity changes to lively admiration.
He rises and faces the finely wrought figures of the Saviour and the malefactors uplifted upon their crosses behind the altar, and bright with a metallic lustre of many colors.
He turns next to the figures close to them of the Virgin and Mary Magdalen; next to the rift in the living rock made by the earthquake at the time of the Crucifixion, and an extension of which he had seen before in the wall of one of the grottoes below; he
All about the apartment the gaudy trappings of the Greek Church offend the eye and keep the mind on the rack to remember that this is the Place of the Crucifixion--Golgotha--the Mount of Calvary.
And the last thing he looks at is that which was also the first--the place where the true Cross stood.
That will chain him to the spot and compel him to look once more, and once again, after he has satisfied all curiosity and lost all interest concerning the other matters pertaining to the locality.
And so I close my chapter on the Church of the Holy Sepulchre--the most sacred locality on earth to millions and millions of men, and women, and children, the noble and the humble, bond and free.
In its history from the first, and in its tremendous associations, it is the most illustrious edifice in Christendom.
With all its clap-trap side-shows and unseemly impostures of every kind, it is still grand, revered, venerable--for a god died there; for fifteen hundred years its shrines have been wet with the tears of pilgrims from the earth's remotest confines; for
Even in our own day a war, that cost millions of treasure and rivers of blood, was fought because two rival nations claimed the sole right to put a new dome upon it.
History is full of this old Church of the Holy Sepulchre--full of blood that was shed because of the respect and the veneration in which men held the last resting-place of the meek and lowly, the mild and gentle, Prince of Peace!
CHAPTER LIV.
We were standing in a narrow street, by the Tower of Antonio.
"On these stones that are crumbling away," the guide said, "the Saviour sat and rested before taking up the cross.
This is the beginning of the Sorrowful Way, or the Way of Grief".
The party took note of the sacred spot, and moved on.
We passed under the "Ecce Homo Arch," and saw the very window from which Pilate's wife warned her husband to have nothing to do with the persecution of the Just Man.
This window is in an excellent state of preservation, considering its great age.
They showed us where Jesus rested the second time, and where the mob refused to give him up, and said, "Let his blood be upon our heads, and upon our children's children forever".
The French Catholics are building a church on this spot, and with their usual veneration for historical relics, are incorporating into the new such scraps of ancient walls as they have found there.
Further on, we saw the spot where the fainting Saviour fell under the weight of his cross.
A great granite column of some ancient temple lay there at the time, and the heavy cross struck it such a blow that it broke in two in the middle.
Such was the guide's story when he halted us before the broken column.
We crossed a street, and came presently to the former residence of St. Veronica.
When the Saviour passed there, she came out, full of womanly compassion, and spoke pitying words to him, undaunted by the hootings and the threatenings of the mob, and wiped the perspiration from his face with her handkerchief.
We had heard so much of St. Veronica, and seen her picture by so many masters, that it was like meeting an old friend unexpectedly to come upon her ancient home in Jerusalem.
The strangest thing about the incident that has made her name so famous, is, that when she wiped the perspiration away, the print of the Saviour's face remained upon the handkerchief, a perfect portrait, and so remains unto this day.
We knew this, because we saw this handkerchief in a cathedral in Paris, in another in Spain, and in two others in Italy.
In the Milan cathedral it costs five francs to see it, and at St. Peter's, at Rome, it is almost impossible to see it at any price.
No tradition is so amply verified as this of St. Veronica and her handkerchief.
At the next corner we saw a deep indention in the hard stone masonry of the corner of a house, but might have gone heedlessly by it but that the guide said it was made by the elbow of the Saviour, who stumbled here and fell.
Presently we came to just such another indention in a stone wall.
The guide said the Saviour fell here, also, and made this depression with his elbow.
There were other places where the Lord fell, and others where he rested; but one of the most curious landmarks of ancient history we found on this morning walk through the crooked lanes that lead toward Calvary, was a certain stone built into a house--a
The projections that answered for cheeks were worn smooth by the passionate kisses of generations of pilgrims from distant lands.
We asked "Why"?
The guide said it was because this was one of "the very stones of Jerusalem" that Christ mentioned when he was reproved for permitting the people to cry "Hosannah"!
when he made his memorable entry into the city upon an ass.
One of the pilgrims said, "But there is no evidence that the stones did cry out--Christ said that if the people stopped from shouting Hosannah, the very stones would do it".
The guide was perfectly serene.
He said, calmly, "This is one of the stones that would have cried out".
It was of little use to try to shake this fellow's simple faith--it was easy to see that.
And so we came at last to another wonder, of deep and abiding interest --the veritable house where the unhappy wretch once lived who has been celebrated in song and story for more than eighteen hundred years as the Wandering Jew.
On the memorable day of the Crucifixion he stood in this old doorway with his arms akimbo, looking out upon the struggling mob that was approaching, and when the weary Saviour would have sat down and rested him a moment, pushed him rudely away and said,
The Lord said, "Move on, thou, likewise," and the command has never been revoked from that day to this.
All men know how that the miscreant upon whose head that just curse fell has roamed up and down the wide world, for ages and ages, seeking rest and never finding it--courting death but always in vain--longing to stop, in city, in wilderness, in desert
They say--do these hoary traditions--that when Titus sacked Jerusalem and slaughtered eleven hundred thousand Jews in her streets and by-ways, the Wandering Jew was seen always in the thickest of the fight, and that when battle-axes gleamed in the air, he
But it was useless--he walked forth out of the carnage without a wound.
And it is said that five hundred years afterward he followed Mahomet when he carried destruction to the cities of Arabia, and then turned against him, hoping in this way to win the death of a traitor.
His calculations were wrong again.
No quarter was given to any living creature but one, and that was the only one of all the host that did not want it.
He sought death five hundred years later, in the wars of the Crusades, and offered himself to famine and pestilence at Ascalon.
He escaped again--he could not die.
These repeated annoyances could have at last but one effect --they shook his confidence.
Since then the Wandering Jew has carried on a kind of desultory toying with the most promising of the aids and implements of destruction, but with small hope, as a general thing.
He has speculated some in cholera and railroads, and has taken almost a lively interest in infernal machines and patent medicines.
He is old, now, and grave, as becomes an age like his; he indulges in no light amusements save that he goes sometimes to executions, and is fond of funerals.
There is one thing he can not avoid; go where he will about the world, he must never fail to report in Jerusalem every fiftieth year.
Only a year or two ago he was here for the thirty-seventh time since Jesus was crucified on Calvary.
They say that many old people, who are here now, saw him then, and had seen him before.
He looks always the same--old, and withered, and hollow-eyed, and listless, save that there is about him something which seems to suggest that he is looking for some one, expecting some one--the friends of his youth, perhaps.
But the most of them are dead, now.
He always pokes about the old streets looking lonesome, making his mark on a wall here and there, and eyeing the oldest buildings with a sort of friendly half interest; and he sheds a few tears at the threshold of his ancient dwelling, and bitter, bitter
Then he collects his rent and leaves again.
He has been seen standing near the Church of the Holy Sepulchre on many a starlight night, for he has cherished an idea for many centuries that if he could only enter there, he could rest.
But when he approaches, the doors slam to with a crash, the earth trembles, and all the lights in Jerusalem burn a ghastly blue!
He does this every fifty years, just the same.
It is hopeless, but then it is hard to break habits one has been eighteen hundred years accustomed to.
The old tourist is far away on his wanderings, now.
How he must smile to see a pack of blockheads like us, galloping about the world, and looking wise, and imagining we are finding out a good deal about it!
He must have a consuming contempt for the ignorant, complacent asses that go skurrying about the world in these railroading days and call it traveling.
When the guide pointed out where the Wandering Jew had left his familiar mark upon a wall, I was filled with astonishment.
It read: "S.
T.--1860--X".
All I have revealed about the Wandering Jew can be amply proven by reference to our guide.
The mighty Mosque of Omar, and the paved court around it, occupy a fourth part of Jerusalem.
They are upon Mount Moriah, where King Solomon's Temple stood.
This Mosque is the holiest place the Mohammedan knows, outside of Mecca.
Up to within a year or two past, no Christian could gain admission to it or its court for love or money.
But the prohibition has been removed, and we entered freely for bucksheesh.
I need not speak of the wonderful beauty and the exquisite grace and symmetry that have made this Mosque so celebrated--because I did not see them.
One can not see such things at an instant glance--one frequently only finds out how really beautiful a really beautiful woman is after considerable acquaintance with her; and the rule applies to Niagara Falls, to majestic mountains and to
The great feature of the Mosque of Omar is the prodigious rock in the centre of its rotunda.
It was upon this rock that Abraham came so near offering up his son Isaac--this, at least, is authentic--it is very much more to be relied on than most of the traditions, at any rate.
On this rock, also, the angel stood and threatened Jerusalem, and David persuaded him to spare the city.
Mahomet was well acquainted with this stone.
From it he ascended to heaven.
The stone tried to follow him, and if the angel Gabriel had not happened by the merest good luck to be there to seize it, it would have done it.
Very few people have a grip like Gabriel--the prints of his monstrous fingers, two inches deep, are to be seen in that rock to-day.
This rock, large as it is, is suspended in the air.
It does not touch any thing at all.
The guide said so.
This is very wonderful.
In the place on it where Mahomet stood, he left his foot-prints in the solid stone.
I should judge that he wore about eighteens.
But what I was going to say, when I spoke of the rock being suspended, was, that in the floor of the cavern under it they showed us a slab which they said covered a hole which was a thing of extraordinary interest to all Mohammedans, because that hole
Mahomet stands there and lifts them out by the hair.
All Mohammedans shave their heads, but they are careful to leave a lock of hair for the Prophet to take hold of.
Our guide observed that a good Mohammedan would consider himself doomed to stay with the damned forever if he were to lose his scalp-lock and die before it grew again.
The most of them that I have seen ought to stay with the damned, any how, without reference to how they were barbered.
For several ages no woman has been allowed to enter the cavern where that important hole is.
The reason is that one of the sex was once caught there blabbing every thing she knew about what was going on above ground, to the rapscallions in the infernal regions down below.
She carried her gossiping to such an extreme that nothing could be kept private--nothing could be done or said on earth but every body in perdition knew all about it before the sun went down.
It was about time to suppress this woman's telegraph, and it was promptly done.
Her breath subsided about the same time.
The inside of the great mosque is very showy with variegated marble walls and with windows and inscriptions of elaborate mosaic.
The Turks have their sacred relics, like the Catholics.
The guide showed us the veritable armor worn by the great son-in-law and successor of Mahomet, and also the buckler of Mahomet's uncle.
The great iron railing which surrounds the rock was ornamented in one place with a thousand rags tied to its open work.
These are to remind Mahomet not to forget the worshipers who placed them there.
It is considered the next best thing to tying threads around his finger by way of reminders.
Just outside the mosque is a miniature temple, which marks the spot where David and Goliah used to sit and judge the people.
--[A pilgrim informs me that it was not David and Goliah, but David and Saul.
I stick to my own statement--the guide told me, and he ought to know.
] Every where about the Mosque of Omar are portions of pillars, curiously wrought altars, and fragments of elegantly carved marble--precious remains of Solomon's Temple.
These have been dug from all depths in the soil and rubbish of Mount Moriah, and the Moslems have always shown a disposition to preserve them with the utmost care.
At that portion of the ancient wall of Solomon's Temple which is called the Jew's Place of Wailing, and where the Hebrews assemble every Friday to kiss the venerated stones and weep over the fallen greatness of Zion, any one can see a part of the
But, as I have remarked before, it is only a year or two ago that the ancient edict prohibiting Christian rubbish like ourselves to enter the Mosque of Omar and see the costly marbles that once adorned the inner Temple was annulled.
The designs wrought upon these fragments are all quaint and peculiar, and so the charm of novelty is added to the deep interest they naturally inspire.
One meets with these venerable scraps at every turn, especially in the neighboring Mosque el Aksa, into whose inner walls a very large number of them are carefully built for preservation.
These pieces of stone, stained and dusty with age, dimly hint at a grandeur we have all been taught to regard as the princeliest ever seen on earth; and they call up pictures of a pageant that is familiar to all imaginations--camels laden with spices and
These elegant fragments bear a richer interest than the solemn vastness of the stones the Jews kiss in the Place of Wailing can ever have for the heedless sinner.
Down in the hollow ground, underneath the olives and the orange-trees that flourish in the court of the great Mosque, is a wilderness of pillars--remains of the ancient Temple; they supported it.
There are ponderous archways down there, also, over which the destroying "plough" of prophecy passed harmless.
It is pleasant to know we are disappointed, in that we never dreamed we might see portions of the actual Temple of Solomon, and yet experience no shadow of suspicion that they were a monkish humbug and a fraud.
We are surfeited with sights.
Nothing has any fascination for us, now, but the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
We have been there every day, and have not grown tired of it; but we are weary of every thing else.
The sights are too many.
They swarm about you at every step; no single foot of ground in all Jerusalem or within its neighborhood seems to be without a stirring and important history of its own.
It is a very relief to steal a walk of a hundred yards without a guide along to talk unceasingly about every stone you step upon and drag you back ages and ages to the day when it achieved celebrity.
It seems hardly real when I find myself leaning for a moment on a ruined wall and looking listlessly down into the historic pool of Bethesda.
I did not think such things could be so crowded together as to diminish their interest.
But in serious truth, we have been drifting about, for several days, using our eyes and our ears more from a sense of duty than any higher and worthier reason.
And too often we have been glad when it was time to go home and be distressed no more about illustrious localities.
Our pilgrims compress too much into one day.
One can gorge sights to repletion as well as sweetmeats.
Since we breakfasted, this morning, we have seen enough to have furnished us food for a year's reflection if we could have seen the various objects in comfort and looked upon them deliberately.
We visited the pool of Hezekiah, where David saw Uriah's wife coming from the bath and fell in love with her.
We went out of the city by the Jaffa gate, and of course were told many things about its Tower of Hippicus.
We rode across the Valley of Hinnom, between two of the Pools of Gihon, and by an aqueduct built by Solomon, which still conveys water to the city.
We ascended the Hill of Evil Counsel, where Judas received his thirty pieces of silver, and we also lingered a moment under the tree a venerable tradition says he hanged himself on.
We descended to the canon again, and then the guide began to give name and history to every bank and boulder we came to: "This was the Field of Blood; these cuttings in the rocks were shrines and temples of Moloch; here they sacrificed children; yonder is
We turned up Jehoshaphat.
The recital went on.
"This is the Mount of Olives; this is the Hill of Offense; the nest of huts is the Village of Siloam; here, yonder, every where, is the King's Garden; under this great tree Zacharias, the high priest, was murdered; yonder is Mount Moriah and the Temple
We were burning up with the heat.
We were failing under the accumulated fatigue of days and days of ceaseless marching.
All were willing.
The Pool is a deep, walled ditch, through which a clear stream of water runs, that comes from under Jerusalem somewhere, and passing through the Fountain of the Virgin, or being supplied from it, reaches this place by way of a tunnel of heavy masonry.
The famous pool looked exactly as it looked in Solomon's time, no doubt, and the same dusky, Oriental women, came down in their old Oriental way, and carried off jars of the water on their heads, just as they did three thousand years ago, and just as they
We went away from there and stopped at the Fountain of the Virgin.
But the water was not good, and there was no comfort or peace any where, on account of the regiment of boys and girls and beggars that persecuted us all the time for bucksheesh.
The guide wanted us to give them some money, and we did it; but when he went on to say that they were starving to death we could not but feel that we had done a great sin in throwing obstacles in the way of such a desirable consummation, and so we tried to
We entered the Garden of Gethsemane, and we visited the Tomb of the Virgin, both of which we had seen before.
It is not meet that I should speak of them now.
A more fitting time will come.
I can not speak now of the Mount of Olives or its view of Jerusalem, the Dead Sea and the mountains of Moab; nor of the Damascus Gate or the tree that was planted by King Godfrey of Jerusalem.
One ought to feel pleasantly when he talks of these things.
I can not say any thing about the stone column that projects over Jehoshaphat from the Temple wall like a cannon, except that the Moslems believe Mahomet will sit astride of it when he comes to judge the world.
It is a pity he could not judge it from some roost of his own in Mecca, without trespassing on our holy ground.
Close by is the Golden Gate, in the Temple wall--a gate that was an elegant piece of sculpture in the time of the Temple, and is even so yet.
From it, in ancient times, the Jewish High Priest turned loose the scapegoat and let him flee to the wilderness and bear away his twelve-month load of the sins of the people.
If they were to turn one loose now, he would not get as far as the Garden of Gethsemane, till these miserable vagabonds here would gobble him up,--[Favorite pilgrim expression.
]--sins and all.
They wouldn't care.
Mutton-chops and sin is good enough living for them.
The Moslems watch the Golden Gate with a jealous eye, and an anxious one, for they have an honored tradition that when it falls, Islamism will fall and with it the Ottoman Empire.
It did not grieve me any to notice that the old gate was getting a little shaky.
We are at home again.
We are exhausted.
The sun has roasted us, almost.
We have full comfort in one reflection, however.
Our experiences in Europe have taught us that in time this fatigue will be forgotten; the heat will be forgotten; the thirst, the tiresome volubility of the guide, the persecutions of the beggars--and then, all that will be left will be pleasant memories
School-boy days are no happier than the days of after life, but we look back upon them regretfully because we have forgotten our punishments at school, and how we grieved when our marbles were lost and our kites destroyed--because we have forgotten all the
We are satisfied.
We can wait.
Our reward will come.
To us, Jerusalem and to-day's experiences will be an enchanted memory a year hence--memory which money could not buy from us.
CHAPTER LV.
We cast up the account.
It footed up pretty fairly.
There was nothing more at Jerusalem to be seen, except the traditional houses of Dives and Lazarus of the parable, the Tombs of the Kings, and those of the Judges; the spot where they stoned one of the disciples to death, and beheaded another; the room and
We were approaching the end.
Human nature asserted itself, now.
Overwork and consequent exhaustion began to have their natural effect.
They began to master the energies and dull the ardor of the party.
Perfectly secure now, against failing to accomplish any detail of the pilgrimage, they felt like drawing in advance upon the holiday soon to be placed to their credit.
They grew a little lazy.
They were late to breakfast and sat long at dinner.
Thirty or forty pilgrims had arrived from the ship, by the short routes, and much swapping of gossip had to be indulged in.
And in hot afternoons, they showed a strong disposition to lie on the cool divans in the hotel and smoke and talk about pleasant experiences of a month or so gone by--for even thus early do episodes of travel which were sometimes annoying, sometimes
The fog-whistle, smothered among a million of trifling sounds, is not noticed a block away, in the city, but the sailor hears it far at sea, whither none of those thousands of trifling sounds can reach.
When one is in Rome, all the domes are alike; but when he has gone away twelve miles, the city fades utterly from sight and leaves St. Peter's swelling above the level plain like an anchored balloon.
When one is traveling in Europe, the daily incidents seem all alike; but when he has placed them all two months and two thousand miles behind him, those that were worthy of being remembered are prominent, and those that were really insignificant have
This disposition to smoke, and idle and talk, was not well.
It was plain that it must not be allowed to gain ground.
A diversion must be tried, or demoralization would ensue.
The Jordan, Jericho and the Dead Sea were suggested.
The remainder of Jerusalem must be left unvisited, for a little while.
The journey was approved at once.
New life stirred in every pulse.
In the saddle --abroad on the plains--sleeping in beds bounded only by the horizon: fancy was at work with these things in a moment.
--It was painful to note how readily these town-bred men had taken to the free life of the camp and the desert The nomadic instinct is a human instinct; it was born with Adam and transmitted through the patriarchs, and after thirty centuries of steady
It has a charm which, once tasted, a man will yearn to taste again.
The nomadic instinct can not be educated out of an Indian at all.
The Jordan journey being approved, our dragoman was notified.
At nine in the morning the caravan was before the hotel door and we were at breakfast.
There was a commotion about the place.
Rumors of war and bloodshed were flying every where.
The lawless Bedouins in the Valley of the Jordan and the deserts down by the Dead Sea were up in arms, and were going to destroy all comers.
They had had a battle with a troop of Turkish cavalry and defeated them; several men killed.
They had shut up the inhabitants of a village and a Turkish garrison in an old fort near Jericho, and were besieging them.
They had marched upon a camp of our excursionists by the Jordan, and the pilgrims only saved their lives by stealing away and flying to Jerusalem under whip and spur in the darkness of the night.
Another of our parties had been fired on from an ambush and then attacked in the open day.
Shots were fired on both sides.
Fortunately there was no bloodshed.
We spoke with the very pilgrim who had fired one of the shots, and learned from his own lips how, in this imminent deadly peril, only the cool courage of the pilgrims, their strength of numbers and imposing display of war material, had saved them from
It was reported that the Consul had requested that no more of our pilgrims should go to the Jordan while this state of things lasted; and further, that he was unwilling that any more should go, at least without an unusually strong military guard.
Here was trouble.
But with the horses at the door and every body aware of what they were there for, what would you have done?
Acknowledged that you were afraid, and backed shamefully out?
Hardly.
It would not be human nature, where there were so many women.
You would have done as we did: said you were not afraid of a million Bedouins--and made your will and proposed quietly to yourself to take up an unostentatious position in the rear of the procession.
I think we must all have determined upon the same line of tactics, for it did seem as if we never would get to Jericho.
I had a notoriously slow horse, but somehow I could not keep him in the rear, to save my neck.
He was forever turning up in the lead.
In such cases I trembled a little, and got down to fix my saddle.
But it was not of any use.
The others all got down to fix their saddles, too.
I never saw such a time with saddles.
It was the first time any of them had got out of order in three weeks, and now they had all broken down at once.
I tried walking, for exercise--I had not had enough in Jerusalem searching for holy places.
But it was a failure.
The whole mob were suffering for exercise, and it was not fifteen minutes till they were all on foot and I had the lead again.
It was very discouraging.
This was all after we got beyond Bethany.
We stopped at the village of Bethany, an hour out from Jerusalem.
They showed us the tomb of Lazarus.
I had rather live in it than in any house in the town.
And they showed us also a large "Fountain of Lazarus," and in the centre of the village the ancient dwelling of Lazarus.
Lazarus appears to have been a man of property.
The legends of the Sunday Schools do him great injustice; they give one the impression that he was poor.
It is because they get him confused with that Lazarus who had no merit but his virtue, and virtue never has been as respectable as money.
The house of Lazarus is a three-story edifice, of stone masonry, but the accumulated rubbish of ages has buried all of it but the upper story.
We took candles and descended to the dismal cell-like chambers where Jesus sat at meat with Martha and Mary, and conversed with them about their brother.
We could not but look upon these old dingy apartments with a more than common interest.
We had had a glimpse, from a mountain top, of the Dead Sea, lying like a blue shield in the plain of the Jordan, and now we were marching down a close, flaming, rugged, desolate defile, where no living creature could enjoy life, except, perhaps, a
It was such a dreary, repulsive, horrible solitude!
It was the "wilderness" where John preached, with camel's hair about his loins--raiment enough--but he never could have got his locusts and wild honey here.
We were moping along down through this dreadful place, every man in the rear.
Our guards--two gorgeous young Arab sheiks, with cargoes of swords, guns, pistols and daggers on board--were loafing ahead.
"Bedouins"!
Every man shrunk up and disappeared in his clothes like a mud-turtle.
My first impulse was to dash forward and destroy the Bedouins.
My second was to dash to the rear to see if there were any coming in that direction.
I acted on the latter impulse.
So did all the others.
If any Bedouins had approached us, then, from that point of the compass, they would have paid dearly for their rashness.
We all remarked that, afterwards.
There would have been scenes of riot and bloodshed there that no pen could describe.
I know that, because each man told what he would have done, individually; and such a medley of strange and unheard-of inventions of cruelty you could not conceive of.
One man said he had calmly made up his mind to perish where he stood, if need be, but never yield an inch; he was going to wait, with deadly patience, till he could count the stripes upon the first Bedouin's jacket, and then count them and let him have it.
Another was going to sit still till the first lance reached within an inch of his breast, and then dodge it and seize it.
I forbear to tell what he was going to do to that Bedouin that owned it.
It makes my blood run cold to think of it.
Another was going to scalp such Bedouins as fell to his share, and take his bald-headed sons of the desert home with him alive for trophies.
But the wild-eyed pilgrim rhapsodist was silent.
His orbs gleamed with a deadly light, but his lips moved not.
Anxiety grew, and he was questioned.
If he had got a Bedouin, what would he have done with him --shot him?
He smiled a smile of grim contempt and shook his head.
Would he have stabbed him?
Another shake.
Would he have quartered him --flayed him?
More shakes.
Oh!
horror what would he have done?
"Eat him"!
Such was the awful sentence that thundered from his lips.
What was grammar to a desperado like that?
I was glad in my heart that I had been spared these scenes of malignant carnage.
No Bedouins attacked our terrible rear.
And none attacked the front.
The new-comers were only a reinforcement of cadaverous Arabs, in shirts and bare legs, sent far ahead of us to brandish rusty guns, and shout and brag, and carry on like lunatics, and thus scare away all bands of marauding Bedouins that might lurk about
What a shame it is that armed white Christians must travel under guard of vermin like this as a protection against the prowling vagabonds of the desert--those sanguinary outlaws who are always going to do something desperate, but never do it.
I may as well mention here that on our whole trip we saw no Bedouins, and had no more use for an Arab guard than we could have had for patent leather boots and white kid gloves.
The Bedouins that attacked the other parties of pilgrims so fiercely were provided for the occasion by the Arab guards of those parties, and shipped from Jerusalem for temporary service as Bedouins.
They met together in full view of the pilgrims, after the battle, and took lunch, divided the bucksheesh extorted in the season of danger, and then accompanied the cavalcade home to the city!
The nuisance of an Arab guard is one which is created by the Sheiks and the Bedouins together, for mutual profit, it is said, and no doubt there is a good deal of truth in it.
We visited the fountain the prophet Elisha sweetened (it is sweet yet,) where he remained some time and was fed by the ravens.
Ancient Jericho is not very picturesque as a ruin.
When Joshua marched around it seven times, some three thousand years ago, and blew it down with his trumpet, he did the work so well and so completely that he hardly left enough of the city to cast a shadow.
The curse pronounced against the rebuilding of it, has never been removed.
One King, holding the curse in light estimation, made the attempt, but was stricken sorely for his presumption.
Its site will always remain unoccupied; and yet it is one of the very best locations for a town we have seen in all Palestine.
At two in the morning they routed us out of bed--another piece of unwarranted cruelty--another stupid effort of our dragoman to get ahead of a rival.
It was not two hours to the Jordan.
However, we were dressed and under way before any one thought of looking to see what time it was, and so we drowsed on through the chill night air and dreamed of camp fires, warm beds, and other comfortable things.
There was no conversation.
People do not talk when they are cold, and wretched, and sleepy.
We nodded in the saddle, at times, and woke up with a start to find that the procession had disappeared in the gloom.
Then there was energy and attention to business until its dusky outlines came in sight again.
Occasionally the order was passed in a low voice down the line: "Close up--close up!
Bedouins lurk here, every where"!
What an exquisite shudder it sent shivering along one's spine!
We reached the famous river before four o'clock, and the night was so black that we could have ridden into it without seeing it.
Some of us were in an unhappy frame of mind.
We waited and waited for daylight, but it did not come.
Finally we went away in the dark and slept an hour on the ground, in the bushes, and caught cold.
It was a costly nap, on that account, but otherwise it was a paying investment because it brought unconsciousness of the dreary minutes and put us in a somewhat fitter mood for a first glimpse of the sacred river.
With the first suspicion of dawn, every pilgrim took off his clothes and waded into the dark torrent, singing: "On Jordan's stormy banks I stand, And cast a wistful eye To Canaan's fair and happy land, Where my possessions lie".
But they did not sing long.
The water was so fearfully cold that they were obliged to stop singing and scamper out again.
Then they stood on the bank shivering, and so chagrined and so grieved, that they merited holiest compassion.
Because another dream, another cherished hope, had failed.
They had promised themselves all along that they would cross the Jordan where the Israelites crossed it when they entered Canaan from their long pilgrimage in the desert.
They would cross where the twelve stones were placed in memory of that great event.
While they did it they would picture to themselves that vast army of pilgrims marching through the cloven waters, bearing the hallowed ark of the covenant and shouting hosannahs, and singing songs of thanksgiving and praise.
Each had promised himself that he would be the first to cross.
They were at the goal of their hopes at last, but the current was too swift, the water was too cold!
It was then that Jack did them a service.
With that engaging recklessness of consequences which is natural to youth, and so proper and so seemly, as well, he went and led the way across the Jordan, and all was happiness again.
Every individual waded over, then, and stood upon the further bank.
The water was not quite breast deep, any where.
If it had been more, we could hardly have accomplished the feat, for the strong current would have swept us down the stream, and we would have been exhausted and drowned before reaching a place where we could make a landing.
The main object compassed, the drooping, miserable party sat down to wait for the sun again, for all wanted to see the water as well as feel it.
But it was too cold a pastime.
Some cans were filled from the holy river, some canes cut from its banks, and then we mounted and rode reluctantly away to keep from freezing to death.
So we saw the Jordan very dimly.
The thickets of bushes that bordered its banks threw their shadows across its shallow, turbulent waters ("stormy," the hymn makes them, which is rather a complimentary stretch of fancy,) and we could not judge of the width of the stream by the eye.
We knew by our wading experience, however, that many streets in America are double as wide as the Jordan.
Daylight came, soon after we got under way, and in the course of an hour or two we reached the Dead Sea.
Nothing grows in the flat, burning desert around it but weeds and the Dead Sea apple the poets say is beautiful to the eye, but crumbles to ashes and dust when you break it.
Such as we found were not handsome, but they were bitter to the taste.
They yielded no dust.
It was because they were not ripe, perhaps.
The desert and the barren hills gleam painfully in the sun, around the Dead Sea, and there is no pleasant thing or living creature upon it or about its borders to cheer the eye.
It is a scorching, arid, repulsive solitude.
A silence broods over the scene that is depressing to the spirits.
It makes one think of funerals and death.
The Dead Sea is small.
Its waters are very clear, and it has a pebbly bottom and is shallow for some distance out from the shores.
It yields quantities of asphaltum; fragments of it lie all about its banks; this stuff gives the place something of an unpleasant smell.
All our reading had taught us to expect that the first plunge into the Dead Sea would be attended with distressing results--our bodies would feel as if they were suddenly pierced by millions of red-hot needles; the dreadful smarting would continue for
We were disappointed.
Our eight sprang in at the same time that another party of pilgrims did, and nobody screamed once.
None of them ever did complain of any thing more than a slight pricking sensation in places where their skin was abraded, and then only for a short time.
My face smarted for a couple of hours, but it was partly because I got it badly sun-burned while I was bathing, and staid in so long that it became plastered over with salt.
No, the water did not blister us; it did not cover us with a slimy ooze and confer upon us an atrocious fragrance; it was not very slimy; and I could not discover that we smelt really any worse than we have always smelt since we have been in Palestine.
It was only a different kind of smell, but not conspicuous on that account, because we have a great deal of variety in that respect.
We didn't smell, there on the Jordan, the same as we do in Jerusalem; and we don't smell in Jerusalem just as we did in Nazareth, or Tiberias, or Cesarea Philippi, or any of those other ruinous ancient towns in Galilee.
No, we change all the time, and generally for the worse.
We do our own washing.
It was a funny bath.
We could not sink.
One could stretch himself at full length on his back, with his arms on his breast, and all of his body above a line drawn from the corner of his jaw past the middle of his side, the middle of his leg and through his ancle bone, would remain out of water.
He could lift his head clear out, if he chose.
No position can be retained long; you lose your balance and whirl over, first on your back and then on your face, and so on.
You can lie comfortably, on your back, with your head out, and your legs out from your knees down, by steadying yourself with your hands.
You can sit, with your knees drawn up to your chin and your arms clasped around them, but you are bound to turn over presently, because you are top-heavy in that position.
You can stand up straight in water that is over your head, and from the middle of your breast upward you will not be wet.
But you can not remain so.
The water will soon float your feet to the surface.
You can not swim on your back and make any progress of any consequence, because your feet stick away above the surface, and there is nothing to propel yourself with but your heels.
If you swim on your face, you kick up the water like a stern-wheel boat.
You make no headway.
A horse is so top-heavy that he can neither swim nor stand up in the Dead Sea.
He turns over on his side at once.
Some of us bathed for more than an hour, and then came out coated with salt till we shone like icicles.
We scrubbed it off with a coarse towel and rode off with a splendid brand-new smell, though it was one which was not any more disagreeable than those we have been for several weeks enjoying.
It was the variegated villainy and novelty of it that charmed us.
Salt crystals glitter in the sun about the shores of the lake.
In places they coat the ground like a brilliant crust of ice.
When I was a boy I somehow got the impression that the river Jordan was four thousand miles long and thirty-five miles wide.
It is only ninety miles long, and so crooked that a man does not know which side of it he is on half the time.
In going ninety miles it does not get over more than fifty miles of ground.
It is not any wider than Broadway in New York.
There is the Sea of Galilee and this Dead Sea--neither of them twenty miles long or thirteen wide.
And yet when I was in Sunday School I thought they were sixty thousand miles in diameter.
Travel and experience mar the grandest pictures and rob us of the most cherished traditions of our boyhood.
Well, let them go.
I have already seen the Empire of King Solomon diminish to the size of the State of Pennsylvania; I suppose I can bear the reduction of the seas and the river.
We looked every where, as we passed along, but never saw grain or crystal of Lot's wife.
It was a great disappointment.
For many and many a year we had known her sad story, and taken that interest in her which misfortune always inspires.
But she was gone.
Her picturesque form no longer looms above the desert of the Dead Sea to remind the tourist of the doom that fell upon the lost cities.
I can not describe the hideous afternoon's ride from the Dead Sea to Mars Saba.
It oppresses me yet, to think of it.
The sun so pelted us that the tears ran down our cheeks once or twice.
The ghastly, treeless, grassless, breathless canons smothered us as if we had been in an oven.
The sun had positive weight to it, I think.
Not a man could sit erect under it.
All drooped low in the saddles.
John preached in this "Wilderness"!
It must have been exhausting work.
What a very heaven the messy towers and ramparts of vast Mars Saba looked to us when we caught a first glimpse of them!
We staid at this great convent all night, guests of the hospitable priests.
Mars Saba, perched upon a crag, a human nest stuck high up against a perpendicular mountain wall, is a world of grand masonry that rises, terrace upon terrace away above your head, like the terraced and retreating colonnades one sees in fanciful pictures
No other human dwelling is near.
It was founded many ages ago by a holy recluse who lived at first in a cave in the rock--a cave which is inclosed in the convent walls, now, and was reverently shown to us by the priests.
This recluse, by his rigorous torturing of his flesh, his diet of bread and water, his utter withdrawal from all society and from the vanities of the world, and his constant prayer and saintly contemplation of a skull, inspired an emulation that brought
The precipice on the opposite side of the canyon is well perforated with the small holes they dug in the rock to live in.
The present occupants of Mars Saba, about seventy in number, are all hermits.
They wear a coarse robe, an ugly, brimless stove-pipe of a hat, and go without shoes.
They eat nothing whatever but bread and salt; they drink nothing but water.
As long as they live they can never go outside the walls, or look upon a woman--for no woman is permitted to enter Mars Saba, upon any pretext whatsoever.
Some of those men have been shut up there for thirty years.
In all that dreary time they have not heard the laughter of a child or the blessed voice of a woman; they have seen no human tears, no human smiles; they have known no human joys, no wholesome human sorrows.
In their hearts are no memories of the past, in their brains no dreams of the future.
All that is lovable, beautiful, worthy, they have put far away from them; against all things that are pleasant to look upon, and all sounds that are music to the ear, they have barred their massive doors and reared their relentless walls of stone forever.
They have banished the tender grace of life and left only the sapped and skinny mockery.
Their lips are lips that never kiss and never sing; their hearts are hearts that never hate and never love; their breasts are breasts that never swell with the sentiment, "I have a country and a flag".
They are dead men who walk.
I set down these first thoughts because they are natural--not because they are just or because it is right to set them down.
It is easy for book-makers to say "I thought so and so as I looked upon such and such a scene"--when the truth is, they thought all those fine things afterwards.
One's first thought is not likely to be strictly accurate, yet it is no crime to think it and none to write it down, subject to modification by later experience.
These hermits are dead men, in several respects, but not in all; and it is not proper, that, thinking ill of them at first, I should go on doing so, or, speaking ill of them I should reiterate the words and stick to them.
No, they treated us too kindly for that.
There is something human about them somewhere.
They knew we were foreigners and Protestants, and not likely to feel admiration or much friendliness toward them.
But their large charity was above considering such things.
They simply saw in us men who were hungry, and thirsty, and tired, and that was sufficient.
They opened their doors and gave us welcome.
They asked no questions, and they made no self-righteous display of their hospitality.
They fished for no compliments.
They moved quietly about, setting the table for us, making the beds, and bringing water to wash in, and paid no heed when we said it was wrong for them to do that when we had men whose business it was to perform such offices.
We fared most comfortably, and sat late at dinner.
We walked all over the building with the hermits afterward, and then sat on the lofty battlements and smoked while we enjoyed the cool air, the wild scenery and the sunset.
One or two chose cosy bed-rooms to sleep in, but the nomadic instinct prompted the rest to sleep on the broad divan that extended around the great hall, because it seemed like sleeping out of doors, and so was more cheery and inviting.
It was a royal rest we had.
When we got up to breakfast in the morning, we were new men.
For all this hospitality no strict charge was made.
We could give something if we chose; we need give nothing, if we were poor or if we were stingy.
The pauper and the miser are as free as any in the Catholic Convents of Palestine.
I have been educated to enmity toward every thing that is Catholic, and sometimes, in consequence of this, I find it much easier to discover Catholic faults than Catholic merits.
But there is one thing I feel no disposition to overlook, and no disposition to forget: and that is, the honest gratitude I and all pilgrims owe, to the Convent Fathers in Palestine.
Their doors are always open, and there is always a welcome for any worthy man who comes, whether he comes in rags or clad in purple.
The Catholic Convents are a priceless blessing to the poor.
A pilgrim without money, whether he be a Protestant or a Catholic, can travel the length and breadth of Palestine, and in the midst of her desert wastes find wholesome food and a clean bed every night, in these buildings.
Pilgrims in better circumstances are often stricken down by the sun and the fevers of the country, and then their saving refuge is the Convent.
Without these hospitable retreats, travel in Palestine would be a pleasure which none but the strongest men could dare to undertake.
Our party, pilgrims and all, will always be ready and always willing, to touch glasses and drink health, prosperity and long life to the Convent Fathers of Palestine.
So, rested and refreshed, we fell into line and filed away over the barren mountains of Judea, and along rocky ridges and through sterile gorges, where eternal silence and solitude reigned.
Even the scattering groups of armed shepherds we met the afternoon before, tending their flocks of long-haired goats, were wanting here.
We saw but two living creatures.
They were gazelles, of "soft-eyed" notoriety.
They looked like very young kids, but they annihilated distance like an express train.
I have not seen animals that moved faster, unless I might say it of the antelopes of our own great plains.
At nine or ten in the morning we reached the Plain of the Shepherds, and stood in a walled garden of olives where the shepherds were watching their flocks by night, eighteen centuries ago, when the multitude of angels brought them the tidings that the
A quarter of a mile away was Bethlehem of Judea, and the pilgrims took some of the stone wall and hurried on.
The Plain of the Shepherds is a desert, paved with loose stones, void of vegetation, glaring in the fierce sun.
Only the music of the angels it knew once could charm its shrubs and flowers to life again and restore its vanished beauty.
No less potent enchantment could avail to work this miracle.
In the huge Church of the Nativity, in Bethlehem, built fifteen hundred years ago by the inveterate St. Helena, they took us below ground, and into a grotto cut in the living rock.
This was the "manger" where Christ was born.
A silver star set in the floor bears a Latin inscription to that effect.
It is polished with the kisses of many generations of worshiping pilgrims.
The grotto was tricked out in the usual tasteless style observable in all the holy places of Palestine.
As in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, envy and uncharitableness were apparent here.
The priests and the members of the Greek and Latin churches can not come by the same corridor to kneel in the sacred birthplace of the Redeemer, but are compelled to approach and retire by different avenues, lest they quarrel and fight on this holiest
I have no "meditations," suggested by this spot where the very first "Merry Christmas"!
was uttered in all the world, and from whence the friend of my childhood, Santa Claus, departed on his first journey, to gladden and continue to gladden roaring firesides on wintry mornings in many a distant land forever and forever.
I touch, with reverent finger, the actual spot where the infant Jesus lay, but I think--nothing.
You can not think in this place any more than you can in any other in Palestine that would be likely to inspire reflection.
Beggars, cripples and monks compass you about, and make you think only of bucksheesh when you would rather think of something more in keeping with the character of the spot.
I was glad to get away, and glad when we had walked through the grottoes where Eusebius wrote, and Jerome fasted, and Joseph prepared for the flight into Egypt, and the dozen other distinguished grottoes, and knew we were done.
The Church of the Nativity is almost as well packed with exceeding holy places as the Church of the Holy Sepulchre itself.
They even have in it a grotto wherein twenty thousand children were slaughtered by Herod when he was seeking the life of the infant Saviour.
We went to the Milk Grotto, of course--a cavern where Mary hid herself for a while before the flight into Egypt.
Its walls were black before she entered, but in suckling the Child, a drop of her milk fell upon the floor and instantly changed the darkness of the walls to its own snowy hue.
We took many little fragments of stone from here, because it is well known in all the East that a barren woman hath need only to touch her lips to one of these and her failing will depart from her.
We took many specimens, to the end that we might confer happiness upon certain households that we wot of.
We got away from Bethlehem and its troops of beggars and relic-peddlers in the afternoon, and after spending some little time at Rachel's tomb, hurried to Jerusalem as fast as possible.
I never was so glad to get home again before.
I never have enjoyed rest as I have enjoyed it during these last few hours.
The journey to the Dead Sea, the Jordan and Bethlehem was short, but it was an exhausting one.
Such roasting heat, such oppressive solitude, and such dismal desolation can not surely exist elsewhere on earth.
And such fatigue!
The commonest sagacity warns me that I ought to tell the customary pleasant lie, and say I tore myself reluctantly away from every noted place in Palestine.
Every body tells that, but with as little ostentation as I may, I doubt the word of every he who tells it.
I could take a dreadful oath that I have never heard any one of our forty pilgrims say any thing of the sort, and they are as worthy and as sincerely devout as any that come here.
They will say it when they get home, fast enough, but why should they not?
They do not wish to array themselves against all the Lamartines and Grimeses in the world.
It does not stand to reason that men are reluctant to leave places where the very life is almost badgered out of them by importunate swarms of beggars and peddlers who hang in strings to one's sleeves and coat-tails and shriek and shout in his ears and
One is glad to get away.
I have heard shameless people say they were glad to get away from Ladies' Festivals where they were importuned to buy by bevies of lovely young ladies.
Transform those houris into dusky hags and ragged savages, and replace their rounded forms with shrunken and knotted distortions, their soft hands with scarred and hideous deformities, and the persuasive music of their voices with the discordant din of a
No, it is the neat thing to say you were reluctant, and then append the profound thoughts that "struggled for utterance," in your brain; but it is the true thing to say you were not reluctant, and found it impossible to think at all--though in good sooth
We do not think, in the holy places; we think in bed, afterwards, when the glare, and the noise, and the confusion are gone, and in fancy we revisit alone, the solemn monuments of the past, and summon the phantom pageants of an age that has passed away.
CHAPTER LVI.
We visited all the holy places about Jerusalem which we had left unvisited when we journeyed to the Jordan and then, about three o'clock one afternoon, we fell into procession and marched out at the stately Damascus gate, and the walls of Jerusalem shut us
We paused on the summit of a distant hill and took a final look and made a final farewell to the venerable city which had been such a good home to us.
For about four hours we traveled down hill constantly.
We followed a narrow bridle-path which traversed the beds of the mountain gorges, and when we could we got out of the way of the long trains of laden camels and asses, and when we could not we suffered the misery of being mashed up against perpendicular
Jack was caught two or three times, and Dan and Moult as often.
One horse had a heavy fall on the slippery rocks, and the others had narrow escapes.
However, this was as good a road as we had found in Palestine, and possibly even the best, and so there was not much grumbling.
Sometimes, in the glens, we came upon luxuriant orchards of figs, apricots, pomegranates, and such things, but oftener the scenery was rugged, mountainous, verdureless and forbidding.
Here and there, towers were perched high up on acclivities which seemed almost inaccessible.
This fashion is as old as Palestine itself and was adopted in ancient times for security against enemies.
We crossed the brook which furnished David the stone that killed Goliah, and no doubt we looked upon the very ground whereon that noted battle was fought.
We passed by a picturesque old gothic ruin whose stone pavements had rung to the armed heels of many a valorous Crusader, and we rode through a piece of country which we were told once knew Samson as a citizen.
We staid all night with the good monks at the convent of Ramleh, and in the morning got up and galloped the horses a good part of the distance from there to Jaffa, or Joppa, for the plain was as level as a floor and free from stones, and besides this was
These two or three hours finished, we and the tired horses could have rest and sleep as long as we wanted it.
This was the plain of which Joshua spoke when he said, "Sun, stand thou still on Gibeon, and thou moon in the valley of Ajalon".
As we drew near to Jaffa, the boys spurred up the horses and indulged in the excitement of an actual race --an experience we had hardly had since we raced on donkeys in the Azores islands.
We came finally to the noble grove of orange-trees in which the Oriental city of Jaffa lies buried; we passed through the walls, and rode again down narrow streets and among swarms of animated rags, and saw other sights and had other experiences we had
We dismounted, for the last time, and out in the offing, riding at anchor, we saw the ship!
I put an exclamation point there because we felt one when we saw the vessel.
The long pilgrimage was ended, and somehow we seemed to feel glad of it.
[For description of Jaffa, see Universal Gazetteer.
] Simon the Tanner formerly lived here.
We went to his house.
All the pilgrims visit Simon the Tanner's house.
Peter saw the vision of the beasts let down in a sheet when he lay upon the roof of Simon the Tanner's house.
It was from Jaffa that Jonah sailed when he was told to go and prophesy against Nineveh, and no doubt it was not far from the town that the whale threw him up when he discovered that he had no ticket.
Jonah was disobedient, and of a fault-finding, complaining disposition, and deserves to be lightly spoken of, almost.
The timbers used in the construction of Solomon's Temple were floated to Jaffa in rafts, and the narrow opening in the reef through which they passed to the shore is not an inch wider or a shade less dangerous to navigate than it was then.
Such is the sleepy nature of the population Palestine's only good seaport has now and always had.
Jaffa has a history and a stirring one.
It will not be discovered any where in this book.
If the reader will call at the circulating library and mention my name, he will be furnished with books which will afford him the fullest information concerning Jaffa.
So ends the pilgrimage.
We ought to be glad that we did not make it for the purpose of feasting our eyes upon fascinating aspects of nature, for we should have been disappointed--at least at this season of the year.
A writer in "Life in the Holy Land" observes: "Monotonous and uninviting as much of the Holy Land will appear to persons accustomed to the almost constant verdure of flowers, ample streams and varied surface of our own country, we must remember that its
Which all of us will freely grant.
But it truly is "monotonous and uninviting," and there is no sufficient reason for describing it as being otherwise.
Of all the lands there are for dismal scenery, I think Palestine must be the prince.
The hills are barren, they are dull of color, they are unpicturesque in shape.
The valleys are unsightly deserts fringed with a feeble vegetation that has an expression about it of being sorrowful and despondent.
The Dead Sea and the Sea of Galilee sleep in the midst of a vast stretch of hill and plain wherein the eye rests upon no pleasant tint, no striking object, no soft picture dreaming in a purple haze or mottled with the shadows of the clouds.
Every outline is harsh, every feature is distinct, there is no perspective--distance works no enchantment here.
It is a hopeless, dreary, heart-broken land.
Small shreds and patches of it must be very beautiful in the full flush of spring, however, and all the more beautiful by contrast with the far-reaching desolation that surrounds them on every side.
I would like much to see the fringes of the Jordan in spring-time, and Shechem, Esdraelon, Ajalon and the borders of Galilee--but even then these spots would seem mere toy gardens set at wide intervals in the waste of a limitless desolation.
Palestine sits in sackcloth and ashes.
Over it broods the spell of a curse that has withered its fields and fettered its energies.
Where Sodom and Gomorrah reared their domes and towers, that solemn sea now floods the plain, in whose bitter waters no living thing exists--over whose waveless surface the blistering air hangs motionless and dead --about whose borders nothing grows but
Nazareth is forlorn; about that ford of Jordan where the hosts of Israel entered the Promised Land with songs of rejoicing, one finds only a squalid camp of fantastic Bedouins of the desert; Jericho the accursed, lies a moldering ruin, to-day, even as
Renowned Jerusalem itself, the stateliest name in history, has lost all its ancient grandeur, and is become a pauper village; the riches of Solomon are no longer there to compel the admiration of visiting Oriental queens; the wonderful temple which was the
The noted Sea of Galilee, where Roman fleets once rode at anchor and the disciples of the Saviour sailed in their ships, was long ago deserted by the devotees of war and commerce, and its borders are a silent wilderness; Capernaum is a shapeless ruin;
Palestine is desolate and unlovely.
And why should it be otherwise?
Can the curse of the Deity beautify a land?
Palestine is no more of this work-day world.
It is sacred to poetry and tradition--it is dream-land.
CHAPTER LVII.
It was worth a kingdom to be at sea again.
It was a relief to drop all anxiety whatsoever--all questions as to where we should go; how long we should stay; whether it were worth while to go or not; all anxieties about the condition of the horses; all such questions as "Shall we ever get to water"?
"Shall we ever lunch"?
"Ferguson, how many more million miles have we got to creep under this awful sun before we camp"?
It was a relief to cast all these torturing little anxieties far away--ropes of steel they were, and every one with a separate and distinct strain on it --and feel the temporary contentment that is born of the banishment of all care and responsibility.
We did not look at the compass: we did not care, now, where the ship went to, so that she went out of sight of land as quickly as possible.
When I travel again, I wish to go in a pleasure ship.
No amount of money could have purchased for us, in a strange vessel and among unfamiliar faces, the perfect satisfaction and the sense of being at home again which we experienced when we stepped on board the "Quaker City,"--our own ship--after this
It is a something we have felt always when we returned to her, and a something we had no desire to sell.
We took off our blue woollen shirts, our spurs, and heavy boots, our sanguinary revolvers and our buckskin-seated pantaloons, and got shaved and came out in Christian costume once more.
All but Jack, who changed all other articles of his dress, but clung to his traveling pantaloons.
They still preserved their ample buckskin seat intact; and so his short pea jacket and his long, thin legs assisted to make him a picturesque object whenever he stood on the forecastle looking abroad upon the ocean over the bows.
At such times his father's last injunction suggested itself to me.
He said: "Jack, my boy, you are about to go among a brilliant company of gentlemen and ladies, who are refined and cultivated, and thoroughly accomplished in the manners and customs of good society.
Listen to their conversation, study their habits of life, and learn.
Be polite and obliging to all, and considerate towards every one's opinions, failings and prejudices.
Command the just respect of all your fellow-voyagers, even though you fail to win their friendly regard.
And Jack--don't you ever dare, while you live, appear in public on those decks in fair weather, in a costume unbecoming your mother's drawing-room"!
It would have been worth any price if the father of this hopeful youth could have stepped on board some time, and seen him standing high on the fore-castle, pea jacket, tasseled red fez, buckskin patch and all, placidly contemplating the ocean--a rare
After a pleasant voyage and a good rest, we drew near to Egypt and out of the mellowest of sunsets we saw the domes and minarets of Alexandria rise into view.
As soon as the anchor was down, Jack and I got a boat and went ashore.
It was night by this time, and the other passengers were content to remain at home and visit ancient Egypt after breakfast.
It was the way they did at Constantinople.
They took a lively interest in new countries, but their school-boy impatience had worn off, and they had learned that it was wisdom to take things easy and go along comfortably --these old countries do not go away in the night; they stay till after
When we reached the pier we found an army of Egyptian boys with donkeys no larger than themselves, waiting for passengers--for donkeys are the omnibuses of Egypt.
We preferred to walk, but we could not have our own way.
The boys crowded about us, clamored around us, and slewed their donkeys exactly across our path, no matter which way we turned.
They were good-natured rascals, and so were the donkeys.
We mounted, and the boys ran behind us and kept the donkeys in a furious gallop, as is the fashion at Damascus.
I believe I would rather ride a donkey than any beast in the world.
He goes briskly, he puts on no airs, he is docile, though opinionated.
Satan himself could not scare him, and he is convenient--very convenient.
When you are tired riding you can rest your feet on the ground and let him gallop from under you.
We found the hotel and secured rooms, and were happy to know that the Prince of Wales had stopped there once.
They had it every where on signs.
No other princes had stopped there since, till Jack and I came.
We went abroad through the town, then, and found it a city of huge commercial buildings, and broad, handsome streets brilliant with gas-light.
By night it was a sort of reminiscence of Paris.
But finally Jack found an ice-cream saloon, and that closed investigations for that evening.
The weather was very hot, it had been many a day since Jack had seen ice-cream, and so it was useless to talk of leaving the saloon till it shut up.
In the morning the lost tribes of America came ashore and infested the hotels and took possession of all the donkeys and other open barouches that offered.
They went in picturesque procession to the American Consul's; to the great gardens; to Cleopatra's Needles; to Pompey's Pillar; to the palace of the Viceroy of Egypt; to the Nile; to the superb groves of date-palms.
One of our most inveterate relic-hunters had his hammer with him, and tried to break a fragment off the upright Needle and could not do it; he tried the prostrate one and failed; he borrowed a heavy sledge hammer from a mason and tried again.
He tried Pompey's Pillar, and this baffled him.
Scattered all about the mighty monolith were sphinxes of noble countenance, carved out of Egyptian granite as hard as blue steel, and whose shapely features the wear of five thousand years had failed to mark or mar.
The relic-hunter battered at these persistently, and sweated profusely over his work.
He might as well have attempted to deface the moon.
They regarded him serenely with the stately smile they had worn so long, and which seemed to say, "Peck away, poor insect; we were not made to fear such as you; in ten-score dragging ages we have seen more of your kind than there are sands at your feet:
But I am forgetting the Jaffa Colonists.
At Jaffa we had taken on board some forty members of a very celebrated community.
They were male and female; babies, young boys and young girls; young married people, and some who had passed a shade beyond the prime of life.
I refer to the "Adams Jaffa Colony".
Others had deserted before.
We left in Jaffa Mr. Adams, his wife, and fifteen unfortunates who not only had no money but did not know where to turn or whither to go.
Such was the statement made to us.
Our forty were miserable enough in the first place, and they lay about the decks seasick all the voyage, which about completed their misery, I take it.
However, one or two young men remained upright, and by constant persecution we wormed out of them some little information.
They gave it reluctantly and in a very fragmentary condition, for, having been shamefully humbugged by their prophet, they felt humiliated and unhappy.
In such circumstances people do not like to talk.
The colony was a complete fiasco.
I have already said that such as could get away did so, from time to time.
The prophet Adams--once an actor, then several other things, afterward a Mormon and a missionary, always an adventurer--remains at Jaffa with his handful of sorrowful subjects.
The forty we brought away with us were chiefly destitute, though not all of them.
They wished to get to Egypt.
What might become of them then they did not know and probably did not care--any thing to get away from hated Jaffa.
They had little to hope for.
Because after many appeals to the sympathies of New England, made by strangers of Boston, through the newspapers, and after the establishment of an office there for the reception of moneyed contributions for the Jaffa colonists, One Dollar was subscribed.
The consul-general for Egypt showed me the newspaper paragraph which mentioned the circumstance and mentioned also the discontinuance of the effort and the closing of the office.
It was evident that practical New England was not sorry to be rid of such visionaries and was not in the least inclined to hire any body to bring them back to her.
Still, to get to Egypt, was something, in the eyes of the unfortunate colonists, hopeless as the prospect seemed of ever getting further.
Thus circumstanced, they landed at Alexandria from our ship.
One of our passengers, Mr. Moses S. Beach, of the New York Sun, inquired of the consul-general what it would cost to send these people to their home in Maine by the way of Liverpool, and he said fifteen hundred dollars in gold would do it.
Mr. Beach gave his check for the money and so the troubles of the Jaffa colonists were at an end.
--[It was an unselfish act of benevolence; it was done without any ostentation, and has never been mentioned in any newspaper, I think.
Therefore it is refreshing to learn now, several months after the above narrative was written, that another man received all the credit of this rescue of the colonists.
Such is life.
] Alexandria was too much like a European city to be novel, and we soon tired of it.
We took the cars and came up here to ancient Cairo, which is an Oriental city and of the completest pattern.
There is little about it to disabuse one's mind of the error if he should take it into his head that he was in the heart of Arabia.
Stately camels and dromedaries, swarthy Egyptians, and likewise Turks and black Ethiopians, turbaned, sashed, and blazing in a rich variety of Oriental costumes of all shades of flashy colors, are what one sees on every hand crowding the narrow streets and
We are stopping at Shepherd's Hotel, which is the worst on earth except the one I stopped at once in a small town in the United States.
It is pleasant to read this sketch in my note-book, now, and know that I can stand Shepherd's Hotel, sure, because I have been in one just like it in America and survived: I stopped at the Benton House.
It used to be a good hotel, but that proves nothing--I used to be a good boy, for that matter.
Both of us have lost character of late years.
The Benton is not a good hotel.
The Benton lacks a very great deal of being a good hotel.
Perdition is full of better hotels than the Benton.
It was late at night when I got there, and I told the clerk I would like plenty of lights, because I wanted to read an hour or two.
When I reached No.
15 with the porter (we came along a dim hall that was clad in ancient carpeting, faded, worn out in many places, and patched with old scraps of oil cloth--a hall that sank under one's feet, and creaked dismally to every footstep,) he struck a light --two
The porter lit it again, and I asked if that was all the light the clerk sent.
He said, "Oh no, I've got another one here," and he produced another couple of inches of tallow candle.
I said, "Light them both --I'll have to have one to see the other by".
He did it, but the result was drearier than darkness itself.
He was a cheery, accommodating rascal.
He said he would go "somewheres" and steal a lamp.
I abetted and encouraged him in his criminal design.
I heard the landlord get after him in the hall ten minutes afterward.
"Where are you going with that lamp"?
"Fifteen wants it, sir".
"Fifteen!
why he's got a double lot of candles--does the man want to illuminate the house?
--does he want to get up a torch-light procession?
--what is he up to, any how"?
"He don't like them candles--says he wants a lamp".
"Why what in the nation does----why I never heard of such a thing?
What on earth can he want with that lamp"?
"Well, he only wants to read--that's what he says".
"Wants to read, does he?
--ain't satisfied with a thousand candles, but has to have a lamp!
--I do wonder what the devil that fellow wants that lamp for?
Take him another candle, and then if----" "But he wants the lamp--says he'll burn the d--d old house down if he don't get a lamp"!
(a remark which I never made.
) "I'd like to see him at it once.
Well, you take it along--but I swear it beats my time, though--and see if you can't find out what in the very nation he wants with that lamp".
And he went off growling to himself and still wondering and wondering over the unaccountable conduct of No.
15.
The lamp was a good one, but it revealed some disagreeable things--a bed in the suburbs of a desert of room--a bed that had hills and valleys in it, and you'd have to accommodate your body to the impression left in it by the man that slept there last,
I sighed and said: "This is charming; and now don't you think you could get me something to read"?
The porter said, "Oh, certainly; the old man's got dead loads of books;" and he was gone before I could tell him what sort of literature I would rather have.
And yet his countenance expressed the utmost confidence in his ability to execute the commission with credit to himself.
The old man made a descent on him.
"What are you going to do with that pile of books"?
"Fifteen wants 'em, sir".
"Fifteen, is it?
He'll want a warming-pan, next--he'll want a nurse!
Take him every thing there is in the house--take him the bar-keeper--take him the baggage-wagon--take him a chamber-maid!
Confound me, I never saw any thing like it.
What did he say he wants with those books"?
"Wants to read 'em, like enough; it ain't likely he wants to eat 'em, I don't reckon".
"Wants to read 'em--wants to read 'em this time of night, the infernal lunatic!
Well, he can't have them".
"But he says he's mor'ly bound to have 'em; he says he'll just go a-rairin' and a-chargin' through this house and raise more--well, there's no tellin' what he won't do if he don't get 'em; because he's drunk and crazy and desperate, and nothing'll soothe
[I had not made any threats, and was not in the condition ascribed to me by the porter.
] "Well, go on; but I will be around when he goes to rairing and charging, and the first rair he makes I'll make him rair out of the window".
And then the old gentleman went off, growling as before.
The genius of that porter was something wonderful.
He put an armful of books on the bed and said "Good night" as confidently as if he knew perfectly well that those books were exactly my style of reading matter.
And well he might.
His selection covered the whole range of legitimate literature.
It comprised "The Great Consummation," by Rev.
Dr. Cummings--theology; "Revised Statutes of the State of Missouri"--law; "The Complete Horse-Doctor"--medicine; "The Toilers of the Sea," by Victor Hugo--romance; "The works of William Shakspeare"--poetry.
I shall never cease to admire the tact and the intelligence of that gifted porter.
But all the donkeys in Christendom, and most of the Egyptian boys, I think, are at the door, and there is some noise going on, not to put it in stronger language.
--We are about starting to the illustrious Pyramids of Egypt, and the donkeys for the voyage are under inspection.
I will go and select one before the choice animals are all taken.
CHAPTER LVIII.
The donkeys were all good, all handsome, all strong and in good condition, all fast and all willing to prove it.
They were the best we had found any where, and the most 'recherche'.
I do not know what 'recherche' is, but that is what these donkeys were, anyhow.
Some were of a soft mouse-color, and the others were white, black, and vari-colored.
Some were close-shaven, all over, except that a tuft like a paint-brush was left on the end of the tail.
Others were so shaven in fanciful landscape garden patterns, as to mark their bodies with curving lines, which were bounded on one side by hair and on the other by the close plush left by the shears.
They had all been newly barbered, and were exceedingly stylish.
Several of the white ones were barred like zebras with rainbow stripes of blue and red and yellow paint.
These were indescribably gorgeous.
Dan and Jack selected from this lot because they brought back Italian reminiscences of the "old masters".
The saddles were the high, stuffy, frog-shaped things we had known in Ephesus and Smyrna.
The donkey-boys were lively young Egyptian rascals who could follow a donkey and keep him in a canter half a day without tiring.
We had plenty of spectators when we mounted, for the hotel was full of English people bound overland to India and officers getting ready for the African campaign against the Abyssinian King Theodorus.
We were not a very large party, but as we charged through the streets of the great metropolis, we made noise for five hundred, and displayed activity and created excitement in proportion.
Nobody can steer a donkey, and some collided with camels, dervishes, effendis, asses, beggars and every thing else that offered to the donkeys a reasonable chance for a collision.
When we turned into the broad avenue that leads out of the city toward Old Cairo, there was plenty of room.
The walls of stately date-palms that fenced the gardens and bordered the way, threw their shadows down and made the air cool and bracing.
We rose to the spirit of the time and the race became a wild rout, a stampede, a terrific panic.
I wish to live to enjoy it again.
Somewhere along this route we had a few startling exhibitions of Oriental simplicity.
A girl apparently thirteen years of age came along the great thoroughfare dressed like Eve before the fall.
We would have called her thirteen at home; but here girls who look thirteen are often not more than nine, in reality.
Occasionally we saw stark-naked men of superb build, bathing, and making no attempt at concealment.
However, an hour's acquaintance with this cheerful custom reconciled the pilgrims to it, and then it ceased to occasion remark.
Thus easily do even the most startling novelties grow tame and spiritless to these sight-surfeited wanderers.
Arrived at Old Cairo, the camp-followers took up the donkeys and tumbled them bodily aboard a small boat with a lateen sail, and we followed and got under way.
The deck was closely packed with donkeys and men; the two sailors had to climb over and under and through the wedged mass to work the sails, and the steersman had to crowd four or five donkeys out of the way when he wished to swing his tiller and put his
But what were their troubles to us?
We had nothing to do; nothing to do but enjoy the trip; nothing to do but shove the donkeys off our corns and look at the charming scenery of the Nile.
On the island at our right was the machine they call the Nilometer, a stone-column whose business it is to mark the rise of the river and prophecy whether it will reach only thirty-two feet and produce a famine, or whether it will properly flood the land
On the same island is still shown the spot where Pharaoh's daughter found Moses in the bulrushes.
Near the spot we sailed from, the Holy Family dwelt when they sojourned in Egypt till Herod should complete his slaughter of the innocents.
The same tree they rested under when they first arrived, was there a short time ago, but the Viceroy of Egypt sent it to the Empress Eugenie lately.
He was just in time, otherwise our pilgrims would have had it.
The Nile at this point is muddy, swift and turbid, and does not lack a great deal of being as wide as the Mississippi.
We scrambled up the steep bank at the shabby town of Ghizeh, mounted the donkeys again, and scampered away.
For four or five miles the route lay along a high embankment which they say is to be the bed of a railway the Sultan means to build for no other reason than that when the Empress of the French comes to visit him she can go to the Pyramids in comfort.
This is true Oriental hospitality.
I am very glad it is our privilege to have donkeys instead of cars.
At the distance of a few miles the Pyramids rising above the palms, looked very clean-cut, very grand and imposing, and very soft and filmy, as well.
They swam in a rich haze that took from them all suggestions of unfeeling stone, and made them seem only the airy nothings of a dream --structures which might blossom into tiers of vague arches, or ornate colonnades, may be, and change and change again,
At the end of the levee we left the mules and went in a sailboat across an arm of the Nile or an overflow, and landed where the sands of the Great Sahara left their embankment, as straight as a wall, along the verge of the alluvial plain of the river.
A laborious walk in the flaming sun brought us to the foot of the great Pyramid of Cheops.
It was a fairy vision no longer.
It was a corrugated, unsightly mountain of stone.
Each of its monstrous sides was a wide stairway which rose upward, step above step, narrowing as it went, till it tapered to a point far aloft in the air.
Insect men and women--pilgrims from the Quaker City--were creeping about its dizzy perches, and one little black swarm were waving postage stamps from the airy summit--handkerchiefs will be understood.
Of course we were besieged by a rabble of muscular Egyptians and Arabs who wanted the contract of dragging us to the top--all tourists are.
Of course you could not hear your own voice for the din that was around you.
Of course the Sheiks said they were the only responsible parties; that all contracts must be made with them, all moneys paid over to them, and none exacted from us by any but themselves alone.
Of course they contracted that the varlets who dragged us up should not mention bucksheesh once.
For such is the usual routine.
Of course we contracted with them, paid them, were delivered into the hands of the draggers, dragged up the Pyramids, and harried and be-deviled for bucksheesh from the foundation clear to the summit.
We paid it, too, for we were purposely spread very far apart over the vast side of the Pyramid.
There was no help near if we called, and the Herculeses who dragged us had a way of asking sweetly and flatteringly for bucksheesh, which was seductive, and of looking fierce and threatening to throw us down the precipice, which was persuasive and
Each step being full as high as a dinner-table; there being very, very many of the steps; an Arab having hold of each of our arms and springing upward from step to step and snatching us with them, forcing us to lift our feet as high as our breasts every
I beseeched the varlets not to twist all my joints asunder; I iterated, reiterated, even swore to them that I did not wish to beat any body to the top; did all I could to convince them that if I got there the last of all I would feel blessed above men and
Twice, for one minute, they let me rest while they extorted bucksheesh, and then continued their maniac flight up the Pyramid.
They wished to beat the other parties.
It was nothing to them that I, a stranger, must be sacrificed upon the altar of their unholy ambition.
But in the midst of sorrow, joy blooms.
Even in this dark hour I had a sweet consolation.
For I knew that except these Mohammedans repented they would go straight to perdition some day.
And they never repent--they never forsake their paganism.
This thought calmed me, cheered me, and I sank down, limp and exhausted, upon the summit, but happy, so happy and serene within.
On the one hand, a mighty sea of yellow sand stretched away toward the ends of the earth, solemn, silent, shorn of vegetation, its solitude uncheered by any forms of creature life; on the other, the Eden of Egypt was spread below us--a broad green floor,
It lay asleep in an enchanted atmosphere.
There was no sound, no motion.
Above the date-plumes in the middle distance, swelled a domed and pinnacled mass, glimmering through a tinted, exquisite mist; away toward the horizon a dozen shapely pyramids watched over ruined Memphis: and at our feet the bland impassible Sphynx looked
We suffered torture no pen can describe from the hungry appeals for bucksheesh that gleamed from Arab eyes and poured incessantly from Arab lips.
Why try to call up the traditions of vanished Egyptian grandeur; why try to fancy Egypt following dead Rameses to his tomb in the Pyramid, or the long multitude of Israel departing over the desert yonder?
Why try to think at all?
The thing was impossible.
One must bring his meditations cut and dried, or else cut and dry them afterward.
The traditional Arab proposed, in the traditional way, to run down Cheops, cross the eighth of a mile of sand intervening between it and the tall pyramid of Cephron, ascend to Cephron's summit and return to us on the top of Cheops--all in nine minutes by
In the first flush of irritation, I said let the Arab and his exploits go to the mischief.
But stay.
The upper third of Cephron was coated with dressed marble, smooth as glass.
A blessed thought entered my brain.
He must infallibly break his neck.
Close the contract with dispatch, I said, and let him go.
He started.
We watched.
He went bounding down the vast broadside, spring after spring, like an ibex.
He grew small and smaller till he became a bobbing pigmy, away down toward the bottom--then disappeared.
We turned and peered over the other side--forty seconds--eighty seconds --a hundred--happiness, he is dead already!
--two minutes--and a quarter --"There he goes"!
Too true--it was too true.
He was very small, now.
Gradually, but surely, he overcame the level ground.
He began to spring and climb again.
Up, up, up--at last he reached the smooth coating--now for it.
But he clung to it with toes and fingers, like a fly.
He crawled this way and that--away to the right, slanting upward--away to the left, still slanting upward--and stood at last, a black peg on the summit, and waved his pigmy scarf!
Then he crept downward to the raw steps again, then picked up his agile heels and flew.
We lost him presently.
But presently again we saw him under us, mounting with undiminished energy.
Shortly he bounded into our midst with a gallant war-whoop.
Time, eight minutes, forty-one seconds.
He had won.
His bones were intact.
It was a failure.
I reflected.
I said to myself, he is tired, and must grow dizzy.
I will risk another dollar on him.
He started again.
Made the trip again.
Slipped on the smooth coating --I almost had him.
But an infamous crevice saved him.
He was with us once more--perfectly sound.
Time, eight minutes, forty-six seconds.
I said to Dan, "Lend me a dollar--I can beat this game, yet".
Worse and worse.
He won again.
Time, eight minutes, forty-eight seconds.
I was out of all patience, now.
I was desperate.
--Money was no longer of any consequence.
I said, "Sirrah, I will give you a hundred dollars to jump off this pyramid head first.
If you do not like the terms, name your bet.
I scorn to stand on expenses now.
I will stay right here and risk money on you as long as Dan has got a cent".
I was in a fair way to win, now, for it was a dazzling opportunity for an Arab.
He pondered a moment, and would have done it, I think, but his mother arrived, then, and interfered.
Her tears moved me--I never can look upon the tears of woman with indifference--and I said I would give her a hundred to jump off, too.
But it was a failure.
The Arabs are too high-priced in Egypt.
They put on airs unbecoming to such savages.
We descended, hot and out of humor.
The dragoman lit candles, and we all entered a hole near the base of the pyramid, attended by a crazy rabble of Arabs who thrust their services upon us uninvited.
They dragged us up a long inclined chute, and dripped candle-grease all over us.
This chute was not more than twice as wide and high as a Saratoga trunk, and was walled, roofed and floored with solid blocks of Egyptian granite as wide as a wardrobe, twice as thick and three times as long.
We kept on climbing, through the oppressive gloom, till I thought we ought to be nearing the top of the pyramid again, and then came to the "Queen's Chamber," and shortly to the Chamber of the King.
These large apartments were tombs.
The walls were built of monstrous masses of smoothed granite, neatly joined together.
Some of them were nearly as large square as an ordinary parlor.
A great stone sarcophagus like a bath-tub stood in the centre of the King's Chamber.
Around it were gathered a picturesque group of Arab savages and soiled and tattered pilgrims, who held their candles aloft in the gloom while they chattered, and the winking blurs of light shed a dim glory down upon one of the irrepressible memento-seekers
We struggled out to the open air and the bright sunshine, and for the space of thirty minutes received ragged Arabs by couples, dozens and platoons, and paid them bucksheesh for services they swore and proved by each other that they had rendered, but which
We lunched in the shade of the pyramid, and in the midst of this encroaching and unwelcome company, and then Dan and Jack and I started away for a walk.
A howling swarm of beggars followed us--surrounded us --almost headed us off.
A sheik, in flowing white bournous and gaudy head-gear, was with them.
He wanted more bucksheesh.
But we had adopted a new code--it was millions for defense, but not a cent for bucksheesh.
I asked him if he could persuade the others to depart if we paid him.
He said yes--for ten francs.
We accepted the contract, and said-- "Now persuade your vassals to fall back".
He swung his long staff round his head and three Arabs bit the dust.
He capered among the mob like a very maniac.
His blows fell like hail, and wherever one fell a subject went down.
We had to hurry to the rescue and tell him it was only necessary to damage them a little, he need not kill them.
--In two minutes we were alone with the sheik, and remained so.
The persuasive powers of this illiterate savage were remarkable.
Each side of the Pyramid of Cheops is about as long as the Capitol at Washington, or the Sultan's new palace on the Bosporus, and is longer than the greatest depth of St. Peter's at Rome--which is to say that each side of Cheops extends seven hundred and
It is about seventy-five feet higher than the cross on St. Peter's.
The first time I ever went down the Mississippi, I thought the highest bluff on the river between St. Louis and New Orleans--it was near Selma, Missouri--was probably the highest mountain in the world.
It is four hundred and thirteen feet high.
It still looms in my memory with undiminished grandeur.
I can still see the trees and bushes growing smaller and smaller as I followed them up its huge slant with my eye, till they became a feathery fringe on the distant summit.
This symmetrical Pyramid of Cheops--this solid mountain of stone reared by the patient hands of men--this mighty tomb of a forgotten monarch--dwarfs my cherished mountain.
For it is four hundred and eighty feet high.
In still earlier years than those I have been recalling, Holliday's Hill, in our town, was to me the noblest work of God.
It appeared to pierce the skies.
It was nearly three hundred feet high.
In those days I pondered the subject much, but I never could understand why it did not swathe its summit with never-failing clouds, and crown its majestic brow with everlasting snows.
I had heard that such was the custom of great mountains in other parts of the world.
I remembered how I worked with another boy, at odd afternoons stolen from study and paid for with stripes, to undermine and start from its bed an immense boulder that rested upon the edge of that hilltop; I remembered how, one Saturday afternoon, we gave
It was splendid.
It went crashing down the hillside, tearing up saplings, mowing bushes down like grass, ripping and crushing and smashing every thing in its path--eternally splintered and scattered a wood pile at the foot of the hill, and then sprang from the high bank
Then we said it was perfectly magnificent, and left.
Because the coopers were starting up the hill to inquire.
Still, that mountain, prodigious as it was, was nothing to the Pyramid of Cheops.
I could conjure up no comparison that would convey to my mind a satisfactory comprehension of the magnitude of a pile of monstrous stones that covered thirteen acres of ground and stretched upward four hundred and eighty tiresome feet, and so I gave it up
After years of waiting, it was before me at last.
The great face was so sad, so earnest, so longing, so patient.
There was a dignity not of earth in its mien, and in its countenance a benignity such as never any thing human wore.
It was stone, but it seemed sentient.
If ever image of stone thought, it was thinking.
It was looking toward the verge of the landscape, yet looking at nothing--nothing but distance and vacancy.
It was looking over and beyond every thing of the present, and far into the past.
It was gazing out over the ocean of Time--over lines of century-waves which, further and further receding, closed nearer and nearer together, and blended at last into one unbroken tide, away toward the horizon of remote antiquity.
It was thinking of the wars of departed ages; of the empires it had seen created and destroyed; of the nations whose birth it had witnessed, whose progress it had watched, whose annihilation it had noted; of the joy and sorrow, the life and death, the
It was the type of an attribute of man--of a faculty of his heart and brain.
It was MEMORY--RETROSPECTION--wrought into visible, tangible form.
All who know what pathos there is in memories of days that are accomplished and faces that have vanished--albeit only a trifling score of years gone by--will have some appreciation of the pathos that dwells in these grave eyes that look so steadfastly back
The Sphynx is grand in its loneliness; it is imposing in its magnitude; it is impressive in the mystery that hangs over its story.
And there is that in the overshadowing majesty of this eternal figure of stone, with its accusing memory of the deeds of all ages, which reveals to one something of what he shall feel when he shall stand at last in the awful presence of God.
There are some things which, for the credit of America, should be left unsaid, perhaps; but these very things happen sometimes to be the very things which, for the real benefit of Americans, ought to have prominent notice.
While we stood looking, a wart, or an excrescence of some kind, appeared on the jaw of the Sphynx.
We heard the familiar clink of a hammer, and understood the case at once.
One of our well meaning reptiles--I mean relic-hunters--had crawled up there and was trying to break a "specimen" from the face of this the most majestic creation the hand of man has wrought.
But the great image contemplated the dead ages as calmly as ever, unconscious of the small insect that was fretting at its jaw.
Egyptian granite that has defied the storms and earthquakes of all time has nothing to fear from the tack-hammers of ignorant excursionists--highwaymen like this specimen.
He failed in his enterprise.
We sent a sheik to arrest him if he had the authority, or to warn him, if he had not, that by the laws of Egypt the crime he was attempting to commit was punishable with imprisonment or the bastinado.
Then he desisted and went away.
The Sphynx: a hundred and twenty-five feet long, sixty feet high, and a hundred and two feet around the head, if I remember rightly--carved out of one solid block of stone harder than any iron.
The block must have been as large as the Fifth Avenue Hotel before the usual waste (by the necessities of sculpture) of a fourth or a half of the original mass was begun.
I only set down these figures and these remarks to suggest the prodigious labor the carving of it so elegantly, so symmetrically, so faultlessly, must have cost.
This species of stone is so hard that figures cut in it remain sharp and unmarred after exposure to the weather for two or three thousand years.
Now did it take a hundred years of patient toil to carve the Sphynx?
It seems probable.
Something interfered, and we did not visit the Red Sea and walk upon the sands of Arabia.
I shall not describe the great mosque of Mehemet Ali, whose entire inner walls are built of polished and glistening alabaster; I shall not tell how the little birds have built their nests in the globes of the great chandeliers that hang in the mosque, and
I only tell it as I got it.
I am willing to believe it.
I can believe any thing.
]--I shall not tell of the groups of mud cones stuck like wasps' nests upon a thousand mounds above high water-mark the length and breadth of Egypt--villages of the lower classes; I shall not speak of the boundless sweep of level plain, green with
I shall not speak a word of any of these things, or write a line.
They shall be as a sealed book.
I do not know what a sealed book is, because I never saw one, but a sealed book is the expression to use in this connection, because it is popular.
We were glad to have seen the land which was the mother of civilization --which taught Greece her letters, and through Greece Rome, and through Rome the world; the land which could have humanized and civilized the hapless children of Israel, but allowed
We were glad to have seen that land which had an enlightened religion with future eternal rewards and punishment in it, while even Israel's religion contained no promise of a hereafter.
We were glad to have seen that land which had glass three thousand years before England had it, and could paint upon it as none of us can paint now; that land which knew, three thousand years ago, well nigh all of medicine and surgery which science has
CHAPTER LIX.
We were at sea now, for a very long voyage--we were to pass through the entire length of the Levant; through the entire length of the Mediterranean proper, also, and then cross the full width of the Atlantic--a voyage of several weeks.
We naturally settled down into a very slow, stay-at-home manner of life, and resolved to be quiet, exemplary people, and roam no more for twenty or thirty days.
No more, at least, than from stem to stern of the ship.
It was a very comfortable prospect, though, for we were tired and needed a long rest.
We were all lazy and satisfied, now, as the meager entries in my note-book (that sure index, to me, of my condition), prove.
What a stupid thing a note-book gets to be at sea, any way.
Please observe the style: "Sunday--Services, as usual, at four bells.
Services at night, also.
No cards.
"Monday--Beautiful day, but rained hard.
The cattle purchased at Alexandria for beef ought to be shingled.
Or else fattened.
The water stands in deep puddles in the depressions forward of their after shoulders.
Also here and there all over their backs.
It is well they are not cows--it would soak in and ruin the milk.
The poor devil eagle--[Afterwards presented to the Central Park.
]--from Syria looks miserable and droopy in the rain, perched on the forward capstan.
He appears to have his own opinion of a sea voyage, and if it were put into language and the language solidified, it would probably essentially dam the widest river in the world.
"Tuesday--Somewhere in the neighborhood of the island of Malta.
Can not stop there.
Cholera.
Weather very stormy.
Many passengers seasick and invisible.
"Wednesday--Weather still very savage.
Storm blew two land birds to sea, and they came on board.
A hawk was blown off, also.
He circled round and round the ship, wanting to light, but afraid of the people.
He was so tired, though, that he had to light, at last, or perish.
He stopped in the foretop, repeatedly, and was as often blown away by the wind.
At last Harry caught him.
Sea full of flying-fish.
They rise in flocks of three hundred and flash along above the tops of the waves a distance of two or three hundred feet, then fall and disappear.
"Thursday--Anchored off Algiers, Africa.
Beautiful city, beautiful green hilly landscape behind it.
Staid half a day and left.
Not permitted to land, though we showed a clean bill of health.
They were afraid of Egyptian plague and cholera.
"Friday--Morning, dominoes.
Afternoon, dominoes.
Evening, promenading the deck.
Afterwards, charades.
"Saturday--Morning, dominoes.
Afternoon, dominoes.
Evening, promenading the decks.
Afterwards, dominoes.
"Sunday--Morning service, four bells.
Evening service, eight bells.
Monotony till midnight.
--Whereupon, dominoes.
"Monday--Morning, dominoes.
Afternoon, dominoes.
Evening, promenading the decks.
Afterward, charades and a lecture from Dr. C. Dominoes.
"No date--Anchored off the picturesque city of Cagliari, Sardinia.
Staid till midnight, but not permitted to land by these infamous foreigners.
They smell inodorously--they do not wash--they dare not risk cholera.
"Thursday--Anchored off the beautiful cathedral city of Malaga, Spain.
--Went ashore in the captain's boat--not ashore, either, for they would not let us land.
Quarantine.
Shipped my newspaper correspondence, which they took with tongs, dipped it in sea water, clipped it full of holes, and then fumigated it with villainous vapors till it smelt like a Spaniard.
Inquired about chances to run to blockade and visit the Alhambra at Granada.
Too risky--they might hang a body.
Set sail--middle of afternoon.
"And so on, and so on, and so forth, for several days.
Finally, anchored off Gibraltar, which looks familiar and home-like".
It reminds me of the journal I opened with the New Year, once, when I was a boy and a confiding and a willing prey to those impossible schemes of reform which well-meaning old maids and grandmothers set for the feet of unwary youths at that season of the
Please accept of an extract: "Monday--Got up, washed, went to bed.
"Tuesday--Got up, washed, went to bed.
"Wednesday--Got up, washed, went to bed.
"Thursday--Got up, washed, went to bed.
"Friday--Got up, washed, went to bed.
"Next Friday--Got up, washed, went to bed.
"Friday fortnight--Got up, washed, went to bed.
"Following month--Got up, washed, went to bed".
I stopped, then, discouraged.
Startling events appeared to be too rare, in my career, to render a diary necessary.
I still reflect with pride, however, that even at that early age I washed when I got up.
That journal finished me.
I never have had the nerve to keep one since.
My loss of confidence in myself in that line was permanent.
The ship had to stay a week or more at Gibraltar to take in coal for the home voyage.
It would be very tiresome staying here, and so four of us ran the quarantine blockade and spent seven delightful days in Seville, Cordova, Cadiz, and wandering through the pleasant rural scenery of Andalusia, the garden of Old Spain.
The experiences of that cheery week were too varied and numerous for a short chapter and I have not room for a long one.
Therefore I shall leave them all out.
CHAPTER LX.
Ten or eleven o'clock found us coming down to breakfast one morning in Cadiz.
They told us the ship had been lying at anchor in the harbor two or three hours.
It was time for us to bestir ourselves.
The ship could wait only a little while because of the quarantine.
We were soon on board, and within the hour the white city and the pleasant shores of Spain sank down behind the waves and passed out of sight.
We had seen no land fade from view so regretfully.
It had long ago been decided in a noisy public meeting in the main cabin that we could not go to Lisbon, because we must surely be quarantined there.
We did every thing by mass-meeting, in the good old national way, from swapping off one empire for another on the programme of the voyage down to complaining of the cookery and the scarcity of napkins.
I am reminded, now, of one of these complaints of the cookery made by a passenger.
The coffee had been steadily growing more and more execrable for the space of three weeks, till at last it had ceased to be coffee altogether and had assumed the nature of mere discolored water--so this person said.
He said it was so weak that it was transparent an inch in depth around the edge of the cup.
As he approached the table one morning he saw the transparent edge--by means of his extraordinary vision long before he got to his seat.
He went back and complained in a high-handed way to Capt.
Duncan.
He said the coffee was disgraceful.
The Captain showed his.
It seemed tolerably good.
The incipient mutineer was more outraged than ever, then, at what he denounced as the partiality shown the captain's table over the other tables in the ship.
He flourished back and got his cup and set it down triumphantly, and said: "Just try that mixture once, Captain Duncan".
He smelt it--tasted it--smiled benignantly--then said: "It is inferior--for coffee--but it is pretty fair tea".
The humbled mutineer smelt it, tasted it, and returned to his seat.
He had made an egregious ass of himself before the whole ship.
He did it no more.
After that he took things as they came.
That was me.
The old-fashioned ship-life had returned, now that we were no longer in sight of land.
For days and days it continued just the same, one day being exactly like another, and, to me, every one of them pleasant.
At last we anchored in the open roadstead of Funchal, in the beautiful islands we call the Madeiras.
The mountains looked surpassingly lovely, clad as they were in living, green; ribbed with lava ridges; flecked with white cottages; riven by deep chasms purple with shade; the great slopes dashed with sunshine and mottled with shadows flung from the
But we could not land.
We staid all day and looked, we abused the man who invented quarantine, we held half a dozen mass-meetings and crammed them full of interrupted speeches, motions that fell still-born, amendments that came to nought and resolutions that died from sheer
At night we set sail.
We averaged four mass-meetings a week for the voyage--we seemed always in labor in this way, and yet so often fallaciously that whenever at long intervals we were safely delivered of a resolution, it was cause for public rejoicing, and we hoisted the flag
Days passed--and nights; and then the beautiful Bermudas rose out of the sea, we entered the tortuous channel, steamed hither and thither among the bright summer islands, and rested at last under the flag of England and were welcome.
We were not a nightmare here, where were civilization and intelligence in place of Spanish and Italian superstition, dirt and dread of cholera.
A few days among the breezy groves, the flower gardens, the coral caves, and the lovely vistas of blue water that went curving in and out, disappearing and anon again appearing through jungle walls of brilliant foliage, restored the energies dulled by long
We bade good-bye to "our friends the Bermudians," as our programme hath it--the majority of those we were most intimate with were negroes--and courted the great deep again.
I said the majority.
We knew more negroes than white people, because we had a deal of washing to be done, but we made some most excellent friends among the whites, whom it will be a pleasant duty to hold long in grateful remembrance.
We sailed, and from that hour all idling ceased.
Such another system of overhauling, general littering of cabins and packing of trunks we had not seen since we let go the anchor in the harbor of Beirout.
Every body was busy.
Lists of all purchases had to be made out, and values attached, to facilitate matters at the custom-house.
Purchases bought by bulk in partnership had to be equitably divided, outstanding debts canceled, accounts compared, and trunks, boxes and packages labeled.
All day long the bustle and confusion continued.
And now came our first accident.
A passenger was running through a gangway, between decks, one stormy night, when he caught his foot in the iron staple of a door that had been heedlessly left off a hatchway, and the bones of his leg broke at the ancle.
It was our first serious misfortune.
We had traveled much more than twenty thousand miles, by land and sea, in many trying climates, without a single hurt, without a serious case of sickness and without a death among five and sixty passengers.
Our good fortune had been wonderful.
A sailor had jumped overboard at Constantinople one night, and was seen no more, but it was suspected that his object was to desert, and there was a slim chance, at least, that he reached the shore.
But the passenger list was complete.
There was no name missing from the register.
At last, one pleasant morning, we steamed up the harbor of New York, all on deck, all dressed in Christian garb--by special order, for there was a latent disposition in some quarters to come out as Turks--and amid a waving of handkerchiefs from welcoming
Amen.
CHAPTER LXI.
In this place I will print an article which I wrote for the New York Herald the night we arrived.
I do it partly because my contract with my publishers makes it compulsory; partly because it is a proper, tolerably accurate, and exhaustive summing up of the cruise of the ship and the performances of the pilgrims in foreign lands; and partly because some
I was charged with "rushing into print" with these compliments.
I did not rush.
I had written news letters to the Herald sometimes, but yet when I visited the office that day I did not say any thing about writing a valedictory.
I did go to the Tribune office to see if such an article was wanted, because I belonged on the regular staff of that paper and it was simply a duty to do it.
The managing editor was absent, and so I thought no more about it.
At night when the Herald's request came for an article, I did not "rush".
In fact, I demurred for a while, because I did not feel like writing compliments then, and therefore was afraid to speak of the cruise lest I might be betrayed into using other than complimentary language.
However, I reflected that it would be a just and righteous thing to go down and write a kind word for the Hadjis--Hadjis are people who have made the pilgrimage--because parties not interested could not do it so feelingly as I, a fellow-Hadji, and so I
I have read it, and read it again; and if there is a sentence in it that is not fulsomely complimentary to captain, ship and passengers, I can not find it.
If it is not a chapter that any company might be proud to have a body write about them, my judgment is fit for nothing.
With these remarks I confidently submit it to the unprejudiced judgment of the reader: RETURN OF THE HOLY LAND EXCURSIONISTS--THE STORY OF THE CRUISE.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD: The steamer Quaker City has accomplished at last her extraordinary voyage and returned to her old pier at the foot of Wall street.
The expedition was a success in some respects, in some it was not.
Originally it was advertised as a "pleasure excursion".
Well, perhaps, it was a pleasure excursion, but certainly it did not look like one; certainly it did not act like one.
Any body's and every body's notion of a pleasure excursion is that the parties to it will of a necessity be young and giddy and somewhat boisterous.
They will dance a good deal, sing a good deal, make love, but sermonize very little.
Any body's and every body's notion of a well conducted funeral is that there must be a hearse and a corpse, and chief mourners and mourners by courtesy, many old people, much solemnity, no levity, and a prayer and a sermon withal.
Three-fourths of the Quaker City's passengers were between forty and seventy years of age!
There was a picnic crowd for you!
It may be supposed that the other fourth was composed of young girls.
But it was not.
It was chiefly composed of rusty old bachelors and a child of six years.
Let us average the ages of the Quaker City's pilgrims and set the figure down as fifty years.
Is any man insane enough to imagine that this picnic of patriarchs sang, made love, danced, laughed, told anecdotes, dealt in ungodly levity?
In my experience they sinned little in these matters.
No doubt it was presumed here at home that these frolicsome veterans laughed and sang and romped all day, and day after day, and kept up a noisy excitement from one end of the ship to the other; and that they played blind-man's buff or danced quadrilles
If these things were presumed, the presumption was at fault.
The venerable excursionists were not gay and frisky.
They played no blind-man's buff; they dealt not in whist; they shirked not the irksome journal, for alas!
most of them were even writing books.
They never romped, they talked but little, they never sang, save in the nightly prayer-meeting.
The pleasure ship was a synagogue, and the pleasure trip was a funeral excursion without a corpse.
(There is nothing exhilarating about a funeral excursion without a corpse.
) A free, hearty laugh was a sound that was not heard oftener than once in seven days about those decks or in those cabins, and when it was heard it met with precious little sympathy.
The excursionists danced, on three separate evenings, long, long ago, (it seems an age.
) quadrilles, of a single set, made up of three ladies and five gentlemen, (the latter with handkerchiefs around their arms to signify their sex.
) who timed their feet to the solemn wheezing of a melodeon; but even this melancholy orgie was voted to be sinful, and dancing was discontinued.
The pilgrims played dominoes when too much Josephus or Robinson's Holy Land Researches, or book-writing, made recreation necessary --for dominoes is about as mild and sinless a game as any in the world, perhaps, excepting always the ineffably insipid
When they were not seasick they were uncommonly prompt when the dinner-gong sounded.
Such was our daily life on board the ship--solemnity, decorum, dinner, dominoes, devotions, slander.
It was not lively enough for a pleasure trip; but if we had only had a corpse it would have made a noble funeral excursion.
It is all over now; but when I look back, the idea of these venerable fossils skipping forth on a six months' picnic, seems exquisitely refreshing.
The advertised title of the expedition--"The Grand Holy Land Pleasure Excursion" --was a misnomer.
"The Grand Holy Land Funeral Procession" would have been better--much better.
Wherever we went, in Europe, Asia, or Africa, we made a sensation, and, I suppose I may add, created a famine.
None of us had ever been any where before; we all hailed from the interior; travel was a wild novelty to us, and we conducted ourselves in accordance with the natural instincts that were in us, and trammeled ourselves with no ceremonies, no
We always took care to make it understood that we were Americans--Americans!
When we found that a good many foreigners had hardly ever heard of America, and that a good many more knew it only as a barbarous province away off somewhere, that had lately been at war with somebody, we pitied the ignorance of the Old World, but abated
Many and many a simple community in the Eastern hemisphere will remember for years the incursion of the strange horde in the year of our Lord 1867, that called themselves Americans, and seemed to imagine in some unaccountable way that they had a right to
We generally created a famine, partly because the coffee on the Quaker City was unendurable, and sometimes the more substantial fare was not strictly first class; and partly because one naturally tires of sitting long at the same board and eating from the
The people of those foreign countries are very, very ignorant.
They looked curiously at the costumes we had brought from the wilds of America.
They observed that we talked loudly at table sometimes.
They noticed that we looked out for expenses, and got what we conveniently could out of a franc, and wondered where in the mischief we came from.
In Paris they just simply opened their eyes and stared when we spoke to them in French!
We never did succeed in making those idiots understand their own language.
One of our passengers said to a shopkeeper, in reference to a proposed return to buy a pair of gloves, "Allong restay trankeel--may be ve coom Moonday;" and would you believe it, that shopkeeper, a born Frenchman, had to ask what it was that had been said.
Sometimes it seems to me, somehow, that there must be a difference between Parisian French and Quaker City French.
The people stared at us every where, and we stared at them.
We generally made them feel rather small, too, before we got done with them, because we bore down on them with America's greatness until we crushed them.
And yet we took kindly to the manners and customs, and especially to the fashions of the various people we visited.
When we left the Azores, we wore awful capotes and used fine tooth combs--successfully.
When we came back from Tangier, in Africa, we were topped with fezzes of the bloodiest hue, hung with tassels like an Indian's scalp-lock.
In France and Spain we attracted some attention in these costumes.
In Italy they naturally took us for distempered Garibaldians, and set a gunboat to look for any thing significant in our changes of uniform.
We made Rome howl.
We could have made any place howl when we had all our clothes on.
We got no fresh raiment in Greece--they had but little there of any kind.
But at Constantinople, how we turned out!
Turbans, scimetars, fezzes, horse-pistols, tunics, sashes, baggy trowsers, yellow slippers--Oh, we were gorgeous!
The illustrious dogs of Constantinople barked their under jaws off, and even then failed to do us justice.
They are all dead by this time.
They could not go through such a run of business as we gave them and survive.
And then we went to see the Emperor of Russia.
We just called on him as comfortably as if we had known him a century or so, and when we had finished our visit we variegated ourselves with selections from Russian costumes and sailed away again more picturesque than ever.
In Smyrna we picked up camel's hair shawls and other dressy things from Persia; but in Palestine--ah, in Palestine--our splendid career ended.
They didn't wear any clothes there to speak of.
We were satisfied, and stopped.
We made no experiments.
We did not try their costume.
But we astonished the natives of that country.
We astonished them with such eccentricities of dress as we could muster.
We prowled through the Holy Land, from Cesarea Philippi to Jerusalem and the Dead Sea, a weird procession of pilgrims, gotten up regardless of expense, solemn, gorgeous, green-spectacled, drowsing under blue umbrellas, and astride of a sorrier lot of
If ever those children of Israel in Palestine forget when Gideon's Band went through there from America, they ought to be cursed once more and finished.
It was the rarest spectacle that ever astounded mortal eyes, perhaps.
Well, we were at home in Palestine.
It was easy to see that that was the grand feature of the expedition.
We had cared nothing much about Europe.
We galloped through the Louvre, the Pitti, the Ufizzi, the Vatican--all the galleries--and through the pictured and frescoed churches of Venice, Naples, and the cathedrals of Spain; some of us said that certain of the great works of the old masters were
We examined modern and ancient statuary with a critical eye in Florence, Rome, or any where we found it, and praised it if we saw fit, and if we didn't we said we preferred the wooden Indians in front of the cigar stores of America.
But the Holy Land brought out all our enthusiasm.
We fell into raptures by the barren shores of Galilee; we pondered at Tabor and at Nazareth; we exploded into poetry over the questionable loveliness of Esdraelon; we meditated at Jezreel and Samaria over the missionary zeal of Jehu; we rioted--fairly
Yet, the pilgrimage part of the excursion was its pet feature--there is no question about that.
After dismal, smileless Palestine, beautiful Egypt had few charms for us.
We merely glanced at it and were ready for home.
They wouldn't let us land at Malta--quarantine; they would not let us land in Sardinia; nor at Algiers, Africa; nor at Malaga, Spain, nor Cadiz, nor at the Madeira islands.
So we got offended at all foreigners and turned our backs upon them and came home.
I suppose we only stopped at the Bermudas because they were in the programme.
We did not care any thing about any place at all.
We wanted to go home.
Homesickness was abroad in the ship--it was epidemic.
If the authorities of New York had known how badly we had it, they would have quarantined us here.
The grand pilgrimage is over.
Good-bye to it, and a pleasant memory to it, I am able to say in all kindness.
I bear no malice, no ill-will toward any individual that was connected with it, either as passenger or officer.
Things I did not like at all yesterday I like very well to-day, now that I am at home, and always hereafter I shall be able to poke fun at the whole gang if the spirit so moves me to do, without ever saying a malicious word.
The expedition accomplished all that its programme promised that it should accomplish, and we ought all to be satisfied with the management of the matter, certainly.
Bye-bye!
MARK TWAIN.
I call that complimentary.
It is complimentary; and yet I never have received a word of thanks for it from the Hadjis; on the contrary I speak nothing but the serious truth when I say that many of them even took exceptions to the article.
In endeavoring to please them I slaved over that sketch for two hours, and had my labor for my pains.
I never will do a generous deed again.
CONCLUSION.
Nearly one year has flown since this notable pilgrimage was ended; and as I sit here at home in San Francisco thinking, I am moved to confess that day by day the mass of my memories of the excursion have grown more and more pleasant as the disagreeable
With the same captain and even the same pilgrims, the same sinners.
I was on excellent terms with eight or nine of the excursionists (they are my staunch friends yet,) and was even on speaking terms with the rest of the sixty-five.
I have been at sea quite enough to know that that was a very good average.
Because a long sea-voyage not only brings out all the mean traits one has, and exaggerates them, but raises up others which he never suspected he possessed, and even creates new ones.
A twelve months' voyage at sea would make of an ordinary man a very miracle of meanness.
On the other hand, if a man has good qualities, the spirit seldom moves him to exhibit them on shipboard, at least with any sort of emphasis.
Now I am satisfied that our pilgrims are pleasant old people on shore; I am also satisfied that at sea on a second voyage they would be pleasanter, somewhat, than they were on our grand excursion, and so I say without hesitation that I would be glad enough
I could at least enjoy life with my handful of old friends.
They could enjoy life with their cliques as well--passengers invariably divide up into cliques, on all ships.
And I will say, here, that I would rather travel with an excursion party of Methuselahs than have to be changing ships and comrades constantly, as people do who travel in the ordinary way.
Those latter are always grieving over some other ship they have known and lost, and over other comrades whom diverging routes have separated from them.
They learn to love a ship just in time to change it for another, and they become attached to a pleasant traveling companion only to lose him.
They have that most dismal experience of being in a strange vessel, among strange people who care nothing about them, and of undergoing the customary bullying by strange officers and the insolence of strange servants, repeated over and over again within
They have also that other misery of packing and unpacking trunks--of running the distressing gauntlet of custom-houses--of the anxieties attendant upon getting a mass of baggage from point to point on land in safety.
I had rasher sail with a whole brigade of patriarchs than suffer so.
We never packed our trunks but twice--when we sailed from New York, and when we returned to it.
Whenever we made a land journey, we estimated how many days we should be gone and what amount of clothing we should need, figured it down to a mathematical nicety, packed a valise or two accordingly, and left the trunks on board.
We chose our comrades from among our old, tried friends, and started.
We were never dependent upon strangers for companionship.
We often had occasion to pity Americans whom we found traveling drearily among strangers with no friends to exchange pains and pleasures with.
Whenever we were coming back from a land journey, our eyes sought one thing in the distance first--the ship --and when we saw it riding at anchor with the flag apeak, we felt as a returning wanderer feels when he sees his home.
When we stepped on board, our cares vanished, our troubles were at an end--for the ship was home to us.
We always had the same familiar old state-room to go to, and feel safe and at peace and comfortable again.
I have no fault to find with the manner in which our excursion was conducted.
Its programme was faithfully carried out--a thing which surprised me, for great enterprises usually promise vastly more than they perform.
It would be well if such an excursion could be gotten up every year and the system regularly inaugurated.
Travel is fatal to prejudice, bigotry and narrow-mindedness, and many of our people need it sorely on these accounts.
Broad, wholesome, charitable views of men and things can not be acquired by vegetating in one little corner of the earth all one's lifetime.
The Excursion is ended, and has passed to its place among the things that were.
But its varied scenes and its manifold incidents will linger pleasantly in our memories for many a year to come.
Always on the wing, as we were, and merely pausing a moment to catch fitful glimpses of the wonders of half a world, we could not hope to receive or retain vivid impressions of all it was our fortune to see.
Yet our holyday flight has not been in vain--for above the confusion of vague recollections, certain of its best prized pictures lift themselves and will still continue perfect in tint and outline after their surroundings shall have faded away.
We shall remember something of pleasant France; and something also of Paris, though it flashed upon us a splendid meteor, and was gone again, we hardly knew how or where.
We shall remember, always, how we saw majestic Gibraltar glorified with the rich coloring of a Spanish sunset and swimming in a sea of rainbows.
In fancy we shall see Milan again, and her stately Cathedral with its marble wilderness of graceful spires.
And Padua--Verona--Como, jeweled with stars; and patrician Venice, afloat on her stagnant flood--silent, desolate, haughty--scornful of her humbled state--wrapping herself in memories of her lost fleets, of battle and triumph, and all the pageantry of a
We can not forget Florence--Naples--nor the foretaste of heaven that is in the delicious atmosphere of Greece--and surely not Athens and the broken temples of the Acropolis.
Surely not venerable Rome--nor the green plain that compasses her round about, contrasting its brightness with her gray decay--nor the ruined arches that stand apart in the plain and clothe their looped and windowed raggedness with vines.
We shall remember St. Peter's: not as one sees it when he walks the streets of Rome and fancies all her domes are just alike, but as he sees it leagues away, when every meaner edifice has faded out of sight and that one dome looms superbly up in the flush
We shall remember Constantinople and the Bosporus--the colossal magnificence of Baalbec--the Pyramids of Egypt--the prodigious form, the benignant countenance of the Sphynx--Oriental Smyrna--sacred Jerusalem --Damascus, the "Pearl of the East," the prideProduced by David Widger.
The earliest PG edition was prepared by Les Bowler THE PRINCE AND THE PAUPER by Mark Twain The Great Seal I will set down a tale as it was told to me by one who had it of his father, which latter had it of HIS father, this last having in like manner had it
It may be history, it may be only a legend, a tradition.
It may have happened, it may not have happened: but it COULD have happened.
It may be that the wise and the learned believed it in the old days; it may be that only the unlearned and the simple loved it and credited it.
CONTENTS I. The birth of the Prince and the Pauper.
II.
Tom's early life.
III.
 Tom's meeting with the Prince.
IV.
The Prince's troubles begin.
V. Tom as a patrician.
VI.
Tom receives instructions.
VII.
 Tom's first royal dinner.
VIII.
 The question of the Seal.
IX.
The river pageant.
X. The Prince in the toils.
XI.
At Guildhall.
XII.
The Prince and his deliverer.
XIII.
 The disappearance of the Prince.
XIV.
'Le Roi est mort--vive le Roi.
' XV.
Tom as King.
XVI.
The state dinner.
XVII.
 Foo-foo the First.
XVIII.
 The Prince with the tramps.
XIX.
The Prince with the peasants.
XX.
The Prince and the hermit.
XXI.
Hendon to the rescue.
XXII.
A victim of treachery.
XXIII.
 The Prince a prisoner.
XXIV.
The escape.
XXV.
Hendon Hall.
XXVI.
Disowned.
XXVII.
In prison.
XXVIII.
 The sacrifice.
XXIX.
To London.
XXX.
Tom's progress.
XXXI.
The Recognition procession.
XXXII.
Coronation Day.
XXXIII.
Edward as King.
CONCLUSION.
 Justice and Retribution.
 Notes.
ILLUSTRATIONS THE GREAT SEAL (frontispiece) THE BIRTH OF THE PRINCE AND THE PAUPER "SPLENDID PAGEANTS AND GREAT BONFIRES" TOM'S EARLY LIFE OFFAL COURT "WITH ANY MISERABLE CRUST" "HE OFTEN READ THE PRIEST'S BOOKS" "SAW POOR ANNE ASKEW BURNED" "BROUGHT THEIR
THE PRINCE'S TROUBLES BEGIN "SET UPON BY DOGS" "A DRUNKEN RUFFIAN COLLARED HIM" TOM AS A PATRICIAN "NEXT HE DREW THE SWORD" "RESOLVED TO FLY" "THE BOY WAS ON HIS KNEES" "NOBLES WALKED UPON EACH SIDE OF HIM" "HE DROPPED UPON HIS KNEES" "HE TURNED WITH
TOM RECEIVES INSTRUCTIONS "PRITHEE, INSIST NOT" "THE LORD ST.
JOHN MADE REVERENCE" HERTFORD AND THE PRINCESSES "SHE MADE REVERENCE" "OFFERED IT TO HIM ON A GOLDEN SALVER" "THEY MUSED A WHILE" "PEACE MY LORD, THOU UTTEREST TREASON"!
"HE BEGAN TO PACE THE FLOOR" TOM'S FIRST ROYAL DINNER "FASTENED A NAPKIN ABOUT HIS NECK" "TOM ATE WITH HIS FINGERS" "HE GRAVELY TOOK A DRAUGHT" "TOM PUT ON THE GREAVES" THE QUESTION OF THE SEAL "EASED HIM BACK UPON HIS PILLOWS" THE RIVER PAGEANT
"INTO GOOD WIFE CANTY'S ARMS" "BENT HEEDFULLY AND WARILY OVER HIM" "THE PRINCE SPRANG UP" "HURRIED HIM ALONG THE DARK WAY" "HE WASTE NO TIME" AT GUILDHALL "A RICH CANOPY OF STATE" "BEGAN TO LAY ABOUT HIM" "LONG LIVE THE KING"!
THE PRINCE AND HIS DELIVERER "OUR FRIENDS THREADED THEIR WAY" "OBJECT LESSONS" IN ENGLISH HISTORY "JOHN CANTY MOVED OFF" "SMOOTHING BACK THE TANGLED CURLS" "PRITHEE, POUR THE WATER" "GO ON--TELL ME THY STORY "THOU HAST BEEN SHAMEFULLY ABUSED" "HE DROPPED
"LORD OF THE BEDCHAMBER" "A SECRETARY OF STATE" "STOOD AT GRACEFUL EASE" "'TIS I THAT TAKE THEM" "BUT TAX YOUR MEMORY" TOM AS KING "TOM HAD WANDERED TO A WINDOW" "TOM SCANNED THE PRISONERS" "LET THE PRISONER GO FREE"!
"WHAT IS IT THAT THESE HAVE DONE"?
"NODDED THEIR RECOGNITION" THE STATE DINNER "A GENTLEMAN BEARING A ROD" "THE CHANCELLOR BETWEEN TWO" "I THANK YOU MY GOOD PEOPLE" "IN THE MIDST OF HIS PAGEANT" FOO-FOO THE FIRST "RUFFIAN FOLLOWED THEIR STEPS" "HE SEIZED A BILLET OF WOOD" "HE WAS SOON
"THE FETTERED LITTLE KING" A VICTIM OF TREACHERY "HUGO STOOD NO CHANCE" "BOUND THE POULTICE TIGHT AND FAST" "TARRY HERE TILL I COME AGAIN "KING SPRANG TO HIS DELIVERER'S SIDE" THE PRINCE A PRISONER "GENTLY, GOOD FRIEND" "SHE SPRANG TO HER FEET" THE ESCAPE
HENDON HALL "JOGGING EASTWARD ON SORRY STEEDS" "THERE IS THE VILLAGE, MY PRINCE"!
"'EMBRACE ME, HUGH,' HE CRIED" "HUGH PUT UP HIS HAND IN DISSENT" "A BEAUTIFUL LADY, RICHLY CLOTHED" "HUGH WAS PINNED TO THE WALL" DISOWNED "OBEY, AND HAVE NO FEAR" "AM I MILES HENDON"?
IN PRISON "CHAINED IN A LARGE ROOM" "THE OLD MAN LOOKED HENDON OVER" "INFORMATION DELIVERED IN A LOW VOICE" "THE KING"!
HE CRIED.
"WHAT KING"?
"TWO WOMEN CHAINED TO POSTS" "TORN AWAY BY THE OFFICERS" "THE KING WAS FURIOUS" THE SACRIFICE "HE CONFRONTED THE OFFICER IN CHARGE" "WHILE THE LASH WAS APPLIED" "SIR HUGH SPURRED AWAY" TO LONDON "MOUNTED AND RODE OFF WITH THE KING" "MIDST OF A JAM OF
"A LARGESS!
A LARGESS"!
"SHE WAS AT HIS SIDE" "IT IS AN ILL TIME FOR DREAMING" "SHE WAS MY MOTHER" CORONATION DAY "GATHERS UP THE LADY'S LONG TRAIN" "TOM CANTY APPEARED" "AND FELL ON HIS KNEES BEFORE HIM" "THE GREAT SEAL--FETCH IT HITHER" "SIRE, THE SEAL IS NOT THERE" "BETHINK
"TO CRACK NUTS WITH" EDWARD AS KING "HE STRETCHED HIMSELF ON THE GROUND" "ARRESTED AS A SUSPICIOUS CHARACTER" "IT IS HIS RIGHT" "STRIP THIS ROBBER" "TOM ROSE AND KISSED THE KING'S HAND" JUSTICE AND RETRIBUTION NOTES CHAPTER I. The birth of the Prince and
In the ancient city of London, on a certain autumn day in the second quarter of the sixteenth century, a boy was born to a poor family of the name of Canty, who did not want him.
On the same day another English child was born to a rich family of the name of Tudor, who did want him.
All England wanted him too.
England had so longed for him, and hoped for him, and prayed God for him, that, now that he was really come, the people went nearly mad for joy.
Mere acquaintances hugged and kissed each other and cried.
Everybody took a holiday, and high and low, rich and poor, feasted and danced and sang, and got very mellow; and they kept this up for days and nights together.
By day, London was a sight to see, with gay banners waving from every balcony and housetop, and splendid pageants marching along.
By night, it was again a sight to see, with its great bonfires at every corner, and its troops of revellers making merry around them.
There was no talk in all England but of the new baby, Edward Tudor, Prince of Wales, who lay lapped in silks and satins, unconscious of all this fuss, and not knowing that great lords and ladies were tending him and watching over him--and not caring,
But there was no talk about the other baby, Tom Canty, lapped in his poor rags, except among the family of paupers whom he had just come to trouble with his presence.
CHAPTER II.
Tom's early life.
Let us skip a number of years.
London was fifteen hundred years old, and was a great town--for that day.
It had a hundred thousand inhabitants--some think double as many.
The streets were very narrow, and crooked, and dirty, especially in the part where Tom Canty lived, which was not far from London Bridge.
The houses were of wood, with the second story projecting over the first, and the third sticking its elbows out beyond the second.
The higher the houses grew, the broader they grew.
They were skeletons of strong criss-cross beams, with solid material between, coated with plaster.
The beams were painted red or blue or black, according to the owner's taste, and this gave the houses a very picturesque look.
The windows were small, glazed with little diamond-shaped panes, and they opened outward, on hinges, like doors.
The house which Tom's father lived in was up a foul little pocket called Offal Court, out of Pudding Lane.
It was small, decayed, and rickety, but it was packed full of wretchedly poor families.
Canty's tribe occupied a room on the third floor.
The mother and father had a sort of bedstead in the corner; but Tom, his grandmother, and his two sisters, Bet and Nan, were not restricted--they had all the floor to themselves, and might sleep where they chose.
There were the remains of a blanket or two, and some bundles of ancient and dirty straw, but these could not rightly be called beds, for they were not organised; they were kicked into a general pile, mornings, and selections made from the mass at night,
Bet and Nan were fifteen years old--twins.
They were good-hearted girls, unclean, clothed in rags, and profoundly ignorant.
Their mother was like them.
But the father and the grandmother were a couple of fiends.
They got drunk whenever they could; then they fought each other or anybody else who came in the way; they cursed and swore always, drunk or sober; John Canty was a thief, and his mother a beggar.
They made beggars of the children, but failed to make thieves of them.
Among, but not of, the dreadful rabble that inhabited the house, was a good old priest whom the King had turned out of house and home with a pension of a few farthings, and he used to get the children aside and teach them right ways secretly.
Father Andrew also taught Tom a little Latin, and how to read and write; and would have done the same with the girls, but they were afraid of the jeers of their friends, who could not have endured such a queer accomplishment in them.
All Offal Court was just such another hive as Canty's house.
Drunkenness, riot and brawling were the order, there, every night and nearly all night long.
Broken heads were as common as hunger in that place.
Yet little Tom was not unhappy.
He had a hard time of it, but did not know it.
It was the sort of time that all the Offal Court boys had, therefore he supposed it was the correct and comfortable thing.
When he came home empty-handed at night, he knew his father would curse him and thrash him first, and that when he was done the awful grandmother would do it all over again and improve on it; and that away in the night his starving mother would slip to
No, Tom's life went along well enough, especially in summer.
He only begged just enough to save himself, for the laws against mendicancy were stringent, and the penalties heavy; so he put in a good deal of his time listening to good Father Andrew's charming old tales and legends about giants and fairies, dwarfs
His head grew to be full of these wonderful things, and many a night as he lay in the dark on his scant and offensive straw, tired, hungry, and smarting from a thrashing, he unleashed his imagination and soon forgot his aches and pains in delicious
One desire came in time to haunt him day and night: it was to see a real prince, with his own eyes.
He spoke of it once to some of his Offal Court comrades; but they jeered him and scoffed him so unmercifully that he was glad to keep his dream to himself after that.
He often read the priest's old books and got him to explain and enlarge upon them.
His dreamings and readings worked certain changes in him, by-and-by.
His dream-people were so fine that he grew to lament his shabby clothing and his dirt, and to wish to be clean and better clad.
He went on playing in the mud just the same, and enjoying it, too; but, instead of splashing around in the Thames solely for the fun of it, he began to find an added value in it because of the washings and cleansings it afforded.
Tom could always find something going on around the Maypole in Cheapside, and at the fairs; and now and then he and the rest of London had a chance to see a military parade when some famous unfortunate was carried prisoner to the Tower, by land or boat.
One summer's day he saw poor Anne Askew and three men burned at the stake in Smithfield, and heard an ex-Bishop preach a sermon to them which did not interest him.
Yes, Tom's life was varied and pleasant enough, on the whole.
By-and-by Tom's reading and dreaming about princely life wrought such a strong effect upon him that he began to _act_ the prince, unconsciously.
His speech and manners became curiously ceremonious and courtly, to the vast admiration and amusement of his intimates.
But Tom's influence among these young people began to grow now, day by day; and in time he came to be looked up to, by them, with a sort of wondering awe, as a superior being.
He seemed to know so much!
and he could do and say such marvellous things!
and withal, he was so deep and wise!
Tom's remarks, and Tom's performances, were reported by the boys to their elders; and these, also, presently began to discuss Tom Canty, and to regard him as a most gifted and extraordinary creature.
Full-grown people brought their perplexities to Tom for solution, and were often astonished at the wit and wisdom of his decisions.
In fact he was become a hero to all who knew him except his own family--these, only, saw nothing in him.
Privately, after a while, Tom organised a royal court!
He was the prince; his special comrades were guards, chamberlains, equerries, lords and ladies in waiting, and the royal family.
Daily the mock prince was received with elaborate ceremonials borrowed by Tom from his romantic readings; daily the great affairs of the mimic kingdom were discussed in the royal council, and daily his mimic highness issued decrees to his imaginary
After which, he would go forth in his rags and beg a few farthings, eat his poor crust, take his customary cuffs and abuse, and then stretch himself upon his handful of foul straw, and resume his empty grandeurs in his dreams.
And still his desire to look just once upon a real prince, in the flesh, grew upon him, day by day, and week by week, until at last it absorbed all other desires, and became the one passion of his life.
One January day, on his usual begging tour, he tramped despondently up and down the region round about Mincing Lane and Little East Cheap, hour after hour, bare-footed and cold, looking in at cook-shop windows and longing for the dreadful pork-pies and
There was a cold drizzle of rain; the atmosphere was murky; it was a melancholy day.
At night Tom reached home so wet and tired and hungry that it was not possible for his father and grandmother to observe his forlorn condition and not be moved--after their fashion; wherefore they gave him a brisk cuffing at once and sent him to bed.
For a long time his pain and hunger, and the swearing and fighting going on in the building, kept him awake; but at last his thoughts drifted away to far, romantic lands, and he fell asleep in the company of jewelled and gilded princelings who live in
And then, as usual, he dreamed that _he_ was a princeling himself.
All night long the glories of his royal estate shone upon him; he moved among great lords and ladies, in a blaze of light, breathing perfumes, drinking in delicious music, and answering the reverent obeisances of the glittering throng as it parted to make
And when he awoke in the morning and looked upon the wretchedness about him, his dream had had its usual effect--it had intensified the sordidness of his surroundings a thousandfold.
Then came bitterness, and heart-break, and tears.
CHAPTER III.
Tom's meeting with the Prince.
Tom got up hungry, and sauntered hungry away, but with his thoughts busy with the shadowy splendours of his night's dreams.
He wandered here and there in the city, hardly noticing where he was going, or what was happening around him.
People jostled him, and some gave him rough speech; but it was all lost on the musing boy.
By-and-by he found himself at Temple Bar, the farthest from home he had ever travelled in that direction.
He stopped and considered a moment, then fell into his imaginings again, and passed on outside the walls of London.
The Strand had ceased to be a country-road then, and regarded itself as a street, but by a strained construction; for, though there was a tolerably compact row of houses on one side of it, there were only some scattered great buildings on the other,
Tom discovered Charing Village presently, and rested himself at the beautiful cross built there by a bereaved king of earlier days; then idled down a quiet, lovely road, past the great cardinal's stately palace, toward a far more mighty and majestic palace
Tom stared in glad wonder at the vast pile of masonry, the wide-spreading wings, the frowning bastions and turrets, the huge stone gateway, with its gilded bars and its magnificent array of colossal granite lions, and other the signs and symbols of English
Was the desire of his soul to be satisfied at last?
Here, indeed, was a king's palace.
Might he not hope to see a prince now--a prince of flesh and blood, if Heaven were willing?
At each side of the gilded gate stood a living statue--that is to say, an erect and stately and motionless man-at-arms, clad from head to heel in shining steel armour.
At a respectful distance were many country folk, and people from the city, waiting for any chance glimpse of royalty that might offer.
Splendid carriages, with splendid people in them and splendid servants outside, were arriving and departing by several other noble gateways that pierced the royal enclosure.
Poor little Tom, in his rags, approached, and was moving slowly and timidly past the sentinels, with a beating heart and a rising hope, when all at once he caught sight through the golden bars of a spectacle that almost made him shout for joy.
Within was a comely boy, tanned and brown with sturdy outdoor sports and exercises, whose clothing was all of lovely silks and satins, shining with jewels; at his hip a little jewelled sword and dagger; dainty buskins on his feet, with red heels; and on
Several gorgeous gentlemen stood near--his servants, without a doubt.
Oh!
he was a prince--a prince, a living prince, a real prince--without the shadow of a question; and the prayer of the pauper-boy's heart was answered at last.
Tom's breath came quick and short with excitement, and his eyes grew big with wonder and delight.
Everything gave way in his mind instantly to one desire: that was to get close to the prince, and have a good, devouring look at him.
Before he knew what he was about, he had his face against the gate-bars.
The next instant one of the soldiers snatched him rudely away, and sent him spinning among the gaping crowd of country gawks and London idlers.
The soldier said,-- "Mind thy manners, thou young beggar"!
The crowd jeered and laughed; but the young prince sprang to the gate with his face flushed, and his eyes flashing with indignation, and cried out,-- "How dar'st thou use a poor lad like that?
How dar'st thou use the King my father's meanest subject so?
Open the gates, and let him in"!
You should have seen that fickle crowd snatch off their hats then.
You should have heard them cheer, and shout, "Long live the Prince of Wales"!
The soldiers presented arms with their halberds, opened the gates, and presented again as the little Prince of Poverty passed in, in his fluttering rags, to join hands with the Prince of Limitless Plenty.
Edward Tudor said-- "Thou lookest tired and hungry: thou'st been treated ill.
Come with me".
Half a dozen attendants sprang forward to--I don't know what; interfere, no doubt.
But they were waved aside with a right royal gesture, and they stopped stock still where they were, like so many statues.
Edward took Tom to a rich apartment in the palace, which he called his cabinet.
By his command a repast was brought such as Tom had never encountered before except in books.
The prince, with princely delicacy and breeding, sent away the servants, so that his humble guest might not be embarrassed by their critical presence; then he sat near by, and asked questions while Tom ate.
"What is thy name, lad"?
"Tom Canty, an' it please thee, sir".
"'Tis an odd one.
Where dost live"?
"In the city, please thee, sir.
Offal Court, out of Pudding Lane".
"Offal Court!
Truly 'tis another odd one.
Hast parents"?
"Parents have I, sir, and a grand-dam likewise that is but indifferently precious to me, God forgive me if it be offence to say it--also twin sisters, Nan and Bet".
"Then is thy grand-dam not over kind to thee, I take it"?
"Neither to any other is she, so please your worship.
She hath a wicked heart, and worketh evil all her days".
"Doth she mistreat thee"?
"There be times that she stayeth her hand, being asleep or overcome with drink; but when she hath her judgment clear again, she maketh it up to me with goodly beatings".
A fierce look came into the little prince's eyes, and he cried out-- "What!
Beatings"?
"Oh, indeed, yes, please you, sir".
"_Beatings_!
--and thou so frail and little.
Hark ye: before the night come, she shall hie her to the Tower.
The King my father"-- "In sooth, you forget, sir, her low degree.
The Tower is for the great alone".
"True, indeed.
I had not thought of that.
I will consider of her punishment.
Is thy father kind to thee"?
"Not more than Gammer Canty, sir".
"Fathers be alike, mayhap.
Mine hath not a doll's temper.
He smiteth with a heavy hand, yet spareth me: he spareth me not always with his tongue, though, sooth to say.
How doth thy mother use thee"?
"She is good, sir, and giveth me neither sorrow nor pain of any sort.
And Nan and Bet are like to her in this".
"How old be these"?
"Fifteen, an' it please you, sir".
"The Lady Elizabeth, my sister, is fourteen, and the Lady Jane Grey, my cousin, is of mine own age, and comely and gracious withal; but my sister the Lady Mary, with her gloomy mien and--Look you: do thy sisters forbid their servants to smile, lest the
"They?
Oh, dost think, sir, that _they_ have servants"?
The little prince contemplated the little pauper gravely a moment, then said-- "And prithee, why not?
Who helpeth them undress at night?
Who attireth them when they rise"?
"None, sir.
Would'st have them take off their garment, and sleep without--like the beasts"?
"Their garment!
Have they but one"?
"Ah, good your worship, what would they do with more?
Truly they have not two bodies each".
"It is a quaint and marvellous thought!
Thy pardon, I had not meant to laugh.
But thy good Nan and thy Bet shall have raiment and lackeys enow, and that soon, too: my cofferer shall look to it.
No, thank me not; 'tis nothing.
Thou speakest well; thou hast an easy grace in it.
Art learned"?
"I know not if I am or not, sir.
The good priest that is called Father Andrew taught me, of his kindness, from his books".
"Know'st thou the Latin"?
"But scantly, sir, I doubt".
"Learn it, lad: 'tis hard only at first.
The Greek is harder; but neither these nor any tongues else, I think, are hard to the Lady Elizabeth and my cousin.
Thou should'st hear those damsels at it!
But tell me of thy Offal Court.
Hast thou a pleasant life there"?
"In truth, yes, so please you, sir, save when one is hungry.
There be Punch-and-Judy shows, and monkeys--oh such antic creatures!
and so bravely dressed!
--and there be plays wherein they that play do shout and fight till all are slain, and 'tis so fine to see, and costeth but a farthing--albeit 'tis main hard to get the farthing, please your worship".
"Tell me more".
"We lads of Offal Court do strive against each other with the cudgel, like to the fashion of the 'prentices, sometimes".
The prince's eyes flashed.
Said he-- "Marry, that would not I mislike.
Tell me more".
"We strive in races, sir, to see who of us shall be fleetest".
"That would I like also.
Speak on".
"In summer, sir, we wade and swim in the canals and in the river, and each doth duck his neighbour, and splatter him with water, and dive and shout and tumble and--" "'Twould be worth my father's kingdom but to enjoy it once!
Prithee go on".
"We dance and sing about the Maypole in Cheapside; we play in the sand, each covering his neighbour up; and times we make mud pastry--oh the lovely mud, it hath not its like for delightfulness in all the world!
--we do fairly wallow in the mud, sir, saving your worship's presence".
"Oh, prithee, say no more, 'tis glorious!
If that I could but clothe me in raiment like to thine, and strip my feet, and revel in the mud once, just once, with none to rebuke me or forbid, meseemeth I could forego the crown"!
"And if that I could clothe me once, sweet sir, as thou art clad--just once--" "Oho, would'st like it?
Then so shall it be.
Doff thy rags, and don these splendours, lad!
It is a brief happiness, but will be not less keen for that.
We will have it while we may, and change again before any come to molest".
A few minutes later the little Prince of Wales was garlanded with Tom's fluttering odds and ends, and the little Prince of Pauperdom was tricked out in the gaudy plumage of royalty.
The two went and stood side by side before a great mirror, and lo, a miracle: there did not seem to have been any change made!
They stared at each other, then at the glass, then at each other again.
At last the puzzled princeling said-- "What dost thou make of this"?
"Ah, good your worship, require me not to answer.
It is not meet that one of my degree should utter the thing".
"Then will _I_ utter it.
Thou hast the same hair, the same eyes, the same voice and manner, the same form and stature, the same face and countenance that I bear.
Fared we forth naked, there is none could say which was you, and which the Prince of Wales.
And, now that I am clothed as thou wert clothed, it seemeth I should be able the more nearly to feel as thou didst when the brute soldier--Hark ye, is not this a bruise upon your hand"?
"Yes; but it is a slight thing, and your worship knoweth that the poor man-at-arms--" "Peace!
It was a shameful thing and a cruel"!
cried the little prince, stamping his bare foot.
"If the King--Stir not a step till I come again!
It is a command"!
In a moment he had snatched up and put away an article of national importance that lay upon a table, and was out at the door and flying through the palace grounds in his bannered rags, with a hot face and glowing eyes.
As soon as he reached the great gate, he seized the bars, and tried to shake them, shouting-- "Open!
Unbar the gates"!
The soldier that had maltreated Tom obeyed promptly; and as the prince burst through the portal, half-smothered with royal wrath, the soldier fetched him a sounding box on the ear that sent him whirling to the roadway, and said-- "Take that, thou beggar's
The crowd roared with laughter.
The prince picked himself out of the mud, and made fiercely at the sentry, shouting-- "I am the Prince of Wales, my person is sacred; and thou shalt hang for laying thy hand upon me"!
The soldier brought his halberd to a present-arms and said mockingly-- "I salute your gracious Highness".
Then angrily--"Be off, thou crazy rubbish"!
Here the jeering crowd closed round the poor little prince, and hustled him far down the road, hooting him, and shouting-- "Way for his Royal Highness!
Way for the Prince of Wales"!
CHAPTER IV.
The Prince's troubles begin.
After hours of persistent pursuit and persecution, the little prince was at last deserted by the rabble and left to himself.
As long as he had been able to rage against the mob, and threaten it royally, and royally utter commands that were good stuff to laugh at, he was very entertaining; but when weariness finally forced him to be silent, he was no longer of use to his
He looked about him, now, but could not recognise the locality.
He was within the city of London--that was all he knew.
He moved on, aimlessly, and in a little while the houses thinned, and the passers-by were infrequent.
He bathed his bleeding feet in the brook which flowed then where Farringdon Street now is; rested a few moments, then passed on, and presently came upon a great space with only a few scattered houses in it, and a prodigious church.
He recognised this church.
Scaffoldings were about, everywhere, and swarms of workmen; for it was undergoing elaborate repairs.
The prince took heart at once--he felt that his troubles were at an end, now.
He said to himself, "It is the ancient Grey Friars' Church, which the king my father hath taken from the monks and given for a home for ever for poor and forsaken children, and new-named it Christ's Church.
Right gladly will they serve the son of him who hath done so generously by them--and the more that that son is himself as poor and as forlorn as any that be sheltered here this day, or ever shall be".
He was soon in the midst of a crowd of boys who were running, jumping, playing at ball and leap-frog, and otherwise disporting themselves, and right noisily, too.
They were all dressed alike, and in the fashion which in that day prevailed among serving-men and 'prentices{1}--that is to say, each had on the crown of his head a flat black cap about the size of a saucer, which was not useful as a covering, it being
It was a sufficiently ugly costume.
The boys stopped their play and flocked about the prince, who said with native dignity-- "Good lads, say to your master that Edward Prince of Wales desireth speech with him".
A great shout went up at this, and one rude fellow said-- "Marry, art thou his grace's messenger, beggar"?
The prince's face flushed with anger, and his ready hand flew to his hip, but there was nothing there.
There was a storm of laughter, and one boy said-- "Didst mark that?
He fancied he had a sword--belike he is the prince himself".
This sally brought more laughter.
Poor Edward drew himself up proudly and said-- "I am the prince; and it ill beseemeth you that feed upon the king my father's bounty to use me so".
This was vastly enjoyed, as the laughter testified.
The youth who had first spoken, shouted to his comrades-- "Ho, swine, slaves, pensioners of his grace's princely father, where be your manners?
Down on your marrow bones, all of ye, and do reverence to his kingly port and royal rags"!
With boisterous mirth they dropped upon their knees in a body and did mock homage to their prey.
The prince spurned the nearest boy with his foot, and said fiercely-- "Take thou that, till the morrow come and I build thee a gibbet"!
Ah, but this was not a joke--this was going beyond fun.
The laughter ceased on the instant, and fury took its place.
A dozen shouted-- "Hale him forth!
To the horse-pond, to the horse-pond!
Where be the dogs?
Ho, there, Lion!
ho, Fangs"!
Then followed such a thing as England had never seen before--the sacred person of the heir to the throne rudely buffeted by plebeian hands, and set upon and torn by dogs.
As night drew to a close that day, the prince found himself far down in the close-built portion of the city.
His body was bruised, his hands were bleeding, and his rags were all besmirched with mud.
He wandered on and on, and grew more and more bewildered, and so tired and faint he could hardly drag one foot after the other.
He had ceased to ask questions of anyone, since they brought him only insult instead of information.
He kept muttering to himself, "Offal Court--that is the name; if I can but find it before my strength is wholly spent and I drop, then am I saved--for his people will take me to the palace and prove that I am none of theirs, but the true prince, and I
And now and then his mind reverted to his treatment by those rude Christ's Hospital boys, and he said, "When I am king, they shall not have bread and shelter only, but also teachings out of books; for a full belly is little worth where the mind is
I will keep this diligently in my remembrance, that this day's lesson be not lost upon me, and my people suffer thereby; for learning softeneth the heart and breedeth gentleness and charity".
{1} The lights began to twinkle, it came on to rain, the wind rose, and a raw and gusty night set in.
The houseless prince, the homeless heir to the throne of England, still moved on, drifting deeper into the maze of squalid alleys where the swarming hives of poverty and misery were massed together.
Suddenly a great drunken ruffian collared him and said-- "Out to this time of night again, and hast not brought a farthing home, I warrant me!
If it be so, an' I do not break all the bones in thy lean body, then am I not John Canty, but some other".
The prince twisted himself loose, unconsciously brushed his profaned shoulder, and eagerly said-- "Oh, art _his_ father, truly?
Sweet heaven grant it be so--then wilt thou fetch him away and restore me"!
"_His_ father?
I know not what thou mean'st; I but know I am _thy_ father, as thou shalt soon have cause to--" "Oh, jest not, palter not, delay not!
--I am worn, I am wounded, I can bear no more.
Take me to the king my father, and he will make thee rich beyond thy wildest dreams.
Believe me, man, believe me!
--I speak no lie, but only the truth!
--put forth thy hand and save me!
I am indeed the Prince of Wales"!
The man stared down, stupefied, upon the lad, then shook his head and muttered-- "Gone stark mad as any Tom o' Bedlam"!
--then collared him once more, and said with a coarse laugh and an oath, "But mad or no mad, I and thy Gammer Canty will soon find where the soft places in thy bones lie, or I'm no true man"!
With this he dragged the frantic and struggling prince away, and disappeared up a front court followed by a delighted and noisy swarm of human vermin.
CHAPTER V. Tom as a Patrician.
Tom Canty, left alone in the prince's cabinet, made good use of his opportunity.
He turned himself this way and that before the great mirror, admiring his finery; then walked away, imitating the prince's high-bred carriage, and still observing results in the glass.
Next he drew the beautiful sword, and bowed, kissing the blade, and laying it across his breast, as he had seen a noble knight do, by way of salute to the lieutenant of the Tower, five or six weeks before, when delivering the great lords of Norfolk and
Tom played with the jewelled dagger that hung upon his thigh; he examined the costly and exquisite ornaments of the room; he tried each of the sumptuous chairs, and thought how proud he would be if the Offal Court herd could only peep in and see him in
He wondered if they would believe the marvellous tale he should tell when he got home, or if they would shake their heads, and say his overtaxed imagination had at last upset his reason.
At the end of half an hour it suddenly occurred to him that the prince was gone a long time; then right away he began to feel lonely; very soon he fell to listening and longing, and ceased to toy with the pretty things about him; he grew uneasy, then
Suppose some one should come, and catch him in the prince's clothes, and the prince not there to explain.
Might they not hang him at once, and inquire into his case afterward?
He had heard that the great were prompt about small matters.
His fear rose higher and higher; and trembling he softly opened the door to the antechamber, resolved to fly and seek the prince, and, through him, protection and release.
Six gorgeous gentlemen-servants and two young pages of high degree, clothed like butterflies, sprang to their feet and bowed low before him.
He stepped quickly back and shut the door.
He said-- "Oh, they mock at me!
They will go and tell.
Oh!
why came I here to cast away my life"?
He walked up and down the floor, filled with nameless fears, listening, starting at every trifling sound.
Presently the door swung open, and a silken page said-- "The Lady Jane Grey".
The door closed and a sweet young girl, richly clad, bounded toward him.
But she stopped suddenly, and said in a distressed voice-- "Oh, what aileth thee, my lord"?
Tom's breath was nearly failing him; but he made shift to stammer out-- "Ah, be merciful, thou!
In sooth I am no lord, but only poor Tom Canty of Offal Court in the city.
Prithee let me see the prince, and he will of his grace restore to me my rags, and let me hence unhurt.
Oh, be thou merciful, and save me"!
By this time the boy was on his knees, and supplicating with his eyes and uplifted hands as well as with his tongue.
The young girl seemed horror-stricken.
She cried out-- "O my lord, on thy knees?
--and to _me_"!
Then she fled away in fright; and Tom, smitten with despair, sank down, murmuring-- "There is no help, there is no hope.
Now will they come and take me".
Whilst he lay there benumbed with terror, dreadful tidings were speeding through the palace.
The whisper--for it was whispered always--flew from menial to menial, from lord to lady, down all the long corridors, from story to story, from saloon to saloon, "The prince hath gone mad, the prince hath gone mad"!
Soon every saloon, every marble hall, had its groups of glittering lords and ladies, and other groups of dazzling lesser folk, talking earnestly together in whispers, and every face had in it dismay.
Presently a splendid official came marching by these groups, making solemn proclamation-- "IN THE NAME OF THE KING!
Let none list to this false and foolish matter, upon pain of death, nor discuss the same, nor carry it abroad.
In the name of the King"!
The whisperings ceased as suddenly as if the whisperers had been stricken dumb.
Soon there was a general buzz along the corridors, of "The prince!
See, the prince comes"!
Poor Tom came slowly walking past the low-bowing groups, trying to bow in return, and meekly gazing upon his strange surroundings with bewildered and pathetic eyes.
Great nobles walked upon each side of him, making him lean upon them, and so steady his steps.
Behind him followed the court-physicians and some servants.
Presently Tom found himself in a noble apartment of the palace and heard the door close behind him.
Around him stood those who had come with him.
Before him, at a little distance, reclined a very large and very fat man, with a wide, pulpy face, and a stern expression.
His large head was very grey; and his whiskers, which he wore only around his face, like a frame, were grey also.
His clothing was of rich stuff, but old, and slightly frayed in places.
One of his swollen legs had a pillow under it, and was wrapped in bandages.
There was silence now; and there was no head there but was bent in reverence, except this man's.
This stern-countenanced invalid was the dread Henry VIII.
He said--and his face grew gentle as he began to speak-- "How now, my lord Edward, my prince?
Hast been minded to cozen me, the good King thy father, who loveth thee, and kindly useth thee, with a sorry jest"?
Poor Tom was listening, as well as his dazed faculties would let him, to the beginning of this speech; but when the words 'me, the good King' fell upon his ear, his face blanched, and he dropped as instantly upon his knees as if a shot had brought him
Lifting up his hands, he exclaimed-- "Thou the _King_?
Then am I undone indeed"!
This speech seemed to stun the King.
His eyes wandered from face to face aimlessly, then rested, bewildered, upon the boy before him.
Then he said in a tone of deep disappointment-- "Alack, I had believed the rumour disproportioned to the truth; but I fear me 'tis not so".
He breathed a heavy sigh, and said in a gentle voice, "Come to thy father, child: thou art not well".
Tom was assisted to his feet, and approached the Majesty of England, humble and trembling.
The King took the frightened face between his hands, and gazed earnestly and lovingly into it awhile, as if seeking some grateful sign of returning reason there, then pressed the curly head against his breast, and patted it tenderly.
Presently he said-- "Dost not know thy father, child?
Break not mine old heart; say thou know'st me.
Thou _dost_ know me, dost thou not"?
"Yea: thou art my dread lord the King, whom God preserve"!
"True, true--that is well--be comforted, tremble not so; there is none here would hurt thee; there is none here but loves thee.
Thou art better now; thy ill dream passeth--is't not so?
Thou wilt not miscall thyself again, as they say thou didst a little while agone"?
"I pray thee of thy grace believe me, I did but speak the truth, most dread lord; for I am the meanest among thy subjects, being a pauper born, and 'tis by a sore mischance and accident I am here, albeit I was therein nothing blameful.
I am but young to die, and thou canst save me with one little word.
Oh speak it, sir"!
"Die?
Talk not so, sweet prince--peace, peace, to thy troubled heart--thou shalt not die"!
Tom dropped upon his knees with a glad cry-- "God requite thy mercy, O my King, and save thee long to bless thy land"!
Then springing up, he turned a joyful face toward the two lords in waiting, and exclaimed, "Thou heard'st it!
I am not to die: the King hath said it"!
There was no movement, save that all bowed with grave respect; but no one spoke.
He hesitated, a little confused, then turned timidly toward the King, saying, "I may go now"?
"Go?
Surely, if thou desirest.
But why not tarry yet a little?
Whither would'st go"?
Tom dropped his eyes, and answered humbly-- "Peradventure I mistook; but I did think me free, and so was I moved to seek again the kennel where I was born and bred to misery, yet which harboureth my mother and my sisters, and so is home to me; whereas
The King was silent and thoughtful a while, and his face betrayed a growing distress and uneasiness.
Presently he said, with something of hope in his voice-- "Perchance he is but mad upon this one strain, and hath his wits unmarred as toucheth other matter.
God send it may be so!
We will make trial".
Then he asked Tom a question in Latin, and Tom answered him lamely in the same tongue.
The lords and doctors manifested their gratification also.
The King said-- "'Twas not according to his schooling and ability, but showeth that his mind is but diseased, not stricken fatally.
How say you, sir"?
The physician addressed bowed low, and replied-- "It jumpeth with my own conviction, sire, that thou hast divined aright".
The King looked pleased with this encouragement, coming as it did from so excellent authority, and continued with good heart-- "Now mark ye all: we will try him further".
He put a question to Tom in French.
Tom stood silent a moment, embarrassed by having so many eyes centred upon him, then said diffidently-- "I have no knowledge of this tongue, so please your majesty".
The King fell back upon his couch.
The attendants flew to his assistance; but he put them aside, and said-- "Trouble me not--it is nothing but a scurvy faintness.
Raise me!
There, 'tis sufficient.
Come hither, child; there, rest thy poor troubled head upon thy father's heart, and be at peace.
Thou'lt soon be well: 'tis but a passing fantasy.
Fear thou not; thou'lt soon be well".
Then he turned toward the company: his gentle manner changed, and baleful lightnings began to play from his eyes.
He said-- "List ye all!
This my son is mad; but it is not permanent.
Over-study hath done this, and somewhat too much of confinement.
Away with his books and teachers!
see ye to it.
Pleasure him with sports, beguile him in wholesome ways, so that his health come again".
He raised himself higher still, and went on with energy, "He is mad; but he is my son, and England's heir; and, mad or sane, still shall he reign!
And hear ye further, and proclaim it: whoso speaketh of this his distemper worketh against the peace and order of these realms, and shall to the gallows!
.
.
.
Give me to drink--I burn: this sorrow sappeth my strength.
.
.
.
There, take away the cup.
.
.
.
Support me.
There, that is well.
Mad, is he?
Were he a thousand times mad, yet is he Prince of Wales, and I the King will confirm it.
This very morrow shall he be installed in his princely dignity in due and ancient form.
Take instant order for it, my lord Hertford".
One of the nobles knelt at the royal couch, and said-- "The King's majesty knoweth that the Hereditary Great Marshal of England lieth attainted in the Tower.
It were not meet that one attainted--" "Peace!
Insult not mine ears with his hated name.
Is this man to live for ever?
Am I to be baulked of my will?
Is the prince to tarry uninstalled, because, forsooth, the realm lacketh an Earl Marshal free of treasonable taint to invest him with his honours?
No, by the splendour of God!
Warn my Parliament to bring me Norfolk's doom before the sun rise again, else shall they answer for it grievously"!
{1} Lord Hertford said-- "The King's will is law;" and, rising, returned to his former place.
Gradually the wrath faded out of the old King's face, and he said-- "Kiss me, my prince.
There .
.
.
what fearest thou?
Am I not thy loving father"?
"Thou art good to me that am unworthy, O mighty and gracious lord: that in truth I know.
But--but--it grieveth me to think of him that is to die, and--" "Ah, 'tis like thee, 'tis like thee!
I know thy heart is still the same, even though thy mind hath suffered hurt, for thou wert ever of a gentle spirit.
But this duke standeth between thee and thine honours: I will have another in his stead that shall bring no taint to his great office.
Comfort thee, my prince: trouble not thy poor head with this matter".
"But is it not I that speed him hence, my liege?
How long might he not live, but for me"?
"Take no thought of him, my prince: he is not worthy.
Kiss me once again, and go to thy trifles and amusements; for my malady distresseth me.
I am aweary, and would rest.
Go with thine uncle Hertford and thy people, and come again when my body is refreshed".
Tom, heavy-hearted, was conducted from the presence, for this last sentence was a death-blow to the hope he had cherished that now he would be set free.
Once more he heard the buzz of low voices exclaiming, "The prince, the prince comes"!
His spirits sank lower and lower as he moved between the glittering files of bowing courtiers; for he recognised that he was indeed a captive now, and might remain for ever shut up in this gilded cage, a forlorn and friendless prince, except God in his
And, turn where he would, he seemed to see floating in the air the severed head and the remembered face of the great Duke of Norfolk, the eyes fixed on him reproachfully.
His old dreams had been so pleasant; but this reality was so dreary!
CHAPTER VI.
Tom receives instructions.
Tom was conducted to the principal apartment of a noble suite, and made to sit down--a thing which he was loth to do, since there were elderly men and men of high degree about him.
He begged them to be seated also, but they only bowed their thanks or murmured them, and remained standing.
He would have insisted, but his 'uncle' the Earl of Hertford whispered in his ear-- "Prithee, insist not, my lord; it is not meet that they sit in thy presence".
The Lord St. John was announced, and after making obeisance to Tom, he said-- "I come upon the King's errand, concerning a matter which requireth privacy.
Will it please your royal highness to dismiss all that attend you here, save my lord the Earl of Hertford"?
Observing that Tom did not seem to know how to proceed, Hertford whispered him to make a sign with his hand, and not trouble himself to speak unless he chose.
When the waiting gentlemen had retired, Lord St. John said-- "His majesty commandeth, that for due and weighty reasons of state, the prince's grace shall hide his infirmity in all ways that be within his power, till it be passed and he be as he was
To wit, that he shall deny to none that he is the true prince, and heir to England's greatness; that he shall uphold his princely dignity, and shall receive, without word or sign of protest, that reverence and observance which unto it do appertain of
Thus saith the King's majesty, who sendeth greeting to your royal highness, and prayeth that God will of His mercy quickly heal you and have you now and ever in His holy keeping".
The Lord St. John made reverence and stood aside.
Tom replied resignedly-- "The King hath said it.
None may palter with the King's command, or fit it to his ease, where it doth chafe, with deft evasions.
The King shall be obeyed".
Lord Hertford said-- "Touching the King's majesty's ordainment concerning books and such like serious matters, it may peradventure please your highness to ease your time with lightsome entertainment, lest you go wearied to the banquet and suffer harm
Tom's face showed inquiring surprise; and a blush followed when he saw Lord St. John's eyes bent sorrowfully upon him.
His lordship said-- "Thy memory still wrongeth thee, and thou hast shown surprise--but suffer it not to trouble thee, for 'tis a matter that will not bide, but depart with thy mending malady.
My Lord of Hertford speaketh of the city's banquet which the King's majesty did promise, some two months flown, your highness should attend.
Thou recallest it now"?
"It grieves me to confess it had indeed escaped me," said Tom, in a hesitating voice; and blushed again.
At this moment the Lady Elizabeth and the Lady Jane Grey were announced.
The two lords exchanged significant glances, and Hertford stepped quickly toward the door.
As the young girls passed him, he said in a low voice-- "I pray ye, ladies, seem not to observe his humours, nor show surprise when his memory doth lapse--it will grieve you to note how it doth stick at every trifle".
Meantime Lord St. John was saying in Tom's ear-- "Please you, sir, keep diligently in mind his majesty's desire.
Remember all thou canst--_seem_ to remember all else.
Let them not perceive that thou art much changed from thy wont, for thou knowest how tenderly thy old play-fellows bear thee in their hearts and how 'twould grieve them.
Art willing, sir, that I remain?
--and thine uncle"?
Tom signified assent with a gesture and a murmured word, for he was already learning, and in his simple heart was resolved to acquit himself as best he might, according to the King's command.
In spite of every precaution, the conversation among the young people became a little embarrassing at times.
More than once, in truth, Tom was near to breaking down and confessing himself unequal to his tremendous part; but the tact of the Princess Elizabeth saved him, or a word from one or the other of the vigilant lords, thrown in apparently by chance, had
Once the little Lady Jane turned to Tom and dismayed him with this question,-- "Hast paid thy duty to the Queen's majesty to-day, my lord"?
Tom hesitated, looked distressed, and was about to stammer out something at hazard, when Lord St. John took the word and answered for him with the easy grace of a courtier accustomed to encounter delicate difficulties and to be ready for them-- "He hath
Tom mumbled something that stood for assent, but felt that he was getting upon dangerous ground.
Somewhat later it was mentioned that Tom was to study no more at present, whereupon her little ladyship exclaimed-- "'Tis a pity, 'tis a pity!
Thou wert proceeding bravely.
But bide thy time in patience: it will not be for long.
Thou'lt yet be graced with learning like thy father, and make thy tongue master of as many languages as his, good my prince".
"My father"!
cried Tom, off his guard for the moment.
"I trow he cannot speak his own so that any but the swine that kennel in the styes may tell his meaning; and as for learning of any sort soever--" He looked up and encountered a solemn warning in my Lord St. John's eyes.
He stopped, blushed, then continued low and sadly: "Ah, my malady persecuteth me again, and my mind wandereth.
I meant the King's grace no irreverence".
"We know it, sir," said the Princess Elizabeth, taking her 'brother's' hand between her two palms, respectfully but caressingly; "trouble not thyself as to that.
The fault is none of thine, but thy distemper's".
"Thou'rt a gentle comforter, sweet lady," said Tom, gratefully, "and my heart moveth me to thank thee for't, an' I may be so bold".
Once the giddy little Lady Jane fired a simple Greek phrase at Tom.
The Princess Elizabeth's quick eye saw by the serene blankness of the target's front that the shaft was overshot; so she tranquilly delivered a return volley of sounding Greek on Tom's behalf, and then straightway changed the talk to other matters.
Time wore on pleasantly, and likewise smoothly, on the whole.
Snags and sandbars grew less and less frequent, and Tom grew more and more at his ease, seeing that all were so lovingly bent upon helping him and overlooking his mistakes.
When it came out that the little ladies were to accompany him to the Lord Mayor's banquet in the evening, his heart gave a bound of relief and delight, for he felt that he should not be friendless, now, among that multitude of strangers; whereas, an hour
Tom's guardian angels, the two lords, had had less comfort in the interview than the other parties to it.
They felt much as if they were piloting a great ship through a dangerous channel; they were on the alert constantly, and found their office no child's play.
Wherefore, at last, when the ladies' visit was drawing to a close and the Lord Guilford Dudley was announced, they not only felt that their charge had been sufficiently taxed for the present, but also that they themselves were not in the best condition to
So they respectfully advised Tom to excuse himself, which he was very glad to do, although a slight shade of disappointment might have been observed upon my Lady Jane's face when she heard the splendid stripling denied admittance.
There was a pause now, a sort of waiting silence which Tom could not understand.
He glanced at Lord Hertford, who gave him a sign--but he failed to understand that also.
The ready Elizabeth came to the rescue with her usual easy grace.
She made reverence and said-- "Have we leave of the prince's grace my brother to go"?
Tom said-- "Indeed your ladyships can have whatsoever of me they will, for the asking; yet would I rather give them any other thing that in my poor power lieth, than leave to take the light and blessing of their presence hence.
Give ye good den, and God be with ye"!
Then he smiled inwardly at the thought, "'Tis not for nought I have dwelt but among princes in my reading, and taught my tongue some slight trick of their broidered and gracious speech withal"!
When the illustrious maidens were gone, Tom turned wearily to his keepers and said-- "May it please your lordships to grant me leave to go into some corner and rest me"?
Lord Hertford said-- "So please your highness, it is for you to command, it is for us to obey.
That thou should'st rest is indeed a needful thing, since thou must journey to the city presently".
He touched a bell, and a page appeared, who was ordered to desire the presence of Sir William Herbert.
This gentleman came straightway, and conducted Tom to an inner apartment.
Tom's first movement there was to reach for a cup of water; but a silk-and-velvet servitor seized it, dropped upon one knee, and offered it to him on a golden salver.
Next the tired captive sat down and was going to take off his buskins, timidly asking leave with his eye, but another silk-and-velvet discomforter went down upon his knees and took the office from him.
He made two or three further efforts to help himself, but being promptly forestalled each time, he finally gave up, with a sigh of resignation and a murmured "Beshrew me, but I marvel they do not require to breathe for me also"!
Slippered, and wrapped in a sumptuous robe, he laid himself down at last to rest, but not to sleep, for his head was too full of thoughts and the room too full of people.
He could not dismiss the former, so they stayed; he did not know enough to dismiss the latter, so they stayed also, to his vast regret--and theirs.
Tom's departure had left his two noble guardians alone.
They mused a while, with much head-shaking and walking the floor, then Lord St. John said-- "Plainly, what dost thou think"?
"Plainly, then, this.
The King is near his end; my nephew is mad--mad will mount the throne, and mad remain.
God protect England, since she will need it"!
"Verily it promiseth so, indeed.
But .
.
.
have you no misgivings as to .
.
.
as to .
.
".
The speaker hesitated, and finally stopped.
He evidently felt that he was upon delicate ground.
Lord Hertford stopped before him, looked into his face with a clear, frank eye, and said-- "Speak on--there is none to hear but me.
Misgivings as to what"?
"I am full loth to word the thing that is in my mind, and thou so near to him in blood, my lord.
But craving pardon if I do offend, seemeth it not strange that madness could so change his port and manner?
--not but that his port and speech are princely still, but that they _differ_, in one unweighty trifle or another, from what his custom was aforetime.
Seemeth it not strange that madness should filch from his memory his father's very lineaments; the customs and observances that are his due from such as be about him; and, leaving him his Latin, strip him of his Greek and French?
My lord, be not offended, but ease my mind of its disquiet and receive my grateful thanks.
It haunteth me, his saying he was not the prince, and so--" "Peace, my lord, thou utterest treason!
Hast forgot the King's command?
Remember I am party to thy crime if I but listen".
St. John paled, and hastened to say-- "I was in fault, I do confess it.
Betray me not, grant me this grace out of thy courtesy, and I will neither think nor speak of this thing more.
Deal not hardly with me, sir, else am I ruined".
"I am content, my lord.
So thou offend not again, here or in the ears of others, it shall be as though thou hadst not spoken.
But thou need'st not have misgivings.
He is my sister's son; are not his voice, his face, his form, familiar to me from his cradle?
Madness can do all the odd conflicting things thou seest in him, and more.
Dost not recall how that the old Baron Marley, being mad, forgot the favour of his own countenance that he had known for sixty years, and held it was another's; nay, even claimed he was the son of Mary Magdalene, and that his head was made of Spanish
Give thy misgivings easement, good my lord.
This is the very prince--I know him well--and soon will be thy king; it may advantage thee to bear this in mind, and more dwell upon it than the other".
After some further talk, in which the Lord St. John covered up his mistake as well as he could by repeated protests that his faith was thoroughly grounded now, and could not be assailed by doubts again, the Lord Hertford relieved his fellow-keeper, and sat
He was soon deep in meditation, and evidently the longer he thought, the more he was bothered.
By-and-by he began to pace the floor and mutter.
"Tush, he _must_ be the prince!
Will any be in all the land maintain there can be two, not of one blood and birth, so marvellously twinned?
And even were it so, 'twere yet a stranger miracle that chance should cast the one into the other's place.
Nay, 'tis folly, folly, folly"!
Presently he said-- "Now were he impostor and called himself prince, look you _that_ would be natural; that would be reasonable.
But lived ever an impostor yet, who, being called prince by the king, prince by the court, prince by all, _denied_ his dignity and pleaded against his exaltation?
_No_!
By the soul of St. Swithin, no!
This is the true prince, gone mad"!
CHAPTER VII.
Tom's first royal dinner.
Somewhat after one in the afternoon, Tom resignedly underwent the ordeal of being dressed for dinner.
He found himself as finely clothed as before, but everything different, everything changed, from his ruff to his stockings.
He was presently conducted with much state to a spacious and ornate apartment, where a table was already set for one.
Its furniture was all of massy gold, and beautified with designs which well-nigh made it priceless, since they were the work of Benvenuto.
The room was half-filled with noble servitors.
A chaplain said grace, and Tom was about to fall to, for hunger had long been constitutional with him, but was interrupted by my lord the Earl of Berkeley, who fastened a napkin about his neck; for the great post of Diaperers to the Prince of Wales was
Tom's cupbearer was present, and forestalled all his attempts to help himself to wine.
The Taster to his highness the Prince of Wales was there also, prepared to taste any suspicious dish upon requirement, and run the risk of being poisoned.
He was only an ornamental appendage at this time, and was seldom called upon to exercise his function; but there had been times, not many generations past, when the office of taster had its perils, and was not a grandeur to be desired.
Why they did not use a dog or a plumber seems strange; but all the ways of royalty are strange.
My Lord d'Arcy, First Groom of the Chamber, was there, to do goodness knows what; but there he was--let that suffice.
The Lord Chief Butler was there, and stood behind Tom's chair, overseeing the solemnities, under command of the Lord Great Steward and the Lord Head Cook, who stood near.
Tom had three hundred and eighty-four servants beside these; but they were not all in that room, of course, nor the quarter of them; neither was Tom aware yet that they existed.
All those that were present had been well drilled within the hour to remember that the prince was temporarily out of his head, and to be careful to show no surprise at his vagaries.
These 'vagaries' were soon on exhibition before them; but they only moved their compassion and their sorrow, not their mirth.
It was a heavy affliction to them to see the beloved prince so stricken.
Poor Tom ate with his fingers mainly; but no one smiled at it, or even seemed to observe it.
He inspected his napkin curiously, and with deep interest, for it was of a very dainty and beautiful fabric, then said with simplicity-- "Prithee, take it away, lest in mine unheedfulness it be soiled".
The Hereditary Diaperer took it away with reverent manner, and without word or protest of any sort.
Tom examined the turnips and the lettuce with interest, and asked what they were, and if they were to be eaten; for it was only recently that men had begun to raise these things in England in place of importing them as luxuries from Holland.
{1} His question was answered with grave respect, and no surprise manifested.
When he had finished his dessert, he filled his pockets with nuts; but nobody appeared to be aware of it, or disturbed by it.
But the next moment he was himself disturbed by it, and showed discomposure; for this was the only service he had been permitted to do with his own hands during the meal, and he did not doubt that he had done a most improper and unprincely thing.
At that moment the muscles of his nose began to twitch, and the end of that organ to lift and wrinkle.
This continued, and Tom began to evince a growing distress.
He looked appealingly, first at one and then another of the lords about him, and tears came into his eyes.
They sprang forward with dismay in their faces, and begged to know his trouble.
Tom said with genuine anguish-- "I crave your indulgence: my nose itcheth cruelly.
What is the custom and usage in this emergence?
Prithee, speed, for 'tis but a little time that I can bear it".
None smiled; but all were sore perplexed, and looked one to the other in deep tribulation for counsel.
But behold, here was a dead wall, and nothing in English history to tell how to get over it.
The Master of Ceremonies was not present: there was no one who felt safe to venture upon this uncharted sea, or risk the attempt to solve this solemn problem.
Alas!
there was no Hereditary Scratcher.
Meantime the tears had overflowed their banks, and begun to trickle down Tom's cheeks.
His twitching nose was pleading more urgently than ever for relief.
At last nature broke down the barriers of etiquette: Tom lifted up an inward prayer for pardon if he was doing wrong, and brought relief to the burdened hearts of his court by scratching his nose himself.
His meal being ended, a lord came and held before him a broad, shallow, golden dish with fragrant rosewater in it, to cleanse his mouth and fingers with; and my lord the Hereditary Diaperer stood by with a napkin for his use.
Tom gazed at the dish a puzzled moment or two, then raised it to his lips, and gravely took a draught.
Then he returned it to the waiting lord, and said-- "Nay, it likes me not, my lord: it hath a pretty flavour, but it wanteth strength".
This new eccentricity of the prince's ruined mind made all the hearts about him ache; but the sad sight moved none to merriment.
Tom's next unconscious blunder was to get up and leave the table just when the chaplain had taken his stand behind his chair, and with uplifted hands, and closed, uplifted eyes, was in the act of beginning the blessing.
Still nobody seemed to perceive that the prince had done a thing unusual.
By his own request our small friend was now conducted to his private cabinet, and left there alone to his own devices.
Hanging upon hooks in the oaken wainscoting were the several pieces of a suit of shining steel armour, covered all over with beautiful designs exquisitely inlaid in gold.
This martial panoply belonged to the true prince--a recent present from Madam Parr the Queen.
Tom put on the greaves, the gauntlets, the plumed helmet, and such other pieces as he could don without assistance, and for a while was minded to call for help and complete the matter, but bethought him of the nuts he had brought away from dinner, and the
When the nuts were all gone, he stumbled upon some inviting books in a closet, among them one about the etiquette of the English court.
This was a prize.
He lay down upon a sumptuous divan, and proceeded to instruct himself with honest zeal.
Let us leave him there for the present.
CHAPTER VIII.
The Question of the Seal.
About five o'clock Henry VIII.
awoke out of an unrefreshing nap, and muttered to himself, "Troublous dreams, troublous dreams!
Mine end is now at hand: so say these warnings, and my failing pulses do confirm it".
Presently a wicked light flamed up in his eye, and he muttered, "Yet will not I die till _He_ go before".
His attendants perceiving that he was awake, one of them asked his pleasure concerning the Lord Chancellor, who was waiting without.
"Admit him, admit him"!
exclaimed the King eagerly.
The Lord Chancellor entered, and knelt by the King's couch, saying-- "I have given order, and, according to the King's command, the peers of the realm, in their robes, do now stand at the bar of the House, where, having confirmed the Duke of Norfolk's
The King's face lit up with a fierce joy.
Said he-- "Lift me up!
In mine own person will I go before my Parliament, and with mine own hand will I seal the warrant that rids me of--" His voice failed; an ashen pallor swept the flush from his cheeks; and the attendants eased him back upon his pillows, and hurriedly
Presently he said sorrowfully-- "Alack, how have I longed for this sweet hour!
and lo, too late it cometh, and I am robbed of this so coveted chance.
But speed ye, speed ye!
let others do this happy office sith 'tis denied to me.
I put my Great Seal in commission: choose thou the lords that shall compose it, and get ye to your work.
Speed ye, man!
Before the sun shall rise and set again, bring me his head that I may see it".
"According to the King's command, so shall it be.
Will't please your majesty to order that the Seal be now restored to me, so that I may forth upon the business"?
"The Seal?
Who keepeth the Seal but thou"?
"Please your majesty, you did take it from me two days since, saying it should no more do its office till your own royal hand should use it upon the Duke of Norfolk's warrant".
"Why, so in sooth I did: I do remember.
.
.
.
What did I with it?
...
I am very feeble.
.
.
.
So oft these days doth my memory play the traitor with me.
.
.
.
'Tis strange, strange--" The King dropped into inarticulate mumblings, shaking his grey head weakly from time to time, and gropingly trying to recollect what he had done with the Seal.
At last my Lord Hertford ventured to kneel and offer information-- "Sire, if that I may be so bold, here be several that do remember with me how that you gave the Great Seal into the hands of his highness the Prince of Wales to keep against the day
interrupted the King.
"Fetch it!
Go: time flieth"!
Lord Hertford flew to Tom, but returned to the King before very long, troubled and empty-handed.
He delivered himself to this effect-- "It grieveth me, my lord the King, to bear so heavy and unwelcome tidings; but it is the will of God that the prince's affliction abideth still, and he cannot recall to mind that he received the Seal.
So came I quickly to report, thinking it were waste of precious time, and little worth withal, that any should attempt to search the long array of chambers and saloons that belong unto his royal high--" A groan from the King interrupted the lord at this
After a little while his majesty said, with a deep sadness in his tone-- "Trouble him no more, poor child.
The hand of God lieth heavy upon him, and my heart goeth out in loving compassion for him, and sorrow that I may not bear his burden on mine old trouble-weighted shoulders, and so bring him peace".
He closed his eyes, fell to mumbling, and presently was silent.
After a time he opened his eyes again, and gazed vacantly around until his glance rested upon the kneeling Lord Chancellor.
Instantly his face flushed with wrath-- "What, thou here yet!
By the glory of God, an' thou gettest not about that traitor's business, thy mitre shall have holiday the morrow for lack of a head to grace withal"!
The trembling Chancellor answered-- "Good your Majesty, I cry you mercy!
I but waited for the Seal".
"Man, hast lost thy wits?
The small Seal which aforetime I was wont to take with me abroad lieth in my treasury.
And, since the Great Seal hath flown away, shall not it suffice?
Hast lost thy wits?
Begone!
And hark ye--come no more till thou do bring his head".
The poor Chancellor was not long in removing himself from this dangerous vicinity; nor did the commission waste time in giving the royal assent to the work of the slavish Parliament, and appointing the morrow for the beheading of the premier peer of
CHAPTER IX.
The river pageant.
At nine in the evening the whole vast river-front of the palace was blazing with light.
The river itself, as far as the eye could reach citywards, was so thickly covered with watermen's boats and with pleasure-barges, all fringed with coloured lanterns, and gently agitated by the waves, that it resembled a glowing and limitless garden of
The grand terrace of stone steps leading down to the water, spacious enough to mass the army of a German principality upon, was a picture to see, with its ranks of royal halberdiers in polished armour, and its troops of brilliantly costumed servitors
Presently a command was given, and immediately all living creatures vanished from the steps.
Now the air was heavy with the hush of suspense and expectancy.
As far as one's vision could carry, he might see the myriads of people in the boats rise up, and shade their eyes from the glare of lanterns and torches, and gaze toward the palace.
A file of forty or fifty state barges drew up to the steps.
They were richly gilt, and their lofty prows and sterns were elaborately carved.
Some of them were decorated with banners and streamers; some with cloth-of-gold and arras embroidered with coats-of-arms; others with silken flags that had numberless little silver bells fastened to them, which shook out tiny showers of joyous music
Each state barge was towed by a tender.
Besides the rowers, these tenders carried each a number of men-at-arms in glossy helmet and breastplate, and a company of musicians.
The advance-guard of the expected procession now appeared in the great gateway, a troop of halberdiers.
'They were dressed in striped hose of black and tawny, velvet caps graced at the sides with silver roses, and doublets of murrey and blue cloth, embroidered on the front and back with the three feathers, the prince's blazon, woven in gold.
Their halberd staves were covered with crimson velvet, fastened with gilt nails, and ornamented with gold tassels.
Filing off on the right and left, they formed two long lines, extending from the gateway of the palace to the water's edge.
A thick rayed cloth or carpet was then unfolded, and laid down between them by attendants in the gold-and-crimson liveries of the prince.
This done, a flourish of trumpets resounded from within.
A lively prelude arose from the musicians on the water; and two ushers with white wands marched with a slow and stately pace from the portal.
They were followed by an officer bearing the civic mace, after whom came another carrying the city's sword; then several sergeants of the city guard, in their full accoutrements, and with badges on their sleeves; then the Garter King-at-arms, in his
Now came twelve French gentlemen, in splendid habiliments, consisting of pourpoints of white damask barred with gold, short mantles of crimson velvet lined with violet taffeta, and carnation coloured hauts-de-chausses, and took their way down the steps.
They were of the suite of the French ambassador, and were followed by twelve cavaliers of the suite of the Spanish ambassador, clothed in black velvet, unrelieved by any ornament.
Following these came several great English nobles with their attendants.
' There was a flourish of trumpets within; and the Prince's uncle, the future great Duke of Somerset, emerged from the gateway, arrayed in a 'doublet of black cloth-of-gold, and a cloak of crimson satin flowered with gold, and ribanded with nets of silver.
' He turned, doffed his plumed cap, bent his body in a low reverence, and began to step backward, bowing at each step.
A prolonged trumpet-blast followed, and a proclamation, "Way for the high and mighty the Lord Edward, Prince of Wales"!
High aloft on the palace walls a long line of red tongues of flame leapt forth with a thunder-crash; the massed world on the river burst into a mighty roar of welcome; and Tom Canty, the cause and hero of it all, stepped into view and slightly bowed his
He was 'magnificently habited in a doublet of white satin, with a front-piece of purple cloth-of-tissue, powdered with diamonds, and edged with ermine.
Over this he wore a mantle of white cloth-of-gold, pounced with the triple-feathered crest, lined with blue satin, set with pearls and precious stones, and fastened with a clasp of brilliants.
About his neck hung the order of the Garter, and several princely foreign orders;' and wherever light fell upon him jewels responded with a blinding flash.
O Tom Canty, born in a hovel, bred in the gutters of London, familiar with rags and dirt and misery, what a spectacle is this!
CHAPTER X. The Prince in the toils.
We left John Canty dragging the rightful prince into Offal Court, with a noisy and delighted mob at his heels.
There was but one person in it who offered a pleading word for the captive, and he was not heeded; he was hardly even heard, so great was the turmoil.
The Prince continued to struggle for freedom, and to rage against the treatment he was suffering, until John Canty lost what little patience was left in him, and raised his oaken cudgel in a sudden fury over the Prince's head.
The single pleader for the lad sprang to stop the man's arm, and the blow descended upon his own wrist.
Canty roared out-- "Thou'lt meddle, wilt thou?
Then have thy reward".
His cudgel crashed down upon the meddler's head: there was a groan, a dim form sank to the ground among the feet of the crowd, and the next moment it lay there in the dark alone.
The mob pressed on, their enjoyment nothing disturbed by this episode.
Presently the Prince found himself in John Canty's abode, with the door closed against the outsiders.
By the vague light of a tallow candle which was thrust into a bottle, he made out the main features of the loathsome den, and also the occupants of it.
Two frowsy girls and a middle-aged woman cowered against the wall in one corner, with the aspect of animals habituated to harsh usage, and expecting and dreading it now.
From another corner stole a withered hag with streaming grey hair and malignant eyes.
John Canty said to this one-- "Tarry!
There's fine mummeries here.
Mar them not till thou'st enjoyed them: then let thy hand be heavy as thou wilt.
Stand forth, lad.
Now say thy foolery again, an thou'st not forgot it.
Name thy name.
Who art thou"?
The insulted blood mounted to the little prince's cheek once more, and he lifted a steady and indignant gaze to the man's face and said-- "'Tis but ill-breeding in such as thou to command me to speak.
I tell thee now, as I told thee before, I am Edward, Prince of Wales, and none other".
The stunning surprise of this reply nailed the hag's feet to the floor where she stood, and almost took her breath.
She stared at the Prince in stupid amazement, which so amused her ruffianly son, that he burst into a roar of laughter.
But the effect upon Tom Canty's mother and sisters was different.
Their dread of bodily injury gave way at once to distress of a different sort.
They ran forward with woe and dismay in their faces, exclaiming-- "Oh, poor Tom, poor lad"!
The mother fell on her knees before the Prince, put her hands upon his shoulders, and gazed yearningly into his face through her rising tears.
Then she said-- "Oh, my poor boy!
Thy foolish reading hath wrought its woeful work at last, and ta'en thy wit away.
Ah!
why did'st thou cleave to it when I so warned thee 'gainst it?
Thou'st broke thy mother's heart".
The Prince looked into her face, and said gently-- "Thy son is well, and hath not lost his wits, good dame.
Comfort thee: let me to the palace where he is, and straightway will the King my father restore him to thee".
"The King thy father!
Oh, my child!
unsay these words that be freighted with death for thee, and ruin for all that be near to thee.
Shake of this gruesome dream.
Call back thy poor wandering memory.
Look upon me.
Am not I thy mother that bore thee, and loveth thee"?
The Prince shook his head and reluctantly said-- "God knoweth I am loth to grieve thy heart; but truly have I never looked upon thy face before".
The woman sank back to a sitting posture on the floor, and, covering her eyes with her hands, gave way to heart-broken sobs and wailings.
"Let the show go on"!
shouted Canty.
"What, Nan!
--what, Bet!
mannerless wenches!
will ye stand in the Prince's presence?
Upon your knees, ye pauper scum, and do him reverence"!
He followed this with another horse-laugh.
The girls began to plead timidly for their brother; and Nan said-- "An thou wilt but let him to bed, father, rest and sleep will heal his madness: prithee, do".
"Do, father," said Bet; "he is more worn than is his wont.
To-morrow will he be himself again, and will beg with diligence, and come not empty home again".
This remark sobered the father's joviality, and brought his mind to business.
He turned angrily upon the Prince, and said-- "The morrow must we pay two pennies to him that owns this hole; two pennies, mark ye--all this money for a half-year's rent, else out of this we go.
Show what thou'st gathered with thy lazy begging".
The Prince said-- "Offend me not with thy sordid matters.
I tell thee again I am the King's son".
A sounding blow upon the Prince's shoulder from Canty's broad palm sent him staggering into goodwife Canty's arms, who clasped him to her breast, and sheltered him from a pelting rain of cuffs and slaps by interposing her own person.
The frightened girls retreated to their corner; but the grandmother stepped eagerly forward to assist her son.
The Prince sprang away from Mrs. Canty, exclaiming-- "Thou shalt not suffer for me, madam.
Let these swine do their will upon me alone".
This speech infuriated the swine to such a degree that they set about their work without waste of time.
Between them they belaboured the boy right soundly, and then gave the girls and their mother a beating for showing sympathy for the victim.
"Now," said Canty, "to bed, all of ye.
The entertainment has tired me".
The light was put out, and the family retired.
As soon as the snorings of the head of the house and his mother showed that they were asleep, the young girls crept to where the Prince lay, and covered him tenderly from the cold with straw and rags; and their mother crept to him also, and stroked his
She had saved a morsel for him to eat, also; but the boy's pains had swept away all appetite--at least for black and tasteless crusts.
He was touched by her brave and costly defence of him, and by her commiseration; and he thanked her in very noble and princely words, and begged her to go to her sleep and try to forget her sorrows.
And he added that the King his father would not let her loyal kindness and devotion go unrewarded.
This return to his 'madness' broke her heart anew, and she strained him to her breast again and again, and then went back, drowned in tears, to her bed.
As she lay thinking and mourning, the suggestion began to creep into her mind that there was an undefinable something about this boy that was lacking in Tom Canty, mad or sane.
She could not describe it, she could not tell just what it was, and yet her sharp mother-instinct seemed to detect it and perceive it.
What if the boy were really not her son, after all?
Oh, absurd!
She almost smiled at the idea, spite of her griefs and troubles.
No matter, she found that it was an idea that would not 'down,' but persisted in haunting her.
It pursued her, it harassed her, it clung to her, and refused to be put away or ignored.
At last she perceived that there was not going to be any peace for her until she should devise a test that should prove, clearly and without question, whether this lad was her son or not, and so banish these wearing and worrying doubts.
Ah, yes, this was plainly the right way out of the difficulty; therefore she set her wits to work at once to contrive that test.
But it was an easier thing to propose than to accomplish.
She turned over in her mind one promising test after another, but was obliged to relinquish them all--none of them were absolutely sure, absolutely perfect; and an imperfect one could not satisfy her.
Evidently she was racking her head in vain--it seemed manifest that she must give the matter up.
While this depressing thought was passing through her mind, her ear caught the regular breathing of the boy, and she knew he had fallen asleep.
And while she listened, the measured breathing was broken by a soft, startled cry, such as one utters in a troubled dream.
This chance occurrence furnished her instantly with a plan worth all her laboured tests combined.
She at once set herself feverishly, but noiselessly, to work to relight her candle, muttering to herself, "Had I but seen him _then_, I should have known!
Since that day, when he was little, that the powder burst in his face, he hath never been startled of a sudden out of his dreams or out of his thinkings, but he hath cast his hand before his eyes, even as he did that day; and not as others would do it,
Yes, I shall soon know, now"!
By this time she had crept to the slumbering boy's side, with the candle, shaded, in her hand.
She bent heedfully and warily over him, scarcely breathing in her suppressed excitement, and suddenly flashed the light in his face and struck the floor by his ear with her knuckles.
The sleeper's eyes sprang wide open, and he cast a startled stare about him--but he made no special movement with his hands.
The poor woman was smitten almost helpless with surprise and grief; but she contrived to hide her emotions, and to soothe the boy to sleep again; then she crept apart and communed miserably with herself upon the disastrous result of her experiment.
She tried to believe that her Tom's madness had banished this habitual gesture of his; but she could not do it.
"No," she said, "his _hands_ are not mad; they could not unlearn so old a habit in so brief a time.
Oh, this is a heavy day for me"!
Still, hope was as stubborn now as doubt had been before; she could not bring herself to accept the verdict of the test; she must try the thing again--the failure must have been only an accident; so she startled the boy out of his sleep a second and a
The poor mother's interruptions having ceased, and the Prince's pains having gradually lost their power to disturb him, utter weariness at last sealed his eyes in a profound and restful sleep.
Hour after hour slipped away, and still he slept like the dead.
Thus four or five hours passed.
Then his stupor began to lighten.
Presently, while half asleep and half awake, he murmured-- "Sir William"!
After a moment-- "Ho, Sir William Herbert!
Hie thee hither, and list to the strangest dream that ever .
.
.
Sir William!
dost hear?
Man, I did think me changed to a pauper, and .
.
.
Ho there!
Guards!
Sir William!
What!
is there no groom of the chamber in waiting?
Alack!
it shall go hard with--" "What aileth thee"?
asked a whisper near him.
"Who art thou calling"?
"Sir William Herbert.
Who art thou"?
"I?
Who should I be, but thy sister Nan?
Oh, Tom, I had forgot!
Thou'rt mad yet--poor lad, thou'rt mad yet: would I had never woke to know it again!
But prithee master thy tongue, lest we be all beaten till we die"!
The startled Prince sprang partly up, but a sharp reminder from his stiffened bruises brought him to himself, and he sank back among his foul straw with a moan and the ejaculation-- "Alas!
it was no dream, then"!
In a moment all the heavy sorrow and misery which sleep had banished were upon him again, and he realised that he was no longer a petted prince in a palace, with the adoring eyes of a nation upon him, but a pauper, an outcast, clothed in rags, prisoner in
In the midst of his grief he began to be conscious of hilarious noises and shoutings, apparently but a block or two away.
The next moment there were several sharp raps at the door; John Canty ceased from snoring and said-- "Who knocketh?
What wilt thou"?
A voice answered-- "Know'st thou who it was thou laid thy cudgel on"?
"No.
Neither know I, nor care".
"Belike thou'lt change thy note eftsoons.
An thou would save thy neck, nothing but flight may stead thee.
The man is this moment delivering up the ghost.
'Tis the priest, Father Andrew"!
"God-a-mercy"!
exclaimed Canty.
He roused his family, and hoarsely commanded, "Up with ye all and fly--or bide where ye are and perish"!
Scarcely five minutes later the Canty household were in the street and flying for their lives.
John Canty held the Prince by the wrist, and hurried him along the dark way, giving him this caution in a low voice-- "Mind thy tongue, thou mad fool, and speak not our name.
I will choose me a new name, speedily, to throw the law's dogs off the scent.
Mind thy tongue, I tell thee"!
He growled these words to the rest of the family-- "If it so chance that we be separated, let each make for London Bridge; whoso findeth himself as far as the last linen-draper's shop on the bridge, let him tarry there till the others be come, then will we
At this moment the party burst suddenly out of darkness into light; and not only into light, but into the midst of a multitude of singing, dancing, and shouting people, massed together on the river frontage.
There was a line of bonfires stretching as far as one could see, up and down the Thames; London Bridge was illuminated; Southwark Bridge likewise; the entire river was aglow with the flash and sheen of coloured lights; and constant explosions of fireworks
John Canty delivered himself of a furious curse and commanded a retreat; but it was too late.
He and his tribe were swallowed up in that swarming hive of humanity, and hopelessly separated from each other in an instant.
We are not considering that the Prince was one of his tribe; Canty still kept his grip upon him.
The Prince's heart was beating high with hopes of escape, now.
A burly waterman, considerably exalted with liquor, found himself rudely shoved by Canty in his efforts to plough through the crowd; he laid his great hand on Canty's shoulder and said-- "Nay, whither so fast, friend?
Dost canker thy soul with sordid business when all that be leal men and true make holiday"?
"Mine affairs are mine own, they concern thee not," answered Canty, roughly; "take away thy hand and let me pass".
"Sith that is thy humour, thou'lt _not_ pass, till thou'st drunk to the Prince of Wales, I tell thee that," said the waterman, barring the way resolutely.
"Give me the cup, then, and make speed, make speed"!
Other revellers were interested by this time.
They cried out-- "The loving-cup, the loving-cup!
make the sour knave drink the loving-cup, else will we feed him to the fishes".
So a huge loving-cup was brought; the waterman, grasping it by one of its handles, and with the other hand bearing up the end of an imaginary napkin, presented it in due and ancient form to Canty, who had to grasp the opposite handle with one of his hands
This left the Prince hand-free for a second, of course.
He wasted no time, but dived among the forest of legs about him and disappeared.
In another moment he could not have been harder to find, under that tossing sea of life, if its billows had been the Atlantic's and he a lost sixpence.
He very soon realised this fact, and straightway busied himself about his own affairs without further thought of John Canty.
He quickly realised another thing, too.
To wit, that a spurious Prince of Wales was being feasted by the city in his stead.
He easily concluded that the pauper lad, Tom Canty, had deliberately taken advantage of his stupendous opportunity and become a usurper.
Therefore there was but one course to pursue--find his way to the Guildhall, make himself known, and denounce the impostor.
He also made up his mind that Tom should be allowed a reasonable time for spiritual preparation, and then be hanged, drawn and quartered, according to the law and usage of the day in cases of high treason.
CHAPTER XI.
At Guildhall.
The royal barge, attended by its gorgeous fleet, took its stately way down the Thames through the wilderness of illuminated boats.
The air was laden with music; the river banks were beruffled with joy-flames; the distant city lay in a soft luminous glow from its countless invisible bonfires; above it rose many a slender spire into the sky, incrusted with sparkling lights, wherefore in
To Tom Canty, half buried in his silken cushions, these sounds and this spectacle were a wonder unspeakably sublime and astonishing.
To his little friends at his side, the Princess Elizabeth and the Lady Jane Grey, they were nothing.
Arrived at the Dowgate, the fleet was towed up the limpid Walbrook (whose channel has now been for two centuries buried out of sight under acres of buildings) to Bucklersbury, past houses and under bridges populous with merry-makers and brilliantly
Tom disembarked, and he and his gallant procession crossed Cheapside and made a short march through the Old Jewry and Basinghall Street to the Guildhall.
Tom and his little ladies were received with due ceremony by the Lord Mayor and the Fathers of the City, in their gold chains and scarlet robes of state, and conducted to a rich canopy of state at the head of the great hall, preceded by heralds making
The lords and ladies who were to attend upon Tom and his two small friends took their places behind their chairs.
At a lower table the Court grandees and other guests of noble degree were seated, with the magnates of the city; the commoners took places at a multitude of tables on the main floor of the hall.
From their lofty vantage-ground the giants Gog and Magog, the ancient guardians of the city, contemplated the spectacle below them with eyes grown familiar to it in forgotten generations.
There was a bugle-blast and a proclamation, and a fat butler appeared in a high perch in the leftward wall, followed by his servitors bearing with impressive solemnity a royal baron of beef, smoking hot and ready for the knife.
After grace, Tom (being instructed) rose--and the whole house with him--and drank from a portly golden loving-cup with the Princess Elizabeth; from her it passed to the Lady Jane, and then traversed the general assemblage.
So the banquet began.
By midnight the revelry was at its height.
Now came one of those picturesque spectacles so admired in that old day.
A description of it is still extant in the quaint wording of a chronicler who witnessed it: 'Space being made, presently entered a baron and an earl appareled after the Turkish fashion in long robes of bawdkin powdered with gold; hats on their heads of
Next came yet another baron and another earl, in two long gowns of yellow satin, traversed with white satin, and in every bend of white was a bend of crimson satin, after the fashion of Russia, with furred hats of gray on their heads; either of them
And after them came a knight, then the Lord High Admiral, and with him five nobles, in doublets of crimson velvet, voyded low on the back and before to the cannell-bone, laced on the breasts with chains of silver; and over that, short cloaks of crimson
These were appareled after the fashion of Prussia.
The torchbearers, which were about an hundred, were appareled in crimson satin and green, like Moors, their faces black.
Next came in a mommarye.
Then the minstrels, which were disguised, danced; and the lords and ladies did wildly dance also, that it was a pleasure to behold.
' And while Tom, in his high seat, was gazing upon this 'wild' dancing, lost in admiration of the dazzling commingling of kaleidoscopic colours which the whirling turmoil of gaudy figures below him presented, the ragged but real little Prince of Wales was
The crowd enjoyed this episode prodigiously, and pressed forward and craned their necks to see the small rioter.
Presently they began to taunt him and mock at him, purposely to goad him into a higher and still more entertaining fury.
Tears of mortification sprang to his eyes, but he stood his ground and defied the mob right royally.
Other taunts followed, added mockings stung him, and he exclaimed-- "I tell ye again, you pack of unmannerly curs, I am the Prince of Wales!
And all forlorn and friendless as I be, with none to give me word of grace or help me in my need, yet will not I be driven from my ground, but will maintain it"!
"Though thou be prince or no prince, 'tis all one, thou be'st a gallant lad, and not friendless neither!
Here stand I by thy side to prove it; and mind I tell thee thou might'st have a worser friend than Miles Hendon and yet not tire thy legs with seeking.
Rest thy small jaw, my child; I talk the language of these base kennel-rats like to a very native".
The speaker was a sort of Don Caesar de Bazan in dress, aspect, and bearing.
He was tall, trim-built, muscular.
His doublet and trunks were of rich material, but faded and threadbare, and their gold-lace adornments were sadly tarnished; his ruff was rumpled and damaged; the plume in his slouched hat was broken and had a bedraggled and disreputable look; at his
The speech of this fantastic figure was received with an explosion of jeers and laughter.
Some cried, "'Tis another prince in disguise"!
"'Ware thy tongue, friend: belike he is dangerous"!
"Marry, he looketh it--mark his eye"!
"Pluck the lad from him--to the horse-pond wi' the cub"!
Instantly a hand was laid upon the Prince, under the impulse of this happy thought; as instantly the stranger's long sword was out and the meddler went to the earth under a sounding thump with the flat of it.
The next moment a score of voices shouted, "Kill the dog!
Kill him!
Kill him"!
and the mob closed in on the warrior, who backed himself against a wall and began to lay about him with his long weapon like a madman.
His victims sprawled this way and that, but the mob-tide poured over their prostrate forms and dashed itself against the champion with undiminished fury.
His moments seemed numbered, his destruction certain, when suddenly a trumpet-blast sounded, a voice shouted, "Way for the King's messenger"!
and a troop of horsemen came charging down upon the mob, who fled out of harm's reach as fast as their legs could carry them.
The bold stranger caught up the Prince in his arms, and was soon far away from danger and the multitude.
Return we within the Guildhall.
Suddenly, high above the jubilant roar and thunder of the revel, broke the clear peal of a bugle-note.
There was instant silence--a deep hush; then a single voice rose--that of the messenger from the palace--and began to pipe forth a proclamation, the whole multitude standing listening.
The closing words, solemnly pronounced, were-- "The King is dead"!
The great assemblage bent their heads upon their breasts with one accord; remained so, in profound silence, a few moments; then all sank upon their knees in a body, stretched out their hands toward Tom, and a mighty shout burst forth that seemed to shake
Poor Tom's dazed eyes wandered abroad over this stupefying spectacle, and finally rested dreamily upon the kneeling princesses beside him, a moment, then upon the Earl of Hertford.
A sudden purpose dawned in his face.
He said, in a low tone, at Lord Hertford's ear-- "Answer me truly, on thy faith and honour!
Uttered I here a command, the which none but a king might hold privilege and prerogative to utter, would such commandment be obeyed, and none rise up to say me nay"?
"None, my liege, in all these realms.
In thy person bides the majesty of England.
Thou art the king--thy word is law".
Tom responded, in a strong, earnest voice, and with great animation-- "Then shall the king's law be law of mercy, from this day, and never more be law of blood!
Up from thy knees and away!
To the Tower, and say the King decrees the Duke of Norfolk shall not die"!
The words were caught up and carried eagerly from lip to lip far and wide over the hall, and as Hertford hurried from the presence, another prodigious shout burst forth-- "The reign of blood is ended!
Long live Edward, King of England"!
CHAPTER XII.
The Prince and his Deliverer.
As soon as Miles Hendon and the little prince were clear of the mob, they struck down through back lanes and alleys toward the river.
Their way was unobstructed until they approached London Bridge; then they ploughed into the multitude again, Hendon keeping a fast grip upon the Prince's--no, the King's--wrist.
The tremendous news was already abroad, and the boy learned it from a thousand voices at once--"The King is dead"!
The tidings struck a chill to the heart of the poor little waif, and sent a shudder through his frame.
He realised the greatness of his loss, and was filled with a bitter grief; for the grim tyrant who had been such a terror to others had always been gentle with him.
The tears sprang to his eyes and blurred all objects.
For an instant he felt himself the most forlorn, outcast, and forsaken of God's creatures--then another cry shook the night with its far-reaching thunders: "Long live King Edward the Sixth"!
and this made his eyes kindle, and thrilled him with pride to his fingers' ends.
"Ah," he thought, "how grand and strange it seems--_I am King_"!
Our friends threaded their way slowly through the throngs upon the bridge.
This structure, which had stood for six hundred years, and had been a noisy and populous thoroughfare all that time, was a curious affair, for a closely packed rank of stores and shops, with family quarters overhead, stretched along both sides of it,
The Bridge was a sort of town to itself; it had its inn, its beer-houses, its bakeries, its haberdasheries, its food markets, its manufacturing industries, and even its church.
It looked upon the two neighbours which it linked together--London and Southwark--as being well enough as suburbs, but not otherwise particularly important.
It was a close corporation, so to speak; it was a narrow town, of a single street a fifth of a mile long, its population was but a village population and everybody in it knew all his fellow-townsmen intimately, and had known their fathers and mothers
It had its aristocracy, of course--its fine old families of butchers, and bakers, and what-not, who had occupied the same old premises for five or six hundred years, and knew the great history of the Bridge from beginning to end, and all its strange
It was just the sort of population to be narrow and ignorant and self-conceited.
Children were born on the Bridge, were reared there, grew to old age, and finally died without ever having set a foot upon any part of the world but London Bridge alone.
Such people would naturally imagine that the mighty and interminable procession which moved through its street night and day, with its confused roar of shouts and cries, its neighings and bellowing and bleatings and its muffled thunder-tramp, was the one
And so they were, in effect--at least they could exhibit it from their windows, and did--for a consideration--whenever a returning king or hero gave it a fleeting splendour, for there was no place like it for affording a long, straight, uninterrupted
Men born and reared upon the Bridge found life unendurably dull and inane elsewhere.
History tells of one of these who left the Bridge at the age of seventy-one and retired to the country.
But he could only fret and toss in his bed; he could not go to sleep, the deep stillness was so painful, so awful, so oppressive.
When he was worn out with it, at last, he fled back to his old home, a lean and haggard spectre, and fell peacefully to rest and pleasant dreams under the lulling music of the lashing waters and the boom and crash and thunder of London Bridge.
In the times of which we are writing, the Bridge furnished 'object lessons' in English history for its children--namely, the livid and decaying heads of renowned men impaled upon iron spikes atop of its gateways.
But we digress.
Hendon's lodgings were in the little inn on the Bridge.
As he neared the door with his small friend, a rough voice said-- "So, thou'rt come at last!
Thou'lt not escape again, I warrant thee; and if pounding thy bones to a pudding can teach thee somewhat, thou'lt not keep us waiting another time, mayhap,"--and John Canty put out his hand to seize the boy.
Miles Hendon stepped in the way and said-- "Not too fast, friend.
Thou art needlessly rough, methinks.
What is the lad to thee"?
"If it be any business of thine to make and meddle in others' affairs, he is my son".
"'Tis a lie"!
cried the little King, hotly.
"Boldly said, and I believe thee, whether thy small headpiece be sound or cracked, my boy.
But whether this scurvy ruffian be thy father or no, 'tis all one, he shall not have thee to beat thee and abuse, according to his threat, so thou prefer to bide with me".
"I do, I do--I know him not, I loathe him, and will die before I will go with him".
"Then 'tis settled, and there is nought more to say".
"We will see, as to that"!
exclaimed John Canty, striding past Hendon to get at the boy; "by force shall he--" "If thou do but touch him, thou animated offal, I will spit thee like a goose"!
said Hendon, barring the way and laying his hand upon his sword hilt.
Canty drew back.
"Now mark ye," continued Hendon, "I took this lad under my protection when a mob of such as thou would have mishandled him, mayhap killed him; dost imagine I will desert him now to a worser fate?
--for whether thou art his father or no--and sooth to say, I think it is a lie--a decent swift death were better for such a lad than life in such brute hands as thine.
So go thy ways, and set quick about it, for I like not much bandying of words, being not over-patient in my nature".
John Canty moved off, muttering threats and curses, and was swallowed from sight in the crowd.
Hendon ascended three flights of stairs to his room, with his charge, after ordering a meal to be sent thither.
It was a poor apartment, with a shabby bed and some odds and ends of old furniture in it, and was vaguely lighted by a couple of sickly candles.
The little King dragged himself to the bed and lay down upon it, almost exhausted with hunger and fatigue.
He had been on his feet a good part of a day and a night (for it was now two or three o'clock in the morning), and had eaten nothing meantime.
He murmured drowsily-- "Prithee call me when the table is spread," and sank into a deep sleep immediately.
A smile twinkled in Hendon's eye, and he said to himself-- "By the mass, the little beggar takes to one's quarters and usurps one's bed with as natural and easy a grace as if he owned them--with never a by-your-leave or so-please-it-you, or anything of the
In his diseased ravings he called himself the Prince of Wales, and bravely doth he keep up the character.
Poor little friendless rat, doubtless his mind has been disordered with ill-usage.
Well, I will be his friend; I have saved him, and it draweth me strongly to him; already I love the bold-tongued little rascal.
How soldier-like he faced the smutty rabble and flung back his high defiance!
And what a comely, sweet and gentle face he hath, now that sleep hath conjured away its troubles and its griefs.
I will teach him; I will cure his malady; yea, I will be his elder brother, and care for him and watch over him; and whoso would shame him or do him hurt may order his shroud, for though I be burnt for it he shall need it"!
He bent over the boy and contemplated him with kind and pitying interest, tapping the young cheek tenderly and smoothing back the tangled curls with his great brown hand.
A slight shiver passed over the boy's form.
Hendon muttered-- "See, now, how like a man it was to let him lie here uncovered and fill his body with deadly rheums.
Now what shall I do?
'twill wake him to take him up and put him within the bed, and he sorely needeth sleep".
He looked about for extra covering, but finding none, doffed his doublet and wrapped the lad in it, saying, "I am used to nipping air and scant apparel, 'tis little I shall mind the cold"!
--then walked up and down the room, to keep his blood in motion, soliloquising as before.
"His injured mind persuades him he is Prince of Wales; 'twill be odd to have a Prince of Wales still with us, now that he that _was_ the prince is prince no more, but king--for this poor mind is set upon the one fantasy, and will not reason out that now it
.
.
If my father liveth still, after these seven years that I have heard nought from home in my foreign dungeon, he will welcome the poor lad and give him generous shelter for my sake; so will my good elder brother, Arthur; my other brother, Hugh--but I will
Yes, thither will we fare--and straightway, too".
A servant entered with a smoking meal, disposed it upon a small deal table, placed the chairs, and took his departure, leaving such cheap lodgers as these to wait upon themselves.
The door slammed after him, and the noise woke the boy, who sprang to a sitting posture, and shot a glad glance about him; then a grieved look came into his face and he murmured to himself, with a deep sigh, "Alack, it was but a dream, woe is me"!
Next he noticed Miles Hendon's doublet--glanced from that to Hendon, comprehended the sacrifice that had been made for him, and said, gently-- "Thou art good to me, yes, thou art very good to me.
Take it and put it on--I shall not need it more".
Then he got up and walked to the washstand in the corner and stood there, waiting.
Hendon said in a cheery voice-- "We'll have a right hearty sup and bite, now, for everything is savoury and smoking hot, and that and thy nap together will make thee a little man again, never fear"!
The boy made no answer, but bent a steady look, that was filled with grave surprise, and also somewhat touched with impatience, upon the tall knight of the sword.
Hendon was puzzled, and said-- "What's amiss"?
"Good sir, I would wash me".
"Oh, is that all?
Ask no permission of Miles Hendon for aught thou cravest.
Make thyself perfectly free here, and welcome, with all that are his belongings".
Still the boy stood, and moved not; more, he tapped the floor once or twice with his small impatient foot.
Hendon was wholly perplexed.
Said he-- "Bless us, what is it"?
"Prithee pour the water, and make not so many words"!
Hendon, suppressing a horse-laugh, and saying to himself, "By all the saints, but this is admirable"!
stepped briskly forward and did the small insolent's bidding; then stood by, in a sort of stupefaction, until the command, "Come--the towel"!
woke him sharply up.
He took up a towel, from under the boy's nose, and handed it to him without comment.
He now proceeded to comfort his own face with a wash, and while he was at it his adopted child seated himself at the table and prepared to fall to.
Hendon despatched his ablutions with alacrity, then drew back the other chair and was about to place himself at table, when the boy said, indignantly-- "Forbear!
Wouldst sit in the presence of the King"?
This blow staggered Hendon to his foundations.
He muttered to himself, "Lo, the poor thing's madness is up with the time!
It hath changed with the great change that is come to the realm, and now in fancy is he _king_!
Good lack, I must humour the conceit, too--there is no other way--faith, he would order me to the Tower, else"!
And pleased with this jest, he removed the chair from the table, took his stand behind the King, and proceeded to wait upon him in the courtliest way he was capable of.
While the King ate, the rigour of his royal dignity relaxed a little, and with his growing contentment came a desire to talk.
He said--"I think thou callest thyself Miles Hendon, if I heard thee aright"?
"Yes, Sire," Miles replied; then observed to himself, "If I _must_ humour the poor lad's madness, I must 'Sire' him, I must 'Majesty' him, I must not go by halves, I must stick at nothing that belongeth to the part I play, else shall I play it ill and work
The King warmed his heart with a second glass of wine, and said--"I would know thee--tell me thy story.
Thou hast a gallant way with thee, and a noble--art nobly born"?
"We are of the tail of the nobility, good your Majesty.
My father is a baronet--one of the smaller lords by knight service {2}--Sir Richard Hendon of Hendon Hall, by Monk's Holm in Kent".
"The name has escaped my memory.
Go on--tell me thy story".
"'Tis not much, your Majesty, yet perchance it may beguile a short half-hour for want of a better.
My father, Sir Richard, is very rich, and of a most generous nature.
My mother died whilst I was yet a boy.
I have two brothers: Arthur, my elder, with a soul like to his father's; and Hugh, younger than I, a mean spirit, covetous, treacherous, vicious, underhanded--a reptile.
Such was he from the cradle; such was he ten years past, when I last saw him--a ripe rascal at nineteen, I being twenty then, and Arthur twenty-two.
There is none other of us but the Lady Edith, my cousin--she was sixteen then--beautiful, gentle, good, the daughter of an earl, the last of her race, heiress of a great fortune and a lapsed title.
My father was her guardian.
I loved her and she loved me; but she was betrothed to Arthur from the cradle, and Sir Richard would not suffer the contract to be broken.
Arthur loved another maid, and bade us be of good cheer and hold fast to the hope that delay and luck together would some day give success to our several causes.
Hugh loved the Lady Edith's fortune, though in truth he said it was herself he loved--but then 'twas his way, alway, to say the one thing and mean the other.
But he lost his arts upon the girl; he could deceive my father, but none else.
My father loved him best of us all, and trusted and believed him; for he was the youngest child, and others hated him--these qualities being in all ages sufficient to win a parent's dearest love; and he had a smooth persuasive tongue, with an admirable
I was wild--in troth I might go yet farther and say _very_ wild, though 'twas a wildness of an innocent sort, since it hurt none but me, brought shame to none, nor loss, nor had in it any taint of crime or baseness, or what might not beseem mine
"Yet did my brother Hugh turn these faults to good account--he seeing that our brother Arthur's health was but indifferent, and hoping the worst might work him profit were I swept out of the path--so--but 'twere a long tale, good my liege, and little worth
Briefly, then, this brother did deftly magnify my faults and make them crimes; ending his base work with finding a silken ladder in mine apartments--conveyed thither by his own means--and did convince my father by this, and suborned evidence of servants
"Three years of banishment from home and England might make a soldier and a man of me, my father said, and teach me some degree of wisdom.
I fought out my long probation in the continental wars, tasting sumptuously of hard knocks, privation, and adventure; but in my last battle I was taken captive, and during the seven years that have waxed and waned since then, a foreign dungeon hath
Through wit and courage I won to the free air at last, and fled hither straight; and am but just arrived, right poor in purse and raiment, and poorer still in knowledge of what these dull seven years have wrought at Hendon Hall, its people and
So please you, sir, my meagre tale is told".
"Thou hast been shamefully abused"!
said the little King, with a flashing eye.
"But I will right thee--by the cross will I!
The King hath said it".
Then, fired by the story of Miles's wrongs, he loosed his tongue and poured the history of his own recent misfortunes into the ears of his astonished listener.
When he had finished, Miles said to himself-- "Lo, what an imagination he hath!
Verily, this is no common mind; else, crazed or sane, it could not weave so straight and gaudy a tale as this out of the airy nothings wherewith it hath wrought this curious romaunt.
Poor ruined little head, it shall not lack friend or shelter whilst I bide with the living.
He shall never leave my side; he shall be my pet, my little comrade.
And he shall be cured!
--ay, made whole and sound--then will he make himself a name--and proud shall I be to say, 'Yes, he is mine--I took him, a homeless little ragamuffin, but I saw what was in him, and I said his name would be heard some day--behold him, observe him--was I
'" The King spoke--in a thoughtful, measured voice-- "Thou didst save me injury and shame, perchance my life, and so my crown.
Such service demandeth rich reward.
Name thy desire, and so it be within the compass of my royal power, it is thine".
This fantastic suggestion startled Hendon out of his reverie.
He was about to thank the King and put the matter aside with saying he had only done his duty and desired no reward, but a wiser thought came into his head, and he asked leave to be silent a few moments and consider the gracious offer--an idea which the
Miles reflected during some moments, then said to himself, "Yes, that is the thing to do--by any other means it were impossible to get at it--and certes, this hour's experience has taught me 'twould be most wearing and inconvenient to continue it as it is.
Yes, I will propose it; 'twas a happy accident that I did not throw the chance away".
Then he dropped upon one knee and said-- "My poor service went not beyond the limit of a subject's simple duty, and therefore hath no merit; but since your Majesty is pleased to hold it worthy some reward, I take heart of grace to make petition to this
Near four hundred years ago, as your grace knoweth, there being ill blood betwixt John, King of England, and the King of France, it was decreed that two champions should fight together in the lists, and so settle the dispute by what is called the
These two kings, and the Spanish king, being assembled to witness and judge the conflict, the French champion appeared; but so redoubtable was he, that our English knights refused to measure weapons with him.
So the matter, which was a weighty one, was like to go against the English monarch by default.
Now in the Tower lay the Lord de Courcy, the mightiest arm in England, stripped of his honours and possessions, and wasting with long captivity.
Appeal was made to him; he gave assent, and came forth arrayed for battle; but no sooner did the Frenchman glimpse his huge frame and hear his famous name but he fled away, and the French king's cause was lost.
King John restored De Courcy's titles and possessions, and said, 'Name thy wish and thou shalt have it, though it cost me half my kingdom;' whereat De Courcy, kneeling, as I do now, made answer, 'This, then, I ask, my liege; that I and my successors may
' The boon was granted, as your Majesty knoweth; and there hath been no time, these four hundred years, that that line has failed of an heir; and so, even unto this day, the head of that ancient house still weareth his hat or helm before the King's
{3} Invoking this precedent in aid of my prayer, I beseech the King to grant to me but this one grace and privilege--to my more than sufficient reward--and none other, to wit: that I and my heirs, for ever, may _sit_ in the presence of the Majesty of
"Rise, Sir Miles Hendon, Knight," said the King, gravely--giving the accolade with Hendon's sword--"rise, and seat thyself.
Thy petition is granted.
Whilst England remains, and the crown continues, the privilege shall not lapse".
His Majesty walked apart, musing, and Hendon dropped into a chair at table, observing to himself, "'Twas a brave thought, and hath wrought me a mighty deliverance; my legs are grievously wearied.
An I had not thought of that, I must have had to stand for weeks, till my poor lad's wits are cured".
After a little, he went on, "And so I am become a knight of the Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows!
A most odd and strange position, truly, for one so matter-of-fact as I. I will not laugh--no, God forbid, for this thing which is so substanceless to me is _real_ to him.
And to me, also, in one way, it is not a falsity, for it reflects with truth the sweet and generous spirit that is in him".
After a pause: "Ah, what if he should call me by my fine title before folk!
--there'd be a merry contrast betwixt my glory and my raiment!
But no matter, let him call me what he will, so it please him; I shall be content".
CHAPTER XIII.
The disappearance of the Prince.
A heavy drowsiness presently fell upon the two comrades.
The King said-- "Remove these rags".
--meaning his clothing.
Hendon disapparelled the boy without dissent or remark, tucked him up in bed, then glanced about the room, saying to himself, ruefully, "He hath taken my bed again, as before--marry, what shall _I_ do"?
The little King observed his perplexity, and dissipated it with a word.
He said, sleepily-- "Thou wilt sleep athwart the door, and guard it".
In a moment more he was out of his troubles, in a deep slumber.
"Dear heart, he should have been born a king"!
muttered Hendon, admiringly; "he playeth the part to a marvel".
Then he stretched himself across the door, on the floor, saying contentedly-- "I have lodged worse for seven years; 'twould be but ill gratitude to Him above to find fault with this".
He dropped asleep as the dawn appeared.
Toward noon he rose, uncovered his unconscious ward--a section at a time--and took his measure with a string.
The King awoke, just as he had completed his work, complained of the cold, and asked what he was doing.
"'Tis done, now, my liege," said Hendon; "I have a bit of business outside, but will presently return; sleep thou again--thou needest it.
There--let me cover thy head also--thou'lt be warm the sooner".
The King was back in dreamland before this speech was ended.
Miles slipped softly out, and slipped as softly in again, in the course of thirty or forty minutes, with a complete second-hand suit of boy's clothing, of cheap material, and showing signs of wear; but tidy, and suited to the season of the year.
He seated himself, and began to overhaul his purchase, mumbling to himself-- "A longer purse would have got a better sort, but when one has not the long purse one must be content with what a short one may do-- "'There was a woman in our town, In our town
.
.
This garment--'tis well enough--a stitch here and another one there will set it aright.
This other is better, albeit a stitch or two will not come amiss in it, likewise .
.
.
_These_ be very good and sound, and will keep his small feet warm and dry--an odd new thing to him, belike, since he has doubtless been used to foot it bare, winters and summers the same .
.
.
Would thread were bread, seeing one getteth a year's sufficiency for a farthing, and such a brave big needle without cost, for mere love.
Now shall I have the demon's own time to thread it"!
And so he had.
He did as men have always done, and probably always will do, to the end of time--held the needle still, and tried to thrust the thread through the eye, which is the opposite of a woman's way.
Time and time again the thread missed the mark, going sometimes on one side of the needle, sometimes on the other, sometimes doubling up against the shaft; but he was patient, having been through these experiences before, when he was soldiering.
He succeeded at last, and took up the garment that had lain waiting, meantime, across his lap, and began his work.
"The inn is paid--the breakfast that is to come, included--and there is wherewithal left to buy a couple of donkeys and meet our little costs for the two or three days betwixt this and the plenty that awaits us at Hendon Hall-- "'She loved her hus--' "Body
I have driven the needle under my nail!
.
.
.
It matters little--'tis not a novelty--yet 'tis not a convenience, neither.
.
.
.
We shall be merry there, little one, never doubt it!
Thy troubles will vanish there, and likewise thy sad distemper-- "'She loved her husband dearilee, But another man--' "These be noble large stitches"!
--holding the garment up and viewing it admiringly--"they have a grandeur and a majesty that do cause these small stingy ones of the tailor-man to look mightily paltry and plebeian-- "'She loved her husband dearilee, But another man he loved she,--'
Now will I wake him, apparel him, pour for him, feed him, and then will we hie us to the mart by the Tabard Inn in Southwark and--be pleased to rise, my liege!
--he answereth not--what ho, my liege!
--of a truth must I profane his sacred person with a touch, sith his slumber is deaf to speech.
What"!
He threw back the covers--the boy was gone!
He stared about him in speechless astonishment for a moment; noticed for the first time that his ward's ragged raiment was also missing; then he began to rage and storm and shout for the innkeeper.
At that moment a servant entered with the breakfast.
"Explain, thou limb of Satan, or thy time is come"!
roared the man of war, and made so savage a spring toward the waiter that this latter could not find his tongue, for the instant, for fright and surprise.
"Where is the boy"?
In disjointed and trembling syllables the man gave the information desired.
"You were hardly gone from the place, your worship, when a youth came running and said it was your worship's will that the boy come to you straight, at the bridge-end on the Southwark side.
I brought him hither; and when he woke the lad and gave his message, the lad did grumble some little for being disturbed 'so early,' as he called it, but straightway trussed on his rags and went with the youth, only saying it had been better manners that
--a fool and easily cozened--hang all thy breed!
Yet mayhap no hurt is done.
Possibly no harm is meant the boy.
I will go fetch him.
Make the table ready.
Stay!
the coverings of the bed were disposed as if one lay beneath them--happened that by accident"?
"I know not, good your worship.
I saw the youth meddle with them--he that came for the boy".
"Thousand deaths!
'Twas done to deceive me--'tis plain 'twas done to gain time.
Hark ye!
Was that youth alone"?
"All alone, your worship".
"Art sure"?
"Sure, your worship".
"Collect thy scattered wits--bethink thee--take time, man".
After a moment's thought, the servant said-- "When he came, none came with him; but now I remember me that as the two stepped into the throng of the Bridge, a ruffian-looking man plunged out from some near place; and just as he was joining them--" "What
--out with it"!
thundered the impatient Hendon, interrupting.
"Just then the crowd lapped them up and closed them in, and I saw no more, being called by my master, who was in a rage because a joint that the scrivener had ordered was forgot, though I take all the saints to witness that to blame _me_ for that
Thy prating drives me mad!
Hold!
Whither art flying?
Canst not bide still an instant?
Went they toward Southwark"?
"Even so, your worship--for, as I said before, as to that detestable joint, the babe unborn is no whit more blameless than--" "Art here _yet_!
And prating still!
Vanish, lest I throttle thee"!
The servitor vanished.
Hendon followed after him, passed him, and plunged down the stairs two steps at a stride, muttering, "'Tis that scurvy villain that claimed he was his son.
I have lost thee, my poor little mad master--it is a bitter thought--and I had come to love thee so!
No!
by book and bell, _not_ lost!
Not lost, for I will ransack the land till I find thee again.
Poor child, yonder is his breakfast--and mine, but I have no hunger now; so, let the rats have it--speed, speed!
that is the word"!
As he wormed his swift way through the noisy multitudes upon the Bridge he several times said to himself--clinging to the thought as if it were a particularly pleasing one--"He grumbled, but he _went_--he went, yes, because he thought Miles Hendon asked
CHAPTER XIV.
'Le Roi est mort--vive le Roi.
' Toward daylight of the same morning, Tom Canty stirred out of a heavy sleep and opened his eyes in the dark.
He lay silent a few moments, trying to analyse his confused thoughts and impressions, and get some sort of meaning out of them; then suddenly he burst out in a rapturous but guarded voice-- "I see it all, I see it all!
Now God be thanked, I am indeed awake at last!
Come, joy!
vanish, sorrow!
Ho, Nan!
Bet!
kick off your straw and hie ye hither to my side, till I do pour into your unbelieving ears the wildest madcap dream that ever the spirits of night did conjure up to astonish the soul of man withal!
.
.
.
Ho, Nan, I say!
Bet"!
A dim form appeared at his side, and a voice said-- "Wilt deign to deliver thy commands"?
"Commands?
.
.
.
O, woe is me, I know thy voice!
Speak thou--who am I"?
"Thou?
In sooth, yesternight wert thou the Prince of Wales; to-day art thou my most gracious liege, Edward, King of England".
Tom buried his head among his pillows, murmuring plaintively-- "Alack, it was no dream!
Go to thy rest, sweet sir--leave me to my sorrows".
Tom slept again, and after a time he had this pleasant dream.
He thought it was summer, and he was playing, all alone, in the fair meadow called Goodman's Fields, when a dwarf only a foot high, with long red whiskers and a humped back, appeared to him suddenly and said, "Dig by that stump".
He did so, and found twelve bright new pennies--wonderful riches!
Yet this was not the best of it; for the dwarf said-- "I know thee.
Thou art a good lad, and a deserving; thy distresses shall end, for the day of thy reward is come.
Dig here every seventh day, and thou shalt find always the same treasure, twelve bright new pennies.
Tell none--keep the secret".
Then the dwarf vanished, and Tom flew to Offal Court with his prize, saying to himself, "Every night will I give my father a penny; he will think I begged it, it will glad his heart, and I shall no more be beaten.
One penny every week the good priest that teacheth me shall have; mother, Nan, and Bet the other four.
We be done with hunger and rags, now, done with fears and frets and savage usage".
In his dream he reached his sordid home all out of breath, but with eyes dancing with grateful enthusiasm; cast four of his pennies into his mother's lap and cried out-- "They are for thee!
--all of them, every one!
--for thee and Nan and Bet--and honestly come by, not begged nor stolen"!
The happy and astonished mother strained him to her breast and exclaimed-- "It waxeth late--may it please your Majesty to rise"?
Ah!
that was not the answer he was expecting.
The dream had snapped asunder--he was awake.
He opened his eyes--the richly clad First Lord of the Bedchamber was kneeling by his couch.
The gladness of the lying dream faded away--the poor boy recognised that he was still a captive and a king.
The room was filled with courtiers clothed in purple mantles--the mourning colour--and with noble servants of the monarch.
Tom sat up in bed and gazed out from the heavy silken curtains upon this fine company.
The weighty business of dressing began, and one courtier after another knelt and paid his court and offered to the little King his condolences upon his heavy loss, whilst the dressing proceeded.
In the beginning, a shirt was taken up by the Chief Equerry in Waiting, who passed it to the First Lord of the Buckhounds, who passed it to the Second Gentleman of the Bedchamber, who passed it to the Head Ranger of Windsor Forest, who passed it to the
Poor little wondering chap, it reminded him of passing buckets at a fire.
Each garment in its turn had to go through this slow and solemn process; consequently Tom grew very weary of the ceremony; so weary that he felt an almost gushing gratefulness when he at last saw his long silken hose begin the journey down the line and
But he exulted too soon.
The First Lord of the Bedchamber received the hose and was about to encase Tom's legs in them, when a sudden flush invaded his face and he hurriedly hustled the things back into the hands of the Archbishop of Canterbury with an astounded look and a
pointing to a something connected with the hose.
The Archbishop paled, then flushed, and passed the hose to the Lord High Admiral, whispering, "See, my lord"!
The Admiral passed the hose to the Hereditary Grand Diaperer, and had hardly breath enough in his body to ejaculate, "See, my lord"!
The hose drifted backward along the line, to the Chief Steward of the Household, the Constable of the Tower, Norroy King-at-Arms, the Master of the Wardrobe, the Chancellor Royal of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Third Groom of the Stole, the Head Ranger of
see"!
--till they finally reached the hands of the Chief Equerry in Waiting, who gazed a moment, with a pallid face, upon what had caused all this dismay, then hoarsely whispered, "Body of my life, a tag gone from a truss-point!
--to the Tower with the Head Keeper of the King's Hose"!
--after which he leaned upon the shoulder of the First Lord of the Buckhounds to regather his vanished strength whilst fresh hose, without any damaged strings to them, were brought.
But all things must have an end, and so in time Tom Canty was in a condition to get out of bed.
The proper official poured water, the proper official engineered the washing, the proper official stood by with a towel, and by-and-by Tom got safely through the purifying stage and was ready for the services of the Hairdresser-royal.
When he at length emerged from this master's hands, he was a gracious figure and as pretty as a girl, in his mantle and trunks of purple satin, and purple-plumed cap.
He now moved in state toward his breakfast-room, through the midst of the courtly assemblage; and as he passed, these fell back, leaving his way free, and dropped upon their knees.
After breakfast he was conducted, with regal ceremony, attended by his great officers and his guard of fifty Gentlemen Pensioners bearing gilt battle-axes, to the throne-room, where he proceeded to transact business of state.
His 'uncle,' Lord Hertford, took his stand by the throne, to assist the royal mind with wise counsel.
The body of illustrious men named by the late King as his executors appeared, to ask Tom's approval of certain acts of theirs--rather a form, and yet not wholly a form, since there was no Protector as yet.
The Archbishop of Canterbury made report of the decree of the Council of Executors concerning the obsequies of his late most illustrious Majesty, and finished by reading the signatures of the Executors, to wit: the Archbishop of Canterbury; the Lord
At this point he turned and whispered to Lord Hertford-- "What day did he say the burial hath been appointed for"?
"The sixteenth of the coming month, my liege".
"'Tis a strange folly.
Will he keep"?
Poor chap, he was still new to the customs of royalty; he was used to seeing the forlorn dead of Offal Court hustled out of the way with a very different sort of expedition.
However, the Lord Hertford set his mind at rest with a word or two.
A secretary of state presented an order of the Council appointing the morrow at eleven for the reception of the foreign ambassadors, and desired the King's assent.
Tom turned an inquiring look toward Hertford, who whispered-- "Your Majesty will signify consent.
They come to testify their royal masters' sense of the heavy calamity which hath visited your Grace and the realm of England".
Tom did as he was bidden.
Another secretary began to read a preamble concerning the expenses of the late King's household, which had amounted to 28,000 pounds during the preceding six months--a sum so vast that it made Tom Canty gasp; he gasped again when the fact appeared that
Tom spoke out, with lively apprehension-- "We be going to the dogs, 'tis plain.
'Tis meet and necessary that we take a smaller house and set the servants at large, sith they be of no value but to make delay, and trouble one with offices that harass the spirit and shame the soul, they misbecoming any but a doll, that hath nor brains
I remember me of a small house that standeth over against the fish-market, by Billingsgate--" A sharp pressure upon Tom's arm stopped his foolish tongue and sent a blush to his face; but no countenance there betrayed any sign that this strange speech had
A secretary made report that forasmuch as the late King had provided in his will for conferring the ducal degree upon the Earl of Hertford and raising his brother, Sir Thomas Seymour, to the peerage, and likewise Hertford's son to an earldom, together with
{5} Tom was about to blurt out something about the propriety of paying the late King's debts first, before squandering all this money, but a timely touch upon his arm, from the thoughtful Hertford, saved him this indiscretion; wherefore he gave the royal
While he sat reflecting a moment over the ease with which he was doing strange and glittering miracles, a happy thought shot into his mind: why not make his mother Duchess of Offal Court, and give her an estate?
But a sorrowful thought swept it instantly away: he was only a king in name, these grave veterans and great nobles were his masters; to them his mother was only the creature of a diseased mind; they would simply listen to his project with unbelieving
The dull work went tediously on.
Petitions were read, and proclamations, patents, and all manner of wordy, repetitious, and wearisome papers relating to the public business; and at last Tom sighed pathetically and murmured to himself, "In what have I offended, that the good God should
Then his poor muddled head nodded a while and presently drooped to his shoulder; and the business of the empire came to a standstill for want of that august factor, the ratifying power.
Silence ensued around the slumbering child, and the sages of the realm ceased from their deliberations.
During the forenoon, Tom had an enjoyable hour, by permission of his keepers, Hertford and St. John, with the Lady Elizabeth and the little Lady Jane Grey; though the spirits of the princesses were rather subdued by the mighty stroke that had fallen upon
He had a few moments to himself, and then a slim lad of about twelve years of age was admitted to his presence, whose clothing, except his snowy ruff and the laces about his wrists, was of black,--doublet, hose, and all.
He bore no badge of mourning but a knot of purple ribbon on his shoulder.
He advanced hesitatingly, with head bowed and bare, and dropped upon one knee in front of Tom.
Tom sat still and contemplated him soberly a moment.
Then he said-- "Rise, lad.
Who art thou.
What wouldst have"?
The boy rose, and stood at graceful ease, but with an aspect of concern in his face.
He said-- "Of a surety thou must remember me, my lord.
I am thy whipping-boy".
"My _whipping_-boy"?
"The same, your Grace.
I am Humphrey--Humphrey Marlow".
Tom perceived that here was someone whom his keepers ought to have posted him about.
The situation was delicate.
What should he do?
--pretend he knew this lad, and then betray by his every utterance that he had never heard of him before?
No, that would not do.
An idea came to his relief: accidents like this might be likely to happen with some frequency, now that business urgencies would often call Hertford and St. John from his side, they being members of the Council of Executors; therefore perhaps it would be
Yes, that would be a wise course--he would practise on this boy, and see what sort of success he might achieve.
So he stroked his brow perplexedly a moment or two, and presently said-- "Now I seem to remember thee somewhat--but my wit is clogged and dim with suffering--" "Alack, my poor master"!
ejaculated the whipping-boy, with feeling; adding, to himself, "In truth 'tis as they said--his mind is gone--alas, poor soul!
But misfortune catch me, how am I forgetting!
They said one must not seem to observe that aught is wrong with him".
"'Tis strange how my memory doth wanton with me these days," said Tom.
"But mind it not--I mend apace--a little clue doth often serve to bring me back again the things and names which had escaped me.
(And not they, only, forsooth, but e'en such as I ne'er heard before--as this lad shall see.
) Give thy business speech".
"'Tis matter of small weight, my liege, yet will I touch upon it, an' it please your Grace.
Two days gone by, when your Majesty faulted thrice in your Greek--in the morning lessons,--dost remember it"?
"Y-e-s--methinks I do.
(It is not much of a lie--an' I had meddled with the Greek at all, I had not faulted simply thrice, but forty times.
) Yes, I do recall it, now--go on".
"The master, being wroth with what he termed such slovenly and doltish work, did promise that he would soundly whip me for it--and--" "Whip _thee_"!
said Tom, astonished out of his presence of mind.
"Why should he whip _thee_ for faults of mine"?
"Ah, your Grace forgetteth again.
He always scourgeth me when thou dost fail in thy lessons".
"True, true--I had forgot.
Thou teachest me in private--then if I fail, he argueth that thy office was lamely done, and--" "Oh, my liege, what words are these?
I, the humblest of thy servants, presume to teach _thee_"?
"Then where is thy blame?
What riddle is this?
Am I in truth gone mad, or is it thou?
Explain--speak out".
"But, good your Majesty, there's nought that needeth simplifying.
--None may visit the sacred person of the Prince of Wales with blows; wherefore, when he faulteth, 'tis I that take them; and meet it is and right, for that it is mine office and my livelihood".
{1} Tom stared at the tranquil boy, observing to himself, "Lo, it is a wonderful thing,--a most strange and curious trade; I marvel they have not hired a boy to take my combings and my dressings for me--would heaven they would!
--an' they will do this thing, I will take my lashings in mine own person, giving God thanks for the change".
Then he said aloud-- "And hast thou been beaten, poor friend, according to the promise"?
"No, good your Majesty, my punishment was appointed for this day, and peradventure it may be annulled, as unbefitting the season of mourning that is come upon us; I know not, and so have made bold to come hither and remind your Grace about your gracious
To save thee thy whipping"?
"Ah, thou dost remember"!
"My memory mendeth, thou seest.
Set thy mind at ease--thy back shall go unscathed--I will see to it".
"Oh, thanks, my good lord"!
cried the boy, dropping upon his knee again.
"Mayhap I have ventured far enow; and yet--" Seeing Master Humphrey hesitate, Tom encouraged him to go on, saying he was "in the granting mood".
"Then will I speak it out, for it lieth near my heart.
Sith thou art no more Prince of Wales but King, thou canst order matters as thou wilt, with none to say thee nay; wherefore it is not in reason that thou wilt longer vex thyself with dreary studies, but wilt burn thy books and turn thy mind to things
Then am I ruined, and mine orphan sisters with me"!
"Ruined?
Prithee how"?
"My back is my bread, O my gracious liege!
if it go idle, I starve.
An' thou cease from study mine office is gone thou'lt need no whipping-boy.
Do not turn me away"!
Tom was touched with this pathetic distress.
He said, with a right royal burst of generosity-- "Discomfort thyself no further, lad.
Thine office shall be permanent in thee and thy line for ever".
Then he struck the boy a light blow on the shoulder with the flat of his sword, exclaiming, "Rise, Humphrey Marlow, Hereditary Grand Whipping-Boy to the Royal House of England!
Banish sorrow--I will betake me to my books again, and study so ill that they must in justice treble thy wage, so mightily shall the business of thine office be augmented".
The grateful Humphrey responded fervidly-- "Thanks, O most noble master, this princely lavishness doth far surpass my most distempered dreams of fortune.
Now shall I be happy all my days, and all the house of Marlow after me".
Tom had wit enough to perceive that here was a lad who could be useful to him.
He encouraged Humphrey to talk, and he was nothing loath.
He was delighted to believe that he was helping in Tom's 'cure'; for always, as soon as he had finished calling back to Tom's diseased mind the various particulars of his experiences and adventures in the royal school-room and elsewhere about the palace,
At the end of an hour Tom found himself well freighted with very valuable information concerning personages and matters pertaining to the Court; so he resolved to draw instruction from this source daily; and to this end he would give order to admit
Humphrey had hardly been dismissed when my Lord Hertford arrived with more trouble for Tom.
He said that the Lords of the Council, fearing that some overwrought report of the King's damaged health might have leaked out and got abroad, they deemed it wise and best that his Majesty should begin to dine in public after a day or two--his wholesome
Then the Earl proceeded, very delicately, to instruct Tom as to the observances proper to the stately occasion, under the rather thin disguise of 'reminding' him concerning things already known to him; but to his vast gratification it turned out that Tom
Tom kept these facts to himself, however.
Seeing the royal memory so improved, the Earl ventured to apply a few tests to it, in an apparently casual way, to find out how far its amendment had progressed.
The results were happy, here and there, in spots--spots where Humphrey's tracks remained--and on the whole my lord was greatly pleased and encouraged.
So encouraged was he, indeed, that he spoke up and said in a quite hopeful voice-- "Now am I persuaded that if your Majesty will but tax your memory yet a little further, it will resolve the puzzle of the Great Seal--a loss which was of moment yesterday,
May it please your Grace to make the trial"?
Tom was at sea--a Great Seal was something which he was totally unacquainted with.
After a moment's hesitation he looked up innocently and asked-- "What was it like, my lord"?
The Earl started, almost imperceptibly, muttering to himself, "Alack, his wits are flown again!
--it was ill wisdom to lead him on to strain them"--then he deftly turned the talk to other matters, with the purpose of sweeping the unlucky seal out of Tom's thoughts--a purpose which easily succeeded.
CHAPTER XV.
Tom as King.
The next day the foreign ambassadors came, with their gorgeous trains; and Tom, throned in awful state, received them.
The splendours of the scene delighted his eye and fired his imagination at first, but the audience was long and dreary, and so were most of the addresses--wherefore, what began as a pleasure grew into weariness and home-sickness by-and-by.
Tom said the words which Hertford put into his mouth from time to time, and tried hard to acquit himself satisfactorily, but he was too new to such things, and too ill at ease to accomplish more than a tolerable success.
He looked sufficiently like a king, but he was ill able to feel like one.
He was cordially glad when the ceremony was ended.
The larger part of his day was 'wasted'--as he termed it, in his own mind--in labours pertaining to his royal office.
Even the two hours devoted to certain princely pastimes and recreations were rather a burden to him than otherwise, they were so fettered by restrictions and ceremonious observances.
However, he had a private hour with his whipping-boy which he counted clear gain, since he got both entertainment and needful information out of it.
The third day of Tom Canty's kingship came and went much as the others had done, but there was a lifting of his cloud in one way--he felt less uncomfortable than at first; he was getting a little used to his circumstances and surroundings; his chains still
But for one single dread, he could have seen the fourth day approach without serious distress--the dining in public; it was to begin that day.
There were greater matters in the programme--for on that day he would have to preside at a council which would take his views and commands concerning the policy to be pursued toward various foreign nations scattered far and near over the great globe; on
Still, nothing could stop that fourth day, and so it came.
It found poor Tom low-spirited and absent-minded, and this mood continued; he could not shake it off.
The ordinary duties of the morning dragged upon his hands, and wearied him.
Once more he felt the sense of captivity heavy upon him.
Late in the forenoon he was in a large audience-chamber, conversing with the Earl of Hertford and dully awaiting the striking of the hour appointed for a visit of ceremony from a considerable number of great officials and courtiers.
After a little while, Tom, who had wandered to a window and become interested in the life and movement of the great highway beyond the palace gates--and not idly interested, but longing with all his heart to take part in person in its stir and freedom--saw
"I would I knew what 'tis about"!
he exclaimed, with all a boy's curiosity in such happenings.
"Thou art the King"!
solemnly responded the Earl, with a reverence.
"Have I your Grace's leave to act"?
"O blithely, yes!
O gladly, yes"!
exclaimed Tom excitedly, adding to himself with a lively sense of satisfaction, "In truth, being a king is not all dreariness--it hath its compensations and conveniences".
The Earl called a page, and sent him to the captain of the guard with the order-- "Let the mob be halted, and inquiry made concerning the occasion of its movement.
By the King's command"!
A few seconds later a long rank of the royal guards, cased in flashing steel, filed out at the gates and formed across the highway in front of the multitude.
A messenger returned, to report that the crowd were following a man, a woman, and a young girl to execution for crimes committed against the peace and dignity of the realm.
Death--and a violent death--for these poor unfortunates!
The thought wrung Tom's heart-strings.
The spirit of compassion took control of him, to the exclusion of all other considerations; he never thought of the offended laws, or of the grief or loss which these three criminals had inflicted upon their victims; he could think of nothing but the
His concern made him even forget, for the moment, that he was but the false shadow of a king, not the substance; and before he knew it he had blurted out the command-- "Bring them here"!
Then he blushed scarlet, and a sort of apology sprung to his lips; but observing that his order had wrought no sort of surprise in the Earl or the waiting page, he suppressed the words he was about to utter.
The page, in the most matter-of-course way, made a profound obeisance and retired backwards out of the room to deliver the command.
Tom experienced a glow of pride and a renewed sense of the compensating advantages of the kingly office.
He said to himself, "Truly it is like what I was used to feel when I read the old priest's tales, and did imagine mine own self a prince, giving law and command to all, saying 'Do this, do that,' whilst none durst offer let or hindrance to my will".
Now the doors swung open; one high-sounding title after another was announced, the personages owning them followed, and the place was quickly half-filled with noble folk and finery.
But Tom was hardly conscious of the presence of these people, so wrought up was he and so intensely absorbed in that other and more interesting matter.
He seated himself absently in his chair of state, and turned his eyes upon the door with manifestations of impatient expectancy; seeing which, the company forbore to trouble him, and fell to chatting a mixture of public business and court gossip one with
In a little while the measured tread of military men was heard approaching, and the culprits entered the presence in charge of an under-sheriff and escorted by a detail of the king's guard.
The civil officer knelt before Tom, then stood aside; the three doomed persons knelt, also, and remained so; the guard took position behind Tom's chair.
Tom scanned the prisoners curiously.
Something about the dress or appearance of the man had stirred a vague memory in him.
"Methinks I have seen this man ere now .
.
.
but the when or the where fail me".
--Such was Tom's thought.
Just then the man glanced quickly up and quickly dropped his face again, not being able to endure the awful port of sovereignty; but the one full glimpse of the face which Tom got was sufficient.
He said to himself: "Now is the matter clear; this is the stranger that plucked Giles Witt out of the Thames, and saved his life, that windy, bitter, first day of the New Year--a brave good deed--pity he hath been doing baser ones and got himself in this
.
.
I have not forgot the day, neither the hour; by reason that an hour after, upon the stroke of eleven, I did get a hiding by the hand of Gammer Canty which was of so goodly and admired severity that all that went before or followed after it were but
Tom now ordered that the woman and the girl be removed from the presence for a little time; then addressed himself to the under-sheriff, saying-- "Good sir, what is this man's offence"?
The officer knelt, and answered-- "So please your Majesty, he hath taken the life of a subject by poison".
Tom's compassion for the prisoner, and admiration of him as the daring rescuer of a drowning boy, experienced a most damaging shock.
"The thing was proven upon him"?
he asked.
"Most clearly, sire".
Tom sighed, and said-- "Take him away--he hath earned his death.
'Tis a pity, for he was a brave heart--na--na, I mean he hath the _look_ of it"!
The prisoner clasped his hands together with sudden energy, and wrung them despairingly, at the same time appealing imploringly to the 'King' in broken and terrified phrases-- "O my lord the King, an' thou canst pity the lost, have pity upon me!
I am innocent--neither hath that wherewith I am charged been more than but lamely proved--yet I speak not of that; the judgment is gone forth against me and may not suffer alteration; yet in mine extremity I beg a boon, for my doom is more than I can
A grace, a grace, my lord the King!
in thy royal compassion grant my prayer--give commandment that I be hanged"!
Tom was amazed.
This was not the outcome he had looked for.
"Odds my life, a strange _boon_!
Was it not the fate intended thee"?
"O good my liege, not so!
It is ordered that I be _boiled alive_"!
The hideous surprise of these words almost made Tom spring from his chair.
As soon as he could recover his wits he cried out-- "Have thy wish, poor soul!
an' thou had poisoned a hundred men thou shouldst not suffer so miserable a death".
The prisoner bowed his face to the ground and burst into passionate expressions of gratitude--ending with-- "If ever thou shouldst know misfortune--which God forefend!
--may thy goodness to me this day be remembered and requited"!
Tom turned to the Earl of Hertford, and said-- "My lord, is it believable that there was warrant for this man's ferocious doom"?
"It is the law, your Grace--for poisoners.
In Germany coiners be boiled to death in _oil_--not cast in of a sudden, but by a rope let down into the oil by degrees, and slowly; first the feet, then the legs, then--" "O prithee no more, my lord, I cannot bear it"!
cried Tom, covering his eyes with his hands to shut out the picture.
"I beseech your good lordship that order be taken to change this law--oh, let no more poor creatures be visited with its tortures".
The Earl's face showed profound gratification, for he was a man of merciful and generous impulses--a thing not very common with his class in that fierce age.
He said-- "These your Grace's noble words have sealed its doom.
History will remember it to the honour of your royal house".
The under-sheriff was about to remove his prisoner; Tom gave him a sign to wait; then he said-- "Good sir, I would look into this matter further.
The man has said his deed was but lamely proved.
Tell me what thou knowest".
"If the King's grace please, it did appear upon the trial that this man entered into a house in the hamlet of Islington where one lay sick--three witnesses say it was at ten of the clock in the morning, and two say it was some minutes later--the sick man
The sick man died within the hour, being torn with spasms and retchings".
"Did any see the poison given?
Was poison found"?
"Marry, no, my liege".
"Then how doth one know there was poison given at all"?
"Please your Majesty, the doctors testified that none die with such symptoms but by poison".
Weighty evidence, this, in that simple age.
Tom recognised its formidable nature, and said-- "The doctor knoweth his trade--belike they were right.
The matter hath an ill-look for this poor man".
"Yet was not this all, your Majesty; there is more and worse.
Many testified that a witch, since gone from the village, none know whither, did foretell, and speak it privately in their ears, that the sick man _would die by poison_--and more, that a stranger would give it--a stranger with brown hair and clothed in a
Please your Majesty to give the circumstance that solemn weight which is its due, seeing it was _foretold_".
This was an argument of tremendous force in that superstitious day.
Tom felt that the thing was settled; if evidence was worth anything, this poor fellow's guilt was proved.
Still he offered the prisoner a chance, saying-- "If thou canst say aught in thy behalf, speak".
"Nought that will avail, my King.
I am innocent, yet cannot I make it appear.
I have no friends, else might I show that I was not in Islington that day; so also might I show that at that hour they name I was above a league away, seeing I was at Wapping Old Stairs; yea more, my King, for I could show, that whilst they say I was
A drowning boy--" "Peace!
Sheriff, name the day the deed was done"!
"At ten in the morning, or some minutes later, the first day of the New Year, most illustrious--" "Let the prisoner go free--it is the King's will"!
Another blush followed this unregal outburst, and he covered his indecorum as well as he could by adding-- "It enrageth me that a man should be hanged upon such idle, hare-brained evidence"!
A low buzz of admiration swept through the assemblage.
It was not admiration of the decree that had been delivered by Tom, for the propriety or expediency of pardoning a convicted poisoner was a thing which few there would have felt justified in either admitting or admiring--no, the admiration was for the
Some of the low-voiced remarks were to this effect-- "This is no mad king--he hath his wits sound".
"How sanely he put his questions--how like his former natural self was this abrupt imperious disposal of the matter"!
"God be thanked, his infirmity is spent!
This is no weakling, but a king.
He hath borne himself like to his own father".
The air being filled with applause, Tom's ear necessarily caught a little of it.
The effect which this had upon him was to put him greatly at his ease, and also to charge his system with very gratifying sensations.
However, his juvenile curiosity soon rose superior to these pleasant thoughts and feelings; he was eager to know what sort of deadly mischief the woman and the little girl could have been about; so, by his command, the two terrified and sobbing creatures
"What is it that these have done"?
he inquired of the sheriff.
"Please your Majesty, a black crime is charged upon them, and clearly proven; wherefore the judges have decreed, according to the law, that they be hanged.
They sold themselves to the devil--such is their crime".
Tom shuddered.
He had been taught to abhor people who did this wicked thing.
Still, he was not going to deny himself the pleasure of feeding his curiosity for all that; so he asked-- "Where was this done?
--and when"?
"On a midnight in December, in a ruined church, your Majesty".
Tom shuddered again.
"Who was there present"?
"Only these two, your grace--and _that other_".
"Have these confessed"?
"Nay, not so, sire--they do deny it".
"Then prithee, how was it known"?
"Certain witness did see them wending thither, good your Majesty; this bred the suspicion, and dire effects have since confirmed and justified it.
In particular, it is in evidence that through the wicked power so obtained, they did invoke and bring about a storm that wasted all the region round about.
Above forty witnesses have proved the storm; and sooth one might have had a thousand, for all had reason to remember it, sith all had suffered by it".
"Certes this is a serious matter".
Tom turned this dark piece of scoundrelism over in his mind a while, then asked-- "Suffered the woman also by the storm"?
Several old heads among the assemblage nodded their recognition of the wisdom of this question.
The sheriff, however, saw nothing consequential in the inquiry; he answered, with simple directness-- "Indeed did she, your Majesty, and most righteously, as all aver.
Her habitation was swept away, and herself and child left shelterless".
"Methinks the power to do herself so ill a turn was dearly bought.
She had been cheated, had she paid but a farthing for it; that she paid her soul, and her child's, argueth that she is mad; if she is mad she knoweth not what she doth, therefore sinneth not".
The elderly heads nodded recognition of Tom's wisdom once more, and one individual murmured, "An' the King be mad himself, according to report, then is it a madness of a sort that would improve the sanity of some I wot of, if by the gentle providence of
"What age hath the child"?
asked Tom.
"Nine years, please your Majesty".
"By the law of England may a child enter into covenant and sell itself, my lord"?
asked Tom, turning to a learned judge.
"The law doth not permit a child to make or meddle in any weighty matter, good my liege, holding that its callow wit unfitteth it to cope with the riper wit and evil schemings of them that are its elders.
The _Devil_ may buy a child, if he so choose, and the child agree thereto, but not an Englishman--in this latter case the contract would be null and void".
"It seemeth a rude unchristian thing, and ill contrived, that English law denieth privileges to Englishmen to waste them on the devil"!
cried Tom, with honest heat.
This novel view of the matter excited many smiles, and was stored away in many heads to be repeated about the Court as evidence of Tom's originality as well as progress toward mental health.
The elder culprit had ceased from sobbing, and was hanging upon Tom's words with an excited interest and a growing hope.
Tom noticed this, and it strongly inclined his sympathies toward her in her perilous and unfriended situation.
Presently he asked-- "How wrought they to bring the storm"?
"_By pulling off their stockings_, sire".
This astonished Tom, and also fired his curiosity to fever heat.
He said, eagerly-- "It is wonderful!
Hath it always this dread effect"?
"Always, my liege--at least if the woman desire it, and utter the needful words, either in her mind or with her tongue".
Tom turned to the woman, and said with impetuous zeal-- "Exert thy power--I would see a storm"!
There was a sudden paling of cheeks in the superstitious assemblage, and a general, though unexpressed, desire to get out of the place--all of which was lost upon Tom, who was dead to everything but the proposed cataclysm.
Seeing a puzzled and astonished look in the woman's face, he added, excitedly-- "Never fear--thou shalt be blameless.
More--thou shalt go free--none shall touch thee.
Exert thy power".
"Oh, my lord the King, I have it not--I have been falsely accused".
"Thy fears stay thee.
Be of good heart, thou shalt suffer no harm.
Make a storm--it mattereth not how small a one--I require nought great or harmful, but indeed prefer the opposite--do this and thy life is spared--thou shalt go out free, with thy child, bearing the King's pardon, and safe from hurt or malice from any in
The woman prostrated herself, and protested, with tears, that she had no power to do the miracle, else she would gladly win her child's life alone, and be content to lose her own, if by obedience to the King's command so precious a grace might be acquired.
Tom urged--the woman still adhered to her declarations.
Finally he said-- "I think the woman hath said true.
An' _my_ mother were in her place and gifted with the devil's functions, she had not stayed a moment to call her storms and lay the whole land in ruins, if the saving of my forfeit life were the price she got!
It is argument that other mothers are made in like mould.
Thou art free, goodwife--thou and thy child--for I do think thee innocent.
_Now_ thou'st nought to fear, being pardoned--pull off thy stockings!
--an' thou canst make me a storm, thou shalt be rich"!
The redeemed creature was loud in her gratitude, and proceeded to obey, whilst Tom looked on with eager expectancy, a little marred by apprehension; the courtiers at the same time manifesting decided discomfort and uneasiness.
The woman stripped her own feet and her little girl's also, and plainly did her best to reward the King's generosity with an earthquake, but it was all a failure and a disappointment.
Tom sighed, and said-- "There, good soul, trouble thyself no further, thy power is departed out of thee.
Go thy way in peace; and if it return to thee at any time, forget me not, but fetch me a storm".
{13} CHAPTER XVI.
The State Dinner.
The dinner hour drew near--yet strangely enough, the thought brought but slight discomfort to Tom, and hardly any terror.
The morning's experiences had wonderfully built up his confidence; the poor little ash-cat was already more wonted to his strange garret, after four days' habit, than a mature person could have become in a full month.
A child's facility in accommodating itself to circumstances was never more strikingly illustrated.
Let us privileged ones hurry to the great banqueting-room and have a glance at matters there whilst Tom is being made ready for the imposing occasion.
It is a spacious apartment, with gilded pillars and pilasters, and pictured walls and ceilings.
At the door stand tall guards, as rigid as statues, dressed in rich and picturesque costumes, and bearing halberds.
In a high gallery which runs all around the place is a band of musicians and a packed company of citizens of both sexes, in brilliant attire.
In the centre of the room, upon a raised platform, is Tom's table.
Now let the ancient chronicler speak: "A gentleman enters the room bearing a rod, and along with him another bearing a tablecloth, which, after they have both kneeled three times with the utmost veneration, he spreads upon the table, and after kneeling
{6} So end the solemn preliminaries.
Now, far down the echoing corridors we hear a bugle-blast, and the indistinct cry, "Place for the King!
Way for the King's most excellent majesty"!
These sounds are momently repeated--they grow nearer and nearer--and presently, almost in our faces, the martial note peals and the cry rings out, "Way for the King"!
At this instant the shining pageant appears, and files in at the door, with a measured march.
Let the chronicler speak again:-- "First come Gentlemen, Barons, Earls, Knights of the Garter, all richly dressed and bareheaded; next comes the Chancellor, between two, one of which carries the royal sceptre, the other the Sword of State in a red
' After him come nobles attached to his person, and on his right and left march his guard of honour, his fifty Gentlemen Pensioners, with gilt battle-axes".
This was all fine and pleasant.
Tom's pulse beat high, and a glad light was in his eye.
He bore himself right gracefully, and all the more so because he was not thinking of how he was doing it, his mind being charmed and occupied with the blithe sights and sounds about him--and besides, nobody can be very ungraceful in nicely-fitting
Tom remembered his instructions, and acknowledged his greeting with a slight inclination of his plumed head, and a courteous "I thank ye, my good people".
He seated himself at table, without removing his cap; and did it without the least embarrassment; for to eat with one's cap on was the one solitary royal custom upon which the kings and the Cantys met upon common ground, neither party having any advantage
The pageant broke up and grouped itself picturesquely, and remained bareheaded.
Now to the sound of gay music the Yeomen of the Guard entered,--"the tallest and mightiest men in England, they being carefully selected in this regard"--but we will let the chronicler tell about it:-- "The Yeomen of the Guard entered, bareheaded, clothed
These dishes were received by a gentleman in the same order they were brought, and placed upon the table, while the taster gave to each guard a mouthful to eat of the particular dish he had brought, for fear of any poison".
Tom made a good dinner, notwithstanding he was conscious that hundreds of eyes followed each morsel to his mouth and watched him eat it with an interest which could not have been more intense if it had been a deadly explosive and was expected to blow him
He was careful not to hurry, and equally careful not to do anything whatever for himself, but wait till the proper official knelt down and did it for him.
He got through without a mistake--flawless and precious triumph.
When the meal was over at last and he marched away in the midst of his bright pageant, with the happy noises in his ears of blaring bugles, rolling drums, and thundering acclamations, he felt that if he had seen the worst of dining in public it was an
CHAPTER XVII.
Foo-foo the First.
Miles Hendon hurried along toward the Southwark end of the bridge, keeping a sharp look-out for the persons he sought, and hoping and expecting to overtake them presently.
He was disappointed in this, however.
By asking questions, he was enabled to track them part of the way through Southwark; then all traces ceased, and he was perplexed as to how to proceed.
Still, he continued his efforts as best he could during the rest of the day.
Nightfall found him leg-weary, half-famished, and his desire as far from accomplishment as ever; so he supped at the Tabard Inn and went to bed, resolved to make an early start in the morning, and give the town an exhaustive search.
As he lay thinking and planning, he presently began to reason thus: The boy would escape from the ruffian, his reputed father, if possible; would he go back to London and seek his former haunts?
No, he would not do that, he would avoid recapture.
What, then, would he do?
Never having had a friend in the world, or a protector, until he met Miles Hendon, he would naturally try to find that friend again, provided the effort did not require him to go toward London and danger.
He would strike for Hendon Hall, that is what he would do, for he knew Hendon was homeward bound and there he might expect to find him.
Yes, the case was plain to Hendon--he must lose no more time in Southwark, but move at once through Kent, toward Monk's Holm, searching the wood and inquiring as he went.
Let us return to the vanished little King now.
The ruffian whom the waiter at the inn on the bridge saw 'about to join' the youth and the King did not exactly join them, but fell in close behind them and followed their steps.
He said nothing.
His left arm was in a sling, and he wore a large green patch over his left eye; he limped slightly, and used an oaken staff as a support.
The youth led the King a crooked course through Southwark, and by-and-by struck into the high road beyond.
The King was irritated, now, and said he would stop here--it was Hendon's place to come to him, not his to go to Hendon.
He would not endure such insolence; he would stop where he was.
The youth said-- "Thou'lt tarry here, and thy friend lying wounded in the wood yonder?
So be it, then".
The King's manner changed at once.
He cried out-- "Wounded?
And who hath dared to do it?
But that is apart; lead on, lead on!
Faster, sirrah!
Art shod with lead?
Wounded, is he?
Now though the doer of it be a duke's son he shall rue it"!
It was some distance to the wood, but the space was speedily traversed.
The youth looked about him, discovered a bough sticking in the ground, with a small bit of rag tied to it, then led the way into the forest, watching for similar boughs and finding them at intervals; they were evidently guides to the point he was aiming
By-and-by an open place was reached, where were the charred remains of a farm-house, and near them a barn which was falling to ruin and decay.
There was no sign of life anywhere, and utter silence prevailed.
The youth entered the barn, the King following eagerly upon his heels.
No one there!
The King shot a surprised and suspicious glance at the youth, and asked-- "Where is he"?
A mocking laugh was his answer.
The King was in a rage in a moment; he seized a billet of wood and was in the act of charging upon the youth when another mocking laugh fell upon his ear.
It was from the lame ruffian who had been following at a distance.
The King turned and said angrily-- "Who art thou?
What is thy business here"?
"Leave thy foolery," said the man, "and quiet thyself.
My disguise is none so good that thou canst pretend thou knowest not thy father through it".
"Thou art not my father.
I know thee not.
I am the King.
If thou hast hid my servant, find him for me, or thou shalt sup sorrow for what thou hast done".
John Canty replied, in a stern and measured voice-- "It is plain thou art mad, and I am loath to punish thee; but if thou provoke me, I must.
Thy prating doth no harm here, where there are no ears that need to mind thy follies; yet it is well to practise thy tongue to wary speech, that it may do no hurt when our quarters change.
I have done a murder, and may not tarry at home--neither shalt thou, seeing I need thy service.
My name is changed, for wise reasons; it is Hobbs--John Hobbs; thine is Jack--charge thy memory accordingly.
Now, then, speak.
Where is thy mother?
Where are thy sisters?
They came not to the place appointed--knowest thou whither they went"?
The King answered sullenly-- "Trouble me not with these riddles.
My mother is dead; my sisters are in the palace".
The youth near by burst into a derisive laugh, and the King would have assaulted him, but Canty--or Hobbs, as he now called himself--prevented him, and said-- "Peace, Hugo, vex him not; his mind is astray, and thy ways fret him.
Sit thee down, Jack, and quiet thyself; thou shalt have a morsel to eat, anon".
Hobbs and Hugo fell to talking together, in low voices, and the King removed himself as far as he could from their disagreeable company.
He withdrew into the twilight of the farther end of the barn, where he found the earthen floor bedded a foot deep with straw.
He lay down here, drew straw over himself in lieu of blankets, and was soon absorbed in thinking.
He had many griefs, but the minor ones were swept almost into forgetfulness by the supreme one, the loss of his father.
To the rest of the world the name of Henry VIII.
brought a shiver, and suggested an ogre whose nostrils breathed destruction and whose hand dealt scourgings and death; but to this boy the name brought only sensations of pleasure; the figure it invoked wore a countenance that was all gentleness and
He called to mind a long succession of loving passages between his father and himself, and dwelt fondly upon them, his unstinted tears attesting how deep and real was the grief that possessed his heart.
As the afternoon wasted away, the lad, wearied with his troubles, sank gradually into a tranquil and healing slumber.
After a considerable time--he could not tell how long--his senses struggled to a half-consciousness, and as he lay with closed eyes vaguely wondering where he was and what had been happening, he noted a murmurous sound, the sullen beating of rain upon the
A snug sense of comfort stole over him, which was rudely broken, the next moment, by a chorus of piping cackles and coarse laughter.
It startled him disagreeably, and he unmuffled his head to see whence this interruption proceeded.
A grim and unsightly picture met his eye.
A bright fire was burning in the middle of the floor, at the other end of the barn; and around it, and lit weirdly up by the red glare, lolled and sprawled the motliest company of tattered gutter-scum and ruffians, of both sexes, he had ever read or
There were huge stalwart men, brown with exposure, long-haired, and clothed in fantastic rags; there were middle-sized youths, of truculent countenance, and similarly clad; there were blind mendicants, with patched or bandaged eyes; crippled ones, with
The night was come, the gang had just finished feasting, an orgy was beginning; the can of liquor was passing from mouth to mouth.
A general cry broke forth-- "A song!
a song from the Bat and Dick and Dot-and-go-One"!
One of the blind men got up, and made ready by casting aside the patches that sheltered his excellent eyes, and the pathetic placard which recited the cause of his calamity.
Dot-and-go-One disencumbered himself of his timber leg and took his place, upon sound and healthy limbs, beside his fellow-rascal; then they roared out a rollicking ditty, and were reinforced by the whole crew, at the end of each stanza, in a rousing
By the time the last stanza was reached, the half-drunken enthusiasm had risen to such a pitch, that everybody joined in and sang it clear through from the beginning, producing a volume of villainous sound that made the rafters quake.
These were the inspiring words:-- 'Bien Darkman's then, Bouse Mort and Ken, The bien Coves bings awast, On Chates to trine by Rome Coves dine For his long lib at last.
Bing'd out bien Morts and toure, and toure, Bing out of the Rome vile bine, And toure the Cove that cloy'd your duds, Upon the Chates to trine.
' (From'The English Rogue.
' London, 1665.
) Conversation followed; not in the thieves' dialect of the song, for that was only used in talk when unfriendly ears might be listening.
In the course of it, it appeared that 'John Hobbs' was not altogether a new recruit, but had trained in the gang at some former time.
His later history was called for, and when he said he had 'accidentally' killed a man, considerable satisfaction was expressed; when he added that the man was a priest, he was roundly applauded, and had to take a drink with everybody.
Old acquaintances welcomed him joyously, and new ones were proud to shake him by the hand.
He was asked why he had 'tarried away so many months.
' He answered-- "London is better than the country, and safer, these late years, the laws be so bitter and so diligently enforced.
An' I had not had that accident, I had stayed there.
I had resolved to stay, and never more venture country-wards--but the accident has ended that".
He inquired how many persons the gang numbered now.
The 'ruffler,' or chief, answered-- "Five and twenty sturdy budges, bulks, files, clapperdogeons and maunders, counting the dells and doxies and other morts.
{7} Most are here, the rest are wandering eastward, along the winter lay.
We follow at dawn".
"I do not see the Wen among the honest folk about me.
Where may he be"?
"Poor lad, his diet is brimstone, now, and over hot for a delicate taste.
He was killed in a brawl, somewhere about midsummer".
"I sorrow to hear that; the Wen was a capable man, and brave".
"That was he, truly.
Black Bess, his dell, is of us yet, but absent on the eastward tramp; a fine lass, of nice ways and orderly conduct, none ever seeing her drunk above four days in the seven".
"She was ever strict--I remember it well--a goodly wench and worthy all commendation.
Her mother was more free and less particular; a troublesome and ugly-tempered beldame, but furnished with a wit above the common".
"We lost her through it.
Her gift of palmistry and other sorts of fortune-telling begot for her at last a witch's name and fame.
The law roasted her to death at a slow fire.
It did touch me to a sort of tenderness to see the gallant way she met her lot--cursing and reviling all the crowd that gaped and gazed around her, whilst the flames licked upward toward her face and catched her thin locks and crackled about her old gray
why an' thou should'st live a thousand years thoud'st never hear so masterful a cursing.
Alack, her art died with her.
There be base and weakling imitations left, but no true blasphemy".
The Ruffler sighed; the listeners sighed in sympathy; a general depression fell upon the company for a moment, for even hardened outcasts like these are not wholly dead to sentiment, but are able to feel a fleeting sense of loss and affliction at wide
However, a deep drink all round soon restored the spirits of the mourners.
"Have any others of our friends fared hardly"?
asked Hobbs.
"Some--yes.
Particularly new comers--such as small husbandmen turned shiftless and hungry upon the world because their farms were taken from them to be changed to sheep ranges.
They begged, and were whipped at the cart's tail, naked from the girdle up, till the blood ran; then set in the stocks to be pelted; they begged again, were whipped again, and deprived of an ear; they begged a third time--poor devils, what else could
--and were branded on the cheek with a red-hot iron, then sold for slaves; they ran away, were hunted down, and hanged.
'Tis a brief tale, and quickly told.
Others of us have fared less hardly.
Stand forth, Yokel, Burns, and Hodge--show your adornments"!
These stood up and stripped away some of their rags, exposing their backs, criss-crossed with ropy old welts left by the lash; one turned up his hair and showed the place where a left ear had once been; another showed a brand upon his shoulder--the letter
My good old blameless mother strove to earn bread by nursing the sick; one of these died, the doctors knew not how, so my mother was burnt for a witch, whilst my babes looked on and wailed.
English law!
--up, all, with your cups!
--now all together and with a cheer!
--drink to the merciful English law that delivered _her_ from the English hell!
Thank you, mates, one and all.
I begged, from house to house--I and the wife--bearing with us the hungry kids--but it was crime to be hungry in England--so they stripped us and lashed us through three towns.
Drink ye all again to the merciful English law!
--for its lash drank deep of my Mary's blood and its blessed deliverance came quick.
She lies there, in the potter's field, safe from all harms.
And the kids--well, whilst the law lashed me from town to town, they starved.
Drink, lads--only a drop--a drop to the poor kids, that never did any creature harm.
I begged again--begged, for a crust, and got the stocks and lost an ear--see, here bides the stump; I begged again, and here is the stump of the other to keep me minded of it.
And still I begged again, and was sold for a slave--here on my cheek under this stain, if I washed it off, ye might see the red S the branding-iron left there!
A _slave_!
Do you understand that word?
An English _slave_!
--that is he that stands before ye.
I have run from my master, and when I am found--the heavy curse of heaven fall on the law of the land that hath commanded it!
--I shall hang"!
{1} A ringing voice came through the murky air-- "Thou shalt _not_!
--and this day the end of that law is come"!
All turned, and saw the fantastic figure of the little King approaching hurriedly; as it emerged into the light and was clearly revealed, a general explosion of inquiries broke out-- "Who is it?
_What_ is it?
Who art thou, manikin"?
The boy stood unconfused in the midst of all those surprised and questioning eyes, and answered with princely dignity-- "I am Edward, King of England".
A wild burst of laughter followed, partly of derision and partly of delight in the excellence of the joke.
The King was stung.
He said sharply-- "Ye mannerless vagrants, is this your recognition of the royal boon I have promised"?
He said more, with angry voice and excited gesture, but it was lost in a whirlwind of laughter and mocking exclamations.
'John Hobbs' made several attempts to make himself heard above the din, and at last succeeded--saying-- "Mates, he is my son, a dreamer, a fool, and stark mad--mind him not--he thinketh he _is_ the King".
"I _am_ the King," said Edward, turning toward him, "as thou shalt know to thy cost, in good time.
Thou hast confessed a murder--thou shalt swing for it".
"_Thou'lt_ betray me?
--_thou_?
An' I get my hands upon thee--" "Tut-tut"!
said the burley Ruffler, interposing in time to save the King, and emphasising this service by knocking Hobbs down with his fist, "hast respect for neither Kings _nor_ Rufflers?
An' thou insult my presence so again, I'll hang thee up myself".
Then he said to his Majesty, "Thou must make no threats against thy mates, lad; and thou must guard thy tongue from saying evil of them elsewhere.
_Be king_, if it please thy mad humour, but be not harmful in it.
Sink the title thou hast uttered--'tis treason; we be bad men in some few trifling ways, but none among us is so base as to be traitor to his King; we be loving and loyal hearts, in that regard.
Note if I speak truth.
Now--all together: 'Long live Edward, King of England!
'" "LONG LIVE EDWARD, KING OF ENGLAND"!
The response came with such a thundergust from the motley crew that the crazy building vibrated to the sound.
The little King's face lighted with pleasure for an instant, and he slightly inclined his head, and said with grave simplicity-- "I thank you, my good people".
This unexpected result threw the company into convulsions of merriment.
When something like quiet was presently come again, the Ruffler said, firmly, but with an accent of good nature-- "Drop it, boy, 'tis not wise, nor well.
Humour thy fancy, if thou must, but choose some other title".
A tinker shrieked out a suggestion-- "Foo-foo the First, King of the Mooncalves"!
The title 'took,' at once, every throat responded, and a roaring shout went up, of-- "Long live Foo-foo the First, King of the Mooncalves"!
followed by hootings, cat-calls, and peals of laughter.
"Hale him forth, and crown him"!
"Robe him"!
"Sceptre him"!
"Throne him"!
These and twenty other cries broke out at once!
and almost before the poor little victim could draw a breath he was crowned with a tin basin, robed in a tattered blanket, throned upon a barrel, and sceptred with the tinker's soldering-iron.
Then all flung themselves upon their knees about him and sent up a chorus of ironical wailings, and mocking supplications, whilst they swabbed their eyes with their soiled and ragged sleeves and aprons-- "Be gracious to us, O sweet King"!
"Trample not upon thy beseeching worms, O noble Majesty"!
"Pity thy slaves, and comfort them with a royal kick"!
"Cheer us and warm us with thy gracious rays, O flaming sun of sovereignty"!
"Sanctify the ground with the touch of thy foot, that we may eat the dirt and be ennobled"!
"Deign to spit upon us, O Sire, that our children's children may tell of thy princely condescension, and be proud and happy for ever"!
But the humorous tinker made the 'hit' of the evening and carried off the honours.
Kneeling, he pretended to kiss the King's foot, and was indignantly spurned; whereupon he went about begging for a rag to paste over the place upon his face which had been touched by the foot, saying it must be preserved from contact with the vulgar air,
He made himself so killingly funny that he was the envy and admiration of the whole mangy rabble.
Tears of shame and indignation stood in the little monarch's eyes; and the thought in his heart was, "Had I offered them a deep wrong they could not be more cruel--yet have I proffered nought but to do them a kindness--and it is thus they use me for it"!
CHAPTER XVIII.
The Prince with the Tramps.
The troop of vagabonds turned out at early dawn, and set forward on their march.
There was a lowering sky overhead, sloppy ground under foot, and a winter chill in the air.
All gaiety was gone from the company; some were sullen and silent, some were irritable and petulant, none were gentle-humoured, all were thirsty.
The Ruffler put 'Jack' in Hugo's charge, with some brief instructions, and commanded John Canty to keep away from him and let him alone; he also warned Hugo not to be too rough with the lad.
After a while the weather grew milder, and the clouds lifted somewhat.
The troop ceased to shiver, and their spirits began to improve.
They grew more and more cheerful, and finally began to chaff each other and insult passengers along the highway.
This showed that they were awaking to an appreciation of life and its joys once more.
The dread in which their sort was held was apparent in the fact that everybody gave them the road, and took their ribald insolences meekly, without venturing to talk back.
They snatched linen from the hedges, occasionally in full view of the owners, who made no protest, but only seemed grateful that they did not take the hedges, too.
By-and-by they invaded a small farmhouse and made themselves at home while the trembling farmer and his people swept the larder clean to furnish a breakfast for them.
They chucked the housewife and her daughters under the chin whilst receiving the food from their hands, and made coarse jests about them, accompanied with insulting epithets and bursts of horse-laughter.
They threw bones and vegetables at the farmer and his sons, kept them dodging all the time, and applauded uproariously when a good hit was made.
They ended by buttering the head of one of the daughters who resented some of their familiarities.
When they took their leave they threatened to come back and burn the house over the heads of the family if any report of their doings got to the ears of the authorities.
About noon, after a long and weary tramp, the gang came to a halt behind a hedge on the outskirts of a considerable village.
An hour was allowed for rest, then the crew scattered themselves abroad to enter the village at different points to ply their various trades--'Jack' was sent with Hugo.
They wandered hither and thither for some time, Hugo watching for opportunities to do a stroke of business, but finding none--so he finally said-- "I see nought to steal; it is a paltry place.
Wherefore we will beg".
"_We_, forsooth!
Follow thy trade--it befits thee.
But _I_ will not beg".
"Thou'lt not beg"!
exclaimed Hugo, eyeing the King with surprise.
"Prithee, since when hast thou reformed"?
"What dost thou mean"?
"Mean?
Hast thou not begged the streets of London all thy life"?
"I?
Thou idiot"!
"Spare thy compliments--thy stock will last the longer.
Thy father says thou hast begged all thy days.
Mayhap he lied.
Peradventure you will even make so bold as to _say_ he lied," scoffed Hugo.
"Him _you_ call my father?
Yes, he lied".
"Come, play not thy merry game of madman so far, mate; use it for thy amusement, not thy hurt.
An' I tell him this, he will scorch thee finely for it".
"Save thyself the trouble.
I will tell him".
"I like thy spirit, I do in truth; but I do not admire thy judgment.
Bone-rackings and bastings be plenty enow in this life, without going out of one's way to invite them.
But a truce to these matters; _I_ believe your father.
I doubt not he can lie; I doubt not he _doth_ lie, upon occasion, for the best of us do that; but there is no occasion here.
A wise man does not waste so good a commodity as lying for nought.
But come; sith it is thy humour to give over begging, wherewithal shall we busy ourselves?
With robbing kitchens"?
The King said, impatiently-- "Have done with this folly--you weary me"!
Hugo replied, with temper-- "Now harkee, mate; you will not beg, you will not rob; so be it.
But I will tell you what you _will_ do.
You will play decoy whilst _I_ beg.
Refuse, an' you think you may venture"!
The King was about to reply contemptuously, when Hugo said, interrupting-- "Peace!
Here comes one with a kindly face.
Now will I fall down in a fit.
When the stranger runs to me, set you up a wail, and fall upon your knees, seeming to weep; then cry out as all the devils of misery were in your belly, and say, 'Oh, sir, it is my poor afflicted brother, and we be friendless; o' God's name cast through
'--and mind you, keep you _on_ wailing, and abate not till we bilk him of his penny, else shall you rue it".
Then immediately Hugo began to moan, and groan, and roll his eyes, and reel and totter about; and when the stranger was close at hand, down he sprawled before him, with a shriek, and began to writhe and wallow in the dirt, in seeming agony.
"O, dear, O dear"!
cried the benevolent stranger, "O poor soul, poor soul, how he doth suffer!
There--let me help thee up".
"O noble sir, forbear, and God love you for a princely gentleman--but it giveth me cruel pain to touch me when I am taken so.
My brother there will tell your worship how I am racked with anguish when these fits be upon me.
A penny, dear sir, a penny, to buy a little food; then leave me to my sorrows".
"A penny!
thou shalt have three, thou hapless creature,"--and he fumbled in his pocket with nervous haste and got them out.
"There, poor lad, take them and most welcome.
Now come hither, my boy, and help me carry thy stricken brother to yon house, where--" "I am not his brother," said the King, interrupting.
"What!
not his brother"?
"Oh, hear him"!
groaned Hugo, then privately ground his teeth.
"He denies his own brother--and he with one foot in the grave"!
"Boy, thou art indeed hard of heart, if this is thy brother.
For shame!
--and he scarce able to move hand or foot.
If he is not thy brother, who is he, then"?
"A beggar and a thief!
He has got your money and has picked your pocket likewise.
An' thou would'st do a healing miracle, lay thy staff over his shoulders and trust Providence for the rest".
But Hugo did not tarry for the miracle.
In a moment he was up and off like the wind, the gentleman following after and raising the hue and cry lustily as he went.
The King, breathing deep gratitude to Heaven for his own release, fled in the opposite direction, and did not slacken his pace until he was out of harm's reach.
He took the first road that offered, and soon put the village behind him.
He hurried along, as briskly as he could, during several hours, keeping a nervous watch over his shoulder for pursuit; but his fears left him at last, and a grateful sense of security took their place.
He recognised, now, that he was hungry, and also very tired.
So he halted at a farmhouse; but when he was about to speak, he was cut short and driven rudely away.
His clothes were against him.
He wandered on, wounded and indignant, and was resolved to put himself in the way of like treatment no more.
But hunger is pride's master; so, as the evening drew near, he made an attempt at another farmhouse; but here he fared worse than before; for he was called hard names and was promised arrest as a vagrant except he moved on promptly.
The night came on, chilly and overcast; and still the footsore monarch laboured slowly on.
He was obliged to keep moving, for every time he sat down to rest he was soon penetrated to the bone with the cold.
All his sensations and experiences, as he moved through the solemn gloom and the empty vastness of the night, were new and strange to him.
At intervals he heard voices approach, pass by, and fade into silence; and as he saw nothing more of the bodies they belonged to than a sort of formless drifting blur, there was something spectral and uncanny about it all that made him shudder.
Occasionally he caught the twinkle of a light--always far away, apparently--almost in another world; if he heard the tinkle of a sheep's bell, it was vague, distant, indistinct; the muffled lowing of the herds floated to him on the night wind in
He stumbled along, through the gruesome fascinations of this new experience, startled occasionally by the soft rustling of the dry leaves overhead, so like human whispers they seemed to sound; and by-and-by he came suddenly upon the freckled light of a tin
He stepped back into the shadows and waited.
The lantern stood by the open door of a barn.
The King waited some time--there was no sound, and nobody stirring.
He got so cold, standing still, and the hospitable barn looked so enticing, that at last he resolved to risk everything and enter.
He started swiftly and stealthily, and just as he was crossing the threshold he heard voices behind him.
He darted behind a cask, within the barn, and stooped down.
Two farm-labourers came in, bringing the lantern with them, and fell to work, talking meanwhile.
Whilst they moved about with the light, the King made good use of his eyes and took the bearings of what seemed to be a good-sized stall at the further end of the place, purposing to grope his way to it when he should be left to himself.
He also noted the position of a pile of horse blankets, midway of the route, with the intent to levy upon them for the service of the crown of England for one night.
By-and-by the men finished and went away, fastening the door behind them and taking the lantern with them.
The shivering King made for the blankets, with as good speed as the darkness would allow; gathered them up, and then groped his way safely to the stall.
Of two of the blankets he made a bed, then covered himself with the remaining two.
He was a glad monarch, now, though the blankets were old and thin, and not quite warm enough; and besides gave out a pungent horsey odour that was almost suffocatingly powerful.
Although the King was hungry and chilly, he was also so tired and so drowsy that these latter influences soon began to get the advantage of the former, and he presently dozed off into a state of semi-consciousness.
Then, just as he was on the point of losing himself wholly, he distinctly felt something touch him!
He was broad awake in a moment, and gasping for breath.
The cold horror of that mysterious touch in the dark almost made his heart stand still.
He lay motionless, and listened, scarcely breathing.
But nothing stirred, and there was no sound.
He continued to listen, and wait, during what seemed a long time, but still nothing stirred, and there was no sound.
So he began to drop into a drowse once more, at last; and all at once he felt that mysterious touch again!
It was a grisly thing, this light touch from this noiseless and invisible presence; it made the boy sick with ghostly fears.
What should he do?
That was the question; but he did not know how to answer it.
Should he leave these reasonably comfortable quarters and fly from this inscrutable horror?
But fly whither?
He could not get out of the barn; and the idea of scurrying blindly hither and thither in the dark, within the captivity of the four walls, with this phantom gliding after him, and visiting him with that soft hideous touch upon cheek or shoulder at every
But to stay where he was, and endure this living death all night--was that better?
No.
What, then, was there left to do?
Ah, there was but one course; he knew it well--he must put out his hand and find that thing!
It was easy to think this; but it was hard to brace himself up to try it.
Three times he stretched his hand a little way out into the dark, gingerly; and snatched it suddenly back, with a gasp--not because it had encountered anything, but because he had felt so sure it was just _going_ to.
But the fourth time, he groped a little further, and his hand lightly swept against something soft and warm.
This petrified him, nearly, with fright; his mind was in such a state that he could imagine the thing to be nothing else than a corpse, newly dead and still warm.
He thought he would rather die than touch it again.
But he thought this false thought because he did not know the immortal strength of human curiosity.
In no long time his hand was tremblingly groping again--against his judgment, and without his consent--but groping persistently on, just the same.
It encountered a bunch of long hair; he shuddered, but followed up the hair and found what seemed to be a warm rope; followed up the rope and found an innocent calf!
--for the rope was not a rope at all, but the calf's tail.
The King was cordially ashamed of himself for having gotten all that fright and misery out of so paltry a matter as a slumbering calf; but he need not have felt so about it, for it was not the calf that frightened him, but a dreadful non-existent something
The King was not only delighted to find that the creature was only a calf, but delighted to have the calf's company; for he had been feeling so lonesome and friendless that the company and comradeship of even this humble animal were welcome.
And he had been so buffeted, so rudely entreated by his own kind, that it was a real comfort to him to feel that he was at last in the society of a fellow-creature that had at least a soft heart and a gentle spirit, whatever loftier attributes might be
So he resolved to waive rank and make friends with the calf.
While stroking its sleek warm back--for it lay near him and within easy reach--it occurred to him that this calf might be utilised in more ways than one.
Whereupon he re-arranged his bed, spreading it down close to the calf; then he cuddled himself up to the calf's back, drew the covers up over himself and his friend, and in a minute or two was as warm and comfortable as he had ever been in the downy
Pleasant thoughts came at once; life took on a cheerfuller seeming.
He was free of the bonds of servitude and crime, free of the companionship of base and brutal outlaws; he was warm; he was sheltered; in a word, he was happy.
The night wind was rising; it swept by in fitful gusts that made the old barn quake and rattle, then its forces died down at intervals, and went moaning and wailing around corners and projections--but it was all music to the King, now that he was snug
He merely snuggled the closer to his friend, in a luxury of warm contentment, and drifted blissfully out of consciousness into a deep and dreamless sleep that was full of serenity and peace.
The distant dogs howled, the melancholy kine complained, and the winds went on raging, whilst furious sheets of rain drove along the roof; but the Majesty of England slept on, undisturbed, and the calf did the same, it being a simple creature, and not
CHAPTER XIX.
The Prince with the peasants.
When the King awoke in the early morning, he found that a wet but thoughtful rat had crept into the place during the night and made a cosy bed for itself in his bosom.
Being disturbed now, it scampered away.
The boy smiled, and said, "Poor fool, why so fearful?
I am as forlorn as thou.
'Twould be a sham in me to hurt the helpless, who am myself so helpless.
Moreover, I owe you thanks for a good omen; for when a king has fallen so low that the very rats do make a bed of him, it surely meaneth that his fortunes be upon the turn, since it is plain he can no lower go".
He got up and stepped out of the stall, and just then he heard the sound of children's voices.
The barn door opened and a couple of little girls came in.
As soon as they saw him their talking and laughing ceased, and they stopped and stood still, gazing at him with strong curiosity; they presently began to whisper together, then they approached nearer, and stopped again to gaze and whisper.
By-and-by they gathered courage and began to discuss him aloud.
One said-- "He hath a comely face".
The other added-- "And pretty hair".
"But is ill clothed enow".
"And how starved he looketh".
They came still nearer, sidling shyly around and about him, examining him minutely from all points, as if he were some strange new kind of animal, but warily and watchfully the while, as if they half feared he might be a sort of animal that would bite,
Finally they halted before him, holding each other's hands for protection, and took a good satisfying stare with their innocent eyes; then one of them plucked up all her courage and inquired with honest directness-- "Who art thou, boy"?
"I am the King," was the grave answer.
The children gave a little start, and their eyes spread themselves wide open and remained so during a speechless half minute.
Then curiosity broke the silence-- "The _King_?
What King"?
"The King of England".
The children looked at each other--then at him--then at each other again--wonderingly, perplexedly; then one said-- "Didst hear him, Margery?
--he said he is the King.
Can that be true"?
"How can it be else but true, Prissy?
Would he say a lie?
For look you, Prissy, an' it were not true, it _would_ be a lie.
It surely would be.
Now think on't.
For all things that be not true, be lies--thou canst make nought else out of it".
It was a good tight argument, without a leak in it anywhere; and it left Prissy's half-doubts not a leg to stand on.
She considered a moment, then put the King upon his honour with the simple remark-- "If thou art truly the King, then I believe thee".
"I am truly the King".
This settled the matter.
His Majesty's royalty was accepted without further question or discussion, and the two little girls began at once to inquire into how he came to be where he was, and how he came to be so unroyally clad, and whither he was bound, and all about his
It was a mighty relief to him to pour out his troubles where they would not be scoffed at or doubted; so he told his tale with feeling, forgetting even his hunger for the time; and it was received with the deepest and tenderest sympathy by the gentle
But when he got down to his latest experiences and they learned how long he had been without food, they cut him short and hurried him away to the farmhouse to find a breakfast for him.
The King was cheerful and happy now, and said to himself, "When I am come to mine own again, I will always honour little children, remembering how that these trusted me and believed in me in my time of trouble; whilst they that were older, and thought
The children's mother received the King kindly, and was full of pity; for his forlorn condition and apparently crazed intellect touched her womanly heart.
She was a widow, and rather poor; consequently she had seen trouble enough to enable her to feel for the unfortunate.
She imagined that the demented boy had wandered away from his friends or keepers; so she tried to find out whence he had come, in order that she might take measures to return him; but all her references to neighbouring towns and villages, and all her
He spoke earnestly and simply about court matters, and broke down, more than once, when speaking of the late King 'his father'; but whenever the conversation changed to baser topics, he lost interest and became silent.
The woman was mightily puzzled; but she did not give up.
As she proceeded with her cooking, she set herself to contriving devices to surprise the boy into betraying his real secret.
She talked about cattle--he showed no concern; then about sheep--the same result: so her guess that he had been a shepherd boy was an error; she talked about mills; and about weavers, tinkers, smiths, trades and tradesmen of all sorts; and about
Not altogether, either; for she argued that she had narrowed the thing down to domestic service.
Yes, she was sure she was on the right track, now; he must have been a house servant.
So she led up to that.
But the result was discouraging.
The subject of sweeping appeared to weary him; fire-building failed to stir him; scrubbing and scouring awoke no enthusiasm.
The goodwife touched, with a perishing hope, and rather as a matter of form, upon the subject of cooking.
To her surprise, and her vast delight, the King's face lighted at once!
Ah, she had hunted him down at last, she thought; and she was right proud, too, of the devious shrewdness and tact which had accomplished it.
Her tired tongue got a chance to rest, now; for the King's, inspired by gnawing hunger and the fragrant smells that came from the sputtering pots and pans, turned itself loose and delivered itself up to such an eloquent dissertation upon certain toothsome
Then he broadened his bill of fare, and discussed it with such appreciation and animation, that the goodwife said to herself, "Good lack!
how can he know so many dishes, and so fine ones withal?
For these belong only upon the tables of the rich and great.
Ah, now I see!
ragged outcast as he is, he must have served in the palace before his reason went astray; yes, he must have helped in the very kitchen of the King himself!
I will test him".
Full of eagerness to prove her sagacity, she told the King to mind the cooking a moment--hinting that he might manufacture and add a dish or two, if he chose; then she went out of the room and gave her children a sign to follow after.
The King muttered-- "Another English king had a commission like to this, in a bygone time--it is nothing against my dignity to undertake an office which the great Alfred stooped to assume.
But I will try to better serve my trust than he; for he let the cakes burn".
The intent was good, but the performance was not answerable to it, for this King, like the other one, soon fell into deep thinkings concerning his vast affairs, and the same calamity resulted--the cookery got burned.
The woman returned in time to save the breakfast from entire destruction; and she promptly brought the King out of his dreams with a brisk and cordial tongue-lashing.
Then, seeing how troubled he was over his violated trust, she softened at once, and was all goodness and gentleness toward him.
The boy made a hearty and satisfying meal, and was greatly refreshed and gladdened by it.
It was a meal which was distinguished by this curious feature, that rank was waived on both sides; yet neither recipient of the favour was aware that it had been extended.
The goodwife had intended to feed this young tramp with broken victuals in a corner, like any other tramp or like a dog; but she was so remorseful for the scolding she had given him, that she did what she could to atone for it by allowing him to sit at
It does us all good to unbend sometimes.
This good woman was made happy all the day long by the applauses which she got out of herself for her magnanimous condescension to a tramp; and the King was just as self-complacent over his gracious humility toward a humble peasant woman.
When breakfast was over, the housewife told the King to wash up the dishes.
This command was a staggerer, for a moment, and the King came near rebelling; but then he said to himself, "Alfred the Great watched the cakes; doubtless he would have washed the dishes too--therefore will I essay it".
He made a sufficiently poor job of it; and to his surprise too, for the cleaning of wooden spoons and trenchers had seemed an easy thing to do.
It was a tedious and troublesome piece of work, but he finished it at last.
He was becoming impatient to get away on his journey now; however, he was not to lose this thrifty dame's society so easily.
She furnished him some little odds and ends of employment, which he got through with after a fair fashion and with some credit.
Then she set him and the little girls to paring some winter apples; but he was so awkward at this service that she retired him from it and gave him a butcher knife to grind.
Afterwards she kept him carding wool until he began to think he had laid the good King Alfred about far enough in the shade for the present in the matter of showy menial heroisms that would read picturesquely in story-books and histories, and so he was
And when, just after the noonday dinner, the goodwife gave him a basket of kittens to drown, he did resign.
At least he was just going to resign--for he felt that he must draw the line somewhere, and it seemed to him that to draw it at kitten-drowning was about the right thing--when there was an interruption.
The interruption was John Canty--with a peddler's pack on his back--and Hugo.
The King discovered these rascals approaching the front gate before they had had a chance to see him; so he said nothing about drawing the line, but took up his basket of kittens and stepped quietly out the back way, without a word.
He left the creatures in an out-house, and hurried on, into a narrow lane at the rear.
CHAPTER XX.
The Prince and the hermit.
The high hedge hid him from the house, now; and so, under the impulse of a deadly fright, he let out all his forces and sped toward a wood in the distance.
He never looked back until he had almost gained the shelter of the forest; then he turned and descried two figures in the distance.
That was sufficient; he did not wait to scan them critically, but hurried on, and never abated his pace till he was far within the twilight depths of the wood.
Then he stopped; being persuaded that he was now tolerably safe.
He listened intently, but the stillness was profound and solemn--awful, even, and depressing to the spirits.
At wide intervals his straining ear did detect sounds, but they were so remote, and hollow, and mysterious, that they seemed not to be real sounds, but only the moaning and complaining ghosts of departed ones.
So the sounds were yet more dreary than the silence which they interrupted.
It was his purpose, in the beginning, to stay where he was the rest of the day; but a chill soon invaded his perspiring body, and he was at last obliged to resume movement in order to get warm.
He struck straight through the forest, hoping to pierce to a road presently, but he was disappointed in this.
He travelled on and on; but the farther he went, the denser the wood became, apparently.
The gloom began to thicken, by-and-by, and the King realised that the night was coming on.
It made him shudder to think of spending it in such an uncanny place; so he tried to hurry faster, but he only made the less speed, for he could not now see well enough to choose his steps judiciously; consequently he kept tripping over roots and
And how glad he was when at last he caught the glimmer of a light!
He approached it warily, stopping often to look about him and listen.
It came from an unglazed window-opening in a shabby little hut.
He heard a voice, now, and felt a disposition to run and hide; but he changed his mind at once, for this voice was praying, evidently.
He glided to the one window of the hut, raised himself on tiptoe, and stole a glance within.
The room was small; its floor was the natural earth, beaten hard by use; in a corner was a bed of rushes and a ragged blanket or two; near it was a pail, a cup, a basin, and two or three pots and pans; there was a short bench and a three-legged stool; on
The man was of large, bony frame; his hair and whiskers were very long and snowy white; he was clothed in a robe of sheepskins which reached from his neck to his heels.
"A holy hermit"!
said the King to himself; "now am I indeed fortunate".
The hermit rose from his knees; the King knocked.
A deep voice responded-- "Enter!
--but leave sin behind, for the ground whereon thou shalt stand is holy"!
The King entered, and paused.
The hermit turned a pair of gleaming, unrestful eyes upon him, and said-- "Who art thou"?
"I am the King," came the answer, with placid simplicity.
"Welcome, King"!
cried the hermit, with enthusiasm.
Then, bustling about with feverish activity, and constantly saying, "Welcome, welcome," he arranged his bench, seated the King on it, by the hearth, threw some faggots on the fire, and finally fell to pacing the floor with a nervous stride.
"Welcome!
Many have sought sanctuary here, but they were not worthy, and were turned away.
But a King who casts his crown away, and despises the vain splendours of his office, and clothes his body in rags, to devote his life to holiness and the mortification of the flesh--he is worthy, he is welcome!
--here shall he abide all his days till death come".
The King hastened to interrupt and explain, but the hermit paid no attention to him--did not even hear him, apparently, but went right on with his talk, with a raised voice and a growing energy.
"And thou shalt be at peace here.
None shall find out thy refuge to disquiet thee with supplications to return to that empty and foolish life which God hath moved thee to abandon.
Thou shalt pray here; thou shalt study the Book; thou shalt meditate upon the follies and delusions of this world, and upon the sublimities of the world to come; thou shalt feed upon crusts and herbs, and scourge thy body with whips, daily, to the
Thou shalt wear a hair shirt next thy skin; thou shalt drink water only; and thou shalt be at peace; yes, wholly at peace; for whoso comes to seek thee shall go his way again, baffled; he shall not find thee, he shall not molest thee".
The old man, still pacing back and forth, ceased to speak aloud, and began to mutter.
The King seized this opportunity to state his case; and he did it with an eloquence inspired by uneasiness and apprehension.
But the hermit went on muttering, and gave no heed.
And still muttering, he approached the King and said impressively-- "'Sh!
I will tell you a secret"!
He bent down to impart it, but checked himself, and assumed a listening attitude.
After a moment or two he went on tiptoe to the window-opening, put his head out, and peered around in the gloaming, then came tiptoeing back again, put his face close down to the King's, and whispered-- "I am an archangel"!
The King started violently, and said to himself, "Would God I were with the outlaws again; for lo, now am I the prisoner of a madman"!
His apprehensions were heightened, and they showed plainly in his face.
In a low excited voice the hermit continued-- "I see you feel my atmosphere!
There's awe in your face!
None may be in this atmosphere and not be thus affected; for it is the very atmosphere of heaven.
I go thither and return, in the twinkling of an eye.
I was made an archangel on this very spot, it is five years ago, by angels sent from heaven to confer that awful dignity.
Their presence filled this place with an intolerable brightness.
And they knelt to me, King!
yes, they knelt to me!
for I was greater than they.
I have walked in the courts of heaven, and held speech with the patriarchs.
Touch my hand--be not afraid--touch it.
There--now thou hast touched a hand which has been clasped by Abraham and Isaac and Jacob!
For I have walked in the golden courts; I have seen the Deity face to face"!
He paused, to give this speech effect; then his face suddenly changed, and he started to his feet again saying, with angry energy, "Yes, I am an archangel; _a mere archangel!
_--I that might have been pope!
It is verily true.
I was told it from heaven in a dream, twenty years ago; ah, yes, I was to be pope!
--and I _should_ have been pope, for Heaven had said it--but the King dissolved my religious house, and I, poor obscure unfriended monk, was cast homeless upon the world, robbed of my mighty destiny"!
Here he began to mumble again, and beat his forehead in futile rage, with his fist; now and then articulating a venomous curse, and now and then a pathetic "Wherefore I am nought but an archangel--I that should have been pope"!
So he went on, for an hour, whilst the poor little King sat and suffered.
Then all at once the old man's frenzy departed, and he became all gentleness.
His voice softened, he came down out of his clouds, and fell to prattling along so simply and so humanly, that he soon won the King's heart completely.
The old devotee moved the boy nearer to the fire and made him comfortable; doctored his small bruises and abrasions with a deft and tender hand; and then set about preparing and cooking a supper--chatting pleasantly all the time, and occasionally
This happy state of things continued while the two ate the supper; then, after a prayer before the shrine, the hermit put the boy to bed, in a small adjoining room, tucking him in as snugly and lovingly as a mother might; and so, with a parting caress,
Presently he paused; then tapped his forehead several times with his fingers, as if trying to recall some thought which had escaped from his mind.
Apparently he was unsuccessful.
Now he started quickly up, and entered his guest's room, and said-- "Thou art King"?
"Yes," was the response, drowsily uttered.
"What King"?
"Of England".
"Of England?
Then Henry is gone"!
"Alack, it is so.
I am his son".
A black frown settled down upon the hermit's face, and he clenched his bony hands with a vindictive energy.
He stood a few moments, breathing fast and swallowing repeatedly, then said in a husky voice-- "Dost know it was he that turned us out into the world houseless and homeless"?
There was no response.
The old man bent down and scanned the boy's reposeful face and listened to his placid breathing.
"He sleeps--sleeps soundly;" and the frown vanished away and gave place to an expression of evil satisfaction.
A smile flitted across the dreaming boy's features.
The hermit muttered, "So--his heart is happy;" and he turned away.
He went stealthily about the place, seeking here and there for something; now and then halting to listen, now and then jerking his head around and casting a quick glance toward the bed; and always muttering, always mumbling to himself.
At last he found what he seemed to want--a rusty old butcher knife and a whetstone.
Then he crept to his place by the fire, sat himself down, and began to whet the knife softly on the stone, still muttering, mumbling, ejaculating.
The winds sighed around the lonely place, the mysterious voices of the night floated by out of the distances.
The shining eyes of venturesome mice and rats peered out at the old man from cracks and coverts, but he went on with his work, rapt, absorbed, and noted none of these things.
At long intervals he drew his thumb along the edge of his knife, and nodded his head with satisfaction.
"It grows sharper," he said; "yes, it grows sharper".
He took no note of the flight of time, but worked tranquilly on, entertaining himself with his thoughts, which broke out occasionally in articulate speech-- "His father wrought us evil, he destroyed us--and is gone down into the eternal fires!
Yes, down into the eternal fires!
He escaped us--but it was God's will, yes it was God's will, we must not repine.
But he hath not escaped the fires!
No, he hath not escaped the fires, the consuming, unpitying, remorseless fires--and _they_ are everlasting"!
And so he wrought, and still wrought--mumbling, chuckling a low rasping chuckle at times--and at times breaking again into words-- "It was his father that did it all.
I am but an archangel; but for him I should be pope"!
The King stirred.
The hermit sprang noiselessly to the bedside, and went down upon his knees, bending over the prostrate form with his knife uplifted.
The boy stirred again; his eyes came open for an instant, but there was no speculation in them, they saw nothing; the next moment his tranquil breathing showed that his sleep was sound once more.
The hermit watched and listened, for a time, keeping his position and scarcely breathing; then he slowly lowered his arms, and presently crept away, saying,-- "It is long past midnight; it is not best that he should cry out, lest by accident someone be
He glided about his hovel, gathering a rag here, a thong there, and another one yonder; then he returned, and by careful and gentle handling he managed to tie the King's ankles together without waking him.
Next he essayed to tie the wrists; he made several attempts to cross them, but the boy always drew one hand or the other away, just as the cord was ready to be applied; but at last, when the archangel was almost ready to despair, the boy crossed his
Now a bandage was passed under the sleeper's chin and brought up over his head and tied fast--and so softly, so gradually, and so deftly were the knots drawn together and compacted, that the boy slept peacefully through it all without stirring.
CHAPTER XXI.
Hendon to the rescue.
The old man glided away, stooping, stealthy, cat-like, and brought the low bench.
He seated himself upon it, half his body in the dim and flickering light, and the other half in shadow; and so, with his craving eyes bent upon the slumbering boy, he kept his patient vigil there, heedless of the drift of time, and softly whetted his
After a long while, the old man, who was still gazing,--yet not seeing, his mind having settled into a dreamy abstraction,--observed, on a sudden, that the boy's eyes were open!
wide open and staring!
--staring up in frozen horror at the knife.
The smile of a gratified devil crept over the old man's face, and he said, without changing his attitude or his occupation-- "Son of Henry the Eighth, hast thou prayed"?
The boy struggled helplessly in his bonds, and at the same time forced a smothered sound through his closed jaws, which the hermit chose to interpret as an affirmative answer to his question.
"Then pray again.
Pray the prayer for the dying"!
A shudder shook the boy's frame, and his face blenched.
Then he struggled again to free himself--turning and twisting himself this way and that; tugging frantically, fiercely, desperately--but uselessly--to burst his fetters; and all the while the old ogre smiled down upon him, and nodded his head, and
The boy uttered a despairing groan, and ceased from his struggles, panting.
The tears came, then, and trickled, one after the other, down his face; but this piteous sight wrought no softening effect upon the savage old man.
The dawn was coming now; the hermit observed it, and spoke up sharply, with a touch of nervous apprehension in his voice-- "I may not indulge this ecstasy longer!
The night is already gone.
It seems but a moment--only a moment; would it had endured a year!
Seed of the Church's spoiler, close thy perishing eyes, an' thou fearest to look upon--" The rest was lost in inarticulate mutterings.
The old man sank upon his knees, his knife in his hand, and bent himself over the moaning boy.
Hark!
There was a sound of voices near the cabin--the knife dropped from the hermit's hand; he cast a sheepskin over the boy and started up, trembling.
The sounds increased, and presently the voices became rough and angry; then came blows, and cries for help; then a clatter of swift footsteps, retreating.
Immediately came a succession of thundering knocks upon the cabin door, followed by-- "Hullo-o-o!
Open!
And despatch, in the name of all the devils"!
Oh, this was the blessedest sound that had ever made music in the King's ears; for it was Miles Hendon's voice!
The hermit, grinding his teeth in impotent rage, moved swiftly out of the bedchamber, closing the door behind him; and straightway the King heard a talk, to this effect, proceeding from the 'chapel':-- "Homage and greeting, reverend sir!
Where is the boy--_my_ boy"?
"What boy, friend"?
"What boy!
Lie me no lies, sir priest, play me no deceptions!
--I am not in the humour for it.
Near to this place I caught the scoundrels who I judged did steal him from me, and I made them confess; they said he was at large again, and they had tracked him to your door.
They showed me his very footprints.
Now palter no more; for look you, holy sir, an' thou produce him not--Where is the boy"?
"O good sir, peradventure you mean the ragged regal vagrant that tarried here the night.
If such as you take an interest in such as he, know, then, that I have sent him of an errand.
He will be back anon".
"How soon?
How soon?
Come, waste not the time--cannot I overtake him?
How soon will he be back"?
"Thou need'st not stir; he will return quickly".
"So be it, then.
I will try to wait.
But stop!
--_you_ sent him of an errand?
--you!
Verily this is a lie--he would not go.
He would pull thy old beard, an' thou didst offer him such an insolence.
Thou hast lied, friend; thou hast surely lied!
He would not go for thee, nor for any man".
"For any _man_--no; haply not.
But I am not a man".
"_What_!
Now o' God's name what art thou, then"?
"It is a secret--mark thou reveal it not.
I am an archangel"!
There was a tremendous ejaculation from Miles Hendon--not altogether unprofane--followed by-- "This doth well and truly account for his complaisance!
Right well I knew he would budge nor hand nor foot in the menial service of any mortal; but, lord, even a king must obey when an archangel gives the word o' command!
Let me--'sh!
What noise was that"?
All this while the little King had been yonder, alternately quaking with terror and trembling with hope; and all the while, too, he had thrown all the strength he could into his anguished moanings, constantly expecting them to reach Hendon's ear, but
So this last remark of his servant came as comes a reviving breath from fresh fields to the dying; and he exerted himself once more, and with all his energy, just as the hermit was saying-- "Noise?
I heard only the wind".
"Mayhap it was.
Yes, doubtless that was it.
I have been hearing it faintly all the--there it is again!
It is not the wind!
What an odd sound!
Come, we will hunt it out"!
Now the King's joy was nearly insupportable.
His tired lungs did their utmost--and hopefully, too--but the sealed jaws and the muffling sheepskin sadly crippled the effort.
Then the poor fellow's heart sank, to hear the hermit say-- "Ah, it came from without--I think from the copse yonder.
Come, I will lead the way".
The King heard the two pass out, talking; heard their footsteps die quickly away--then he was alone with a boding, brooding, awful silence.
It seemed an age till he heard the steps and voices approaching again--and this time he heard an added sound,--the trampling of hoofs, apparently.
Then he heard Hendon say-- "I will not wait longer.
I _cannot_ wait longer.
He has lost his way in this thick wood.
Which direction took he?
Quick--point it out to me".
"He--but wait; I will go with thee".
"Good--good!
Why, truly thou art better than thy looks.
Marry I do not think there's not another archangel with so right a heart as thine.
Wilt ride?
Wilt take the wee donkey that's for my boy, or wilt thou fork thy holy legs over this ill-conditioned slave of a mule that I have provided for myself?
--and had been cheated in too, had he cost but the indifferent sum of a month's usury on a brass farthing let to a tinker out of work".
"No--ride thy mule, and lead thine ass; I am surer on mine own feet, and will walk".
"Then prithee mind the little beast for me while I take my life in my hands and make what success I may toward mounting the big one".
Then followed a confusion of kicks, cuffs, tramplings and plungings, accompanied by a thunderous intermingling of volleyed curses, and finally a bitter apostrophe to the mule, which must have broken its spirit, for hostilities seemed to cease from that
With unutterable misery the fettered little King heard the voices and footsteps fade away and die out.
All hope forsook him, now, for the moment, and a dull despair settled down upon his heart.
"My only friend is deceived and got rid of," he said; "the hermit will return and--" He finished with a gasp; and at once fell to struggling so frantically with his bonds again, that he shook off the smothering sheepskin.
And now he heard the door open!
The sound chilled him to the marrow--already he seemed to feel the knife at his throat.
Horror made him close his eyes; horror made him open them again--and before him stood John Canty and Hugo!
He would have said "Thank God"!
if his jaws had been free.
A moment or two later his limbs were at liberty, and his captors, each gripping him by an arm, were hurrying him with all speed through the forest.
CHAPTER XXII.
A Victim of Treachery.
Once more 'King Foo-foo the First' was roving with the tramps and outlaws, a butt for their coarse jests and dull-witted railleries, and sometimes the victim of small spitefulness at the hands of Canty and Hugo when the Ruffler's back was turned.
None but Canty and Hugo really disliked him.
Some of the others liked him, and all admired his pluck and spirit.
During two or three days, Hugo, in whose ward and charge the King was, did what he covertly could to make the boy uncomfortable; and at night, during the customary orgies, he amused the company by putting small indignities upon him--always as if by
Twice he stepped upon the King's toes--accidentally--and the King, as became his royalty, was contemptuously unconscious of it and indifferent to it; but the third time Hugo entertained himself in that way, the King felled him to the ground with a
Hugo, consumed with anger and shame, sprang up, seized a cudgel, and came at his small adversary in a fury.
Instantly a ring was formed around the gladiators, and the betting and cheering began.
But poor Hugo stood no chance whatever.
His frantic and lubberly 'prentice-work found but a poor market for itself when pitted against an arm which had been trained by the first masters of Europe in single-stick, quarter-staff, and every art and trick of swordsmanship.
The little King stood, alert but at graceful ease, and caught and turned aside the thick rain of blows with a facility and precision which set the motley on-lookers wild with admiration; and every now and then, when his practised eye detected an opening,
At the end of fifteen minutes, Hugo, all battered, bruised, and the target for a pitiless bombardment of ridicule, slunk from the field; and the unscathed hero of the fight was seized and borne aloft upon the shoulders of the joyous rabble to the place
All attempts to make the King serviceable to the troop had failed.
He had stubbornly refused to act; moreover, he was always trying to escape.
He had been thrust into an unwatched kitchen, the first day of his return; he not only came forth empty-handed, but tried to rouse the housemates.
He was sent out with a tinker to help him at his work; he would not work; moreover, he threatened the tinker with his own soldering-iron; and finally both Hugo and the tinker found their hands full with the mere matter of keeping his from getting away.
He delivered the thunders of his royalty upon the heads of all who hampered his liberties or tried to force him to service.
He was sent out, in Hugo's charge, in company with a slatternly woman and a diseased baby, to beg; but the result was not encouraging--he declined to plead for the mendicants, or be a party to their cause in any way.
Thus several days went by; and the miseries of this tramping life, and the weariness and sordidness and meanness and vulgarity of it, became gradually and steadily so intolerable to the captive that he began at last to feel that his release from the
But at night, in his dreams, these things were forgotten, and he was on his throne, and master again.
This, of course, intensified the sufferings of the awakening--so the mortifications of each succeeding morning of the few that passed between his return to bondage and the combat with Hugo, grew bitterer and bitterer, and harder and harder to bear.
The morning after that combat, Hugo got up with a heart filled with vengeful purposes against the King.
He had two plans, in particular.
One was to inflict upon the lad what would be, to his proud spirit and 'imagined' royalty, a peculiar humiliation; and if he failed to accomplish this, his other plan was to put a crime of some kind upon the King, and then betray him into the implacable
In pursuance of the first plan, he purposed to put a 'clime' upon the King's leg; rightly judging that that would mortify him to the last and perfect degree; and as soon as the clime should operate, he meant to get Canty's help, and _force_ the King to
'Clime' was the cant term for a sore, artificially created.
To make a clime, the operator made a paste or poultice of unslaked lime, soap, and the rust of old iron, and spread it upon a piece of leather, which was then bound tightly upon the leg.
This would presently fret off the skin, and make the flesh raw and angry-looking; blood was then rubbed upon the limb, which, being fully dried, took on a dark and repulsive colour.
Then a bandage of soiled rags was put on in a cleverly careless way which would allow the hideous ulcer to be seen, and move the compassion of the passer-by.
{8} Hugo got the help of the tinker whom the King had cowed with the soldering-iron; they took the boy out on a tinkering tramp, and as soon as they were out of sight of the camp they threw him down and the tinker held him while Hugo bound the poultice
The King raged and stormed, and promised to hang the two the moment the sceptre was in his hand again; but they kept a firm grip upon him and enjoyed his impotent struggling and jeered at his threats.
This continued until the poultice began to bite; and in no long time its work would have been perfected, if there had been no interruption.
But there was; for about this time the 'slave' who had made the speech denouncing England's laws, appeared on the scene, and put an end to the enterprise, and stripped off the poultice and bandage.
The King wanted to borrow his deliverer's cudgel and warm the jackets of the two rascals on the spot; but the man said no, it would bring trouble--leave the matter till night; the whole tribe being together, then, the outside world would not venture to
He marched the party back to camp and reported the affair to the Ruffler, who listened, pondered, and then decided that the King should not be again detailed to beg, since it was plain he was worthy of something higher and better--wherefore, on the spot
Hugo was overjoyed.
He had already tried to make the King steal, and failed; but there would be no more trouble of that sort, now, for of course the King would not dream of defying a distinct command delivered directly from head-quarters.
So he planned a raid for that very afternoon, purposing to get the King in the law's grip in the course of it; and to do it, too, with such ingenious strategy, that it should seem to be accidental and unintentional; for the King of the Game-Cocks was
Very well.
All in good time Hugo strolled off to a neighbouring village with his prey; and the two drifted slowly up and down one street after another, the one watching sharply for a sure chance to achieve his evil purpose, and the other watching as sharply for a
Both threw away some tolerably fair-looking opportunities; for both, in their secret hearts, were resolved to make absolutely sure work this time, and neither meant to allow his fevered desires to seduce him into any venture that had much uncertainty about
Hugo's chance came first.
For at last a woman approached who carried a fat package of some sort in a basket.
Hugo's eyes sparkled with sinful pleasure as he said to himself, "Breath o' my life, an' I can but put _that_ upon him, 'tis good-den and God keep thee, King of the Game-Cocks"!
He waited and watched--outwardly patient, but inwardly consuming with excitement--till the woman had passed by, and the time was ripe; then said, in a low voice-- "Tarry here till I come again," and darted stealthily after the prey.
The King's heart was filled with joy--he could make his escape, now, if Hugo's quest only carried him far enough away.
But he was to have no such luck.
Hugo crept behind the woman, snatched the package, and came running back, wrapping it in an old piece of blanket which he carried on his arm.
The hue and cry was raised in a moment, by the woman, who knew her loss by the lightening of her burden, although she had not seen the pilfering done.
Hugo thrust the bundle into the King's hands without halting, saying-- "Now speed ye after me with the rest, and cry 'Stop thief!
' but mind ye lead them astray"!
The next moment Hugo turned a corner and darted down a crooked alley--and in another moment or two he lounged into view again, looking innocent and indifferent, and took up a position behind a post to watch results.
The insulted King threw the bundle on the ground; and the blanket fell away from it just as the woman arrived, with an augmenting crowd at her heels; she seized the King's wrist with one hand, snatched up her bundle with the other, and began to pour out a
Hugo had seen enough--his enemy was captured and the law would get him, now--so he slipped away, jubilant and chuckling, and wended campwards, framing a judicious version of the matter to give to the Ruffler's crew as he strode along.
The King continued to struggle in the woman's strong grasp, and now and then cried out in vexation-- "Unhand me, thou foolish creature; it was not I that bereaved thee of thy paltry goods".
The crowd closed around, threatening the King and calling him names; a brawny blacksmith in leather apron, and sleeves rolled to his elbows, made a reach for him, saying he would trounce him well, for a lesson; but just then a long sword flashed in the air
This is matter for the law's consideration, not private and unofficial handling.
Loose thy hold from the boy, goodwife".
The blacksmith averaged the stalwart soldier with a glance, then went muttering away, rubbing his arm; the woman released the boy's wrist reluctantly; the crowd eyed the stranger unlovingly, but prudently closed their mouths.
The King sprang to his deliverer's side, with flushed cheeks and sparkling eyes, exclaiming-- "Thou hast lagged sorely, but thou comest in good season, now, Sir Miles; carve me this rabble to rags"!
CHAPTER XXIII.
The Prince a prisoner.
Hendon forced back a smile, and bent down and whispered in the King's ear-- "Softly, softly, my prince, wag thy tongue warily--nay, suffer it not to wag at all.
Trust in me--all shall go well in the end".
Then he added to himself: "_Sir_ Miles!
Bless me, I had totally forgot I was a knight!
Lord, how marvellous a thing it is, the grip his memory doth take upon his quaint and crazy fancies!
.
.
.
An empty and foolish title is mine, and yet it is something to have deserved it; for I think it is more honour to be held worthy to be a spectre-knight in his Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows, than to be held base enough to be an earl in some of the _real_
The crowd fell apart to admit a constable, who approached and was about to lay his hand upon the King's shoulder, when Hendon said-- "Gently, good friend, withhold your hand--he shall go peaceably; I am responsible for that.
Lead on, we will follow".
The officer led, with the woman and her bundle; Miles and the King followed after, with the crowd at their heels.
The King was inclined to rebel; but Hendon said to him in a low voice-- "Reflect, Sire--your laws are the wholesome breath of your own royalty; shall their source resist them, yet require the branches to respect them?
Apparently one of these laws has been broken; when the King is on his throne again, can it ever grieve him to remember that when he was seemingly a private person he loyally sank the king in the citizen and submitted to its authority"?
"Thou art right; say no more; thou shalt see that whatsoever the King of England requires a subject to suffer, under the law, he will himself suffer while he holdeth the station of a subject".
When the woman was called upon to testify before the justice of the peace, she swore that the small prisoner at the bar was the person who had committed the theft; there was none able to show the contrary, so the King stood convicted.
The bundle was now unrolled, and when the contents proved to be a plump little dressed pig, the judge looked troubled, whilst Hendon turned pale, and his body was thrilled with an electric shiver of dismay; but the King remained unmoved, protected by his
The judge meditated, during an ominous pause, then turned to the woman, with the question-- "What dost thou hold this property to be worth"?
The woman courtesied and replied-- "Three shillings and eightpence, your worship--I could not abate a penny and set forth the value honestly".
The justice glanced around uncomfortably upon the crowd, then nodded to the constable, and said-- "Clear the court and close the doors".
It was done.
None remained but the two officials, the accused, the accuser, and Miles Hendon.
This latter was rigid and colourless, and on his forehead big drops of cold sweat gathered, broke and blended together, and trickled down his face.
The judge turned to the woman again, and said, in a compassionate voice-- "'Tis a poor ignorant lad, and mayhap was driven hard by hunger, for these be grievous times for the unfortunate; mark you, he hath not an evil face--but when hunger driveth--Good
dost know that when one steals a thing above the value of thirteenpence ha'penny the law saith he shall _hang_ for it"?
The little King started, wide-eyed with consternation, but controlled himself and held his peace; but not so the woman.
She sprang to her feet, shaking with fright, and cried out-- "Oh, good lack, what have I done!
God-a-mercy, I would not hang the poor thing for the whole world!
Ah, save me from this, your worship--what shall I do, what _can_ I do"?
The justice maintained his judicial composure, and simply said-- "Doubtless it is allowable to revise the value, since it is not yet writ upon the record".
"Then in God's name call the pig eightpence, and heaven bless the day that freed my conscience of this awesome thing"!
Miles Hendon forgot all decorum in his delight; and surprised the King and wounded his dignity, by throwing his arms around him and hugging him.
The woman made her grateful adieux and started away with her pig; and when the constable opened the door for her, he followed her out into the narrow hall.
The justice proceeded to write in his record book.
Hendon, always alert, thought he would like to know why the officer followed the woman out; so he slipped softly into the dusky hall and listened.
He heard a conversation to this effect-- "It is a fat pig, and promises good eating; I will buy it of thee; here is the eightpence".
"Eightpence, indeed!
Thou'lt do no such thing.
It cost me three shillings and eightpence, good honest coin of the last reign, that old Harry that's just dead ne'er touched or tampered with.
A fig for thy eightpence"!
"Stands the wind in that quarter?
Thou wast under oath, and so swore falsely when thou saidst the value was but eightpence.
Come straightway back with me before his worship, and answer for the crime!
--and then the lad will hang".
"There, there, dear heart, say no more, I am content.
Give me the eightpence, and hold thy peace about the matter".
The woman went off crying: Hendon slipped back into the court room, and the constable presently followed, after hiding his prize in some convenient place.
The justice wrote a while longer, then read the King a wise and kindly lecture, and sentenced him to a short imprisonment in the common jail, to be followed by a public flogging.
The astounded King opened his mouth, and was probably going to order the good judge to be beheaded on the spot; but he caught a warning sign from Hendon, and succeeded in closing his mouth again before he lost anything out of it.
Hendon took him by the hand, now, made reverence to the justice, and the two departed in the wake of the constable toward the jail.
The moment the street was reached, the inflamed monarch halted, snatched away his hand, and exclaimed-- "Idiot, dost imagine I will enter a common jail _alive_"?
Hendon bent down and said, somewhat sharply-- "_Will_ you trust in me?
Peace!
and forbear to worsen our chances with dangerous speech.
What God wills, will happen; thou canst not hurry it, thou canst not alter it; therefore wait, and be patient--'twill be time enow to rail or rejoice when what is to happen has happened".
{1} CHAPTER XXIV.
The Escape.
The short winter day was nearly ended.
The streets were deserted, save for a few random stragglers, and these hurried straight along, with the intent look of people who were only anxious to accomplish their errands as quickly as possible, and then snugly house themselves from the rising wind
They looked neither to the right nor to the left; they paid no attention to our party, they did not even seem to see them.
Edward the Sixth wondered if the spectacle of a king on his way to jail had ever encountered such marvellous indifference before.
By-and-by the constable arrived at a deserted market-square, and proceeded to cross it.
When he had reached the middle of it, Hendon laid his hand upon his arm, and said in a low voice-- "Bide a moment, good sir, there is none in hearing, and I would say a word to thee".
"My duty forbids it, sir; prithee hinder me not, the night comes on".
"Stay, nevertheless, for the matter concerns thee nearly.
Turn thy back a moment and seem not to see: _let this poor lad escape_".
"This to me, sir!
I arrest thee in--" "Nay, be not too hasty.
See thou be careful and commit no foolish error,"--then he shut his voice down to a whisper, and said in the man's ear--"the pig thou hast purchased for eightpence may cost thee thy neck, man"!
The poor constable, taken by surprise, was speechless, at first, then found his tongue and fell to blustering and threatening; but Hendon was tranquil, and waited with patience till his breath was spent; then said-- "I have a liking to thee, friend, and
Observe, I heard it all--every word.
I will prove it to thee".
Then he repeated the conversation which the officer and the woman had had together in the hall, word for word, and ended with-- "There--have I set it forth correctly?
Should not I be able to set it forth correctly before the judge, if occasion required"?
The man was dumb with fear and distress, for a moment; then he rallied, and said with forced lightness-- "'Tis making a mighty matter, indeed, out of a jest; I but plagued the woman for mine amusement".
"Kept you the woman's pig for amusement"?
The man answered sharply-- "Nought else, good sir--I tell thee 'twas but a jest".
"I do begin to believe thee," said Hendon, with a perplexing mixture of mockery and half-conviction in his tone; "but tarry thou here a moment whilst I run and ask his worship--for nathless, he being a man experienced in law, in jests, in--" He was moving
Why, man, he hath no more sympathy with a jest than hath a dead corpse!
--come, and we will speak further.
Ods body!
I seem to be in evil case--and all for an innocent and thoughtless pleasantry.
I am a man of family; and my wife and little ones--List to reason, good your worship: what wouldst thou of me"?
"Only that thou be blind and dumb and paralytic whilst one may count a hundred thousand--counting slowly," said Hendon, with the expression of a man who asks but a reasonable favour, and that a very little one.
"It is my destruction"!
said the constable despairingly.
"Ah, be reasonable, good sir; only look at this matter, on all its sides, and see how mere a jest it is--how manifestly and how plainly it is so.
And even if one granted it were not a jest, it is a fault so small that e'en the grimmest penalty it could call forth would be but a rebuke and warning from the judge's lips".
Hendon replied with a solemnity which chilled the air about him-- "This jest of thine hath a name, in law,--wot you what it is"?
"I knew it not!
Peradventure I have been unwise.
I never dreamed it had a name--ah, sweet heaven, I thought it was original".
"Yes, it hath a name.
In the law this crime is called Non compos mentis lex talionis sic transit gloria mundi".
"Ah, my God"!
"And the penalty is death"!
"God be merciful to me a sinner"!
"By advantage taken of one in fault, in dire peril, and at thy mercy, thou hast seized goods worth above thirteenpence ha'penny, paying but a trifle for the same; and this, in the eye of the law, is constructive barratry, misprision of treason, malfeasance
"Bear me up, bear me up, sweet sir, my legs do fail me!
Be thou merciful--spare me this doom, and I will turn my back and see nought that shall happen".
"Good!
now thou'rt wise and reasonable.
And thou'lt restore the pig"?
"I will, I will indeed--nor ever touch another, though heaven send it and an archangel fetch it.
Go--I am blind for thy sake--I see nothing.
I will say thou didst break in and wrest the prisoner from my hands by force.
It is but a crazy, ancient door--I will batter it down myself betwixt midnight and the morning".
"Do it, good soul, no harm will come of it; the judge hath a loving charity for this poor lad, and will shed no tears and break no jailer's bones for his escape".
CHAPTER XXV.
Hendon Hall.
As soon as Hendon and the King were out of sight of the constable, his Majesty was instructed to hurry to a certain place outside the town, and wait there, whilst Hendon should go to the inn and settle his account.
Half an hour later the two friends were blithely jogging eastward on Hendon's sorry steeds.
The King was warm and comfortable, now, for he had cast his rags and clothed himself in the second-hand suit which Hendon had bought on London Bridge.
Hendon wished to guard against over-fatiguing the boy; he judged that hard journeys, irregular meals, and illiberal measures of sleep would be bad for his crazed mind; whilst rest, regularity, and moderate exercise would be pretty sure to hasten its cure;
When he and the King had journeyed about ten miles, they reached a considerable village, and halted there for the night, at a good inn.
The former relations were resumed; Hendon stood behind the King's chair, while he dined, and waited upon him; undressed him when he was ready for bed; then took the floor for his own quarters, and slept athwart the door, rolled up in a blanket.
The next day, and the day after, they jogged lazily along talking over the adventures they had met since their separation, and mightily enjoying each other's narratives.
Hendon detailed all his wide wanderings in search of the King, and described how the archangel had led him a fool's journey all over the forest, and taken him back to the hut, finally, when he found he could not get rid of him.
Then--he said--the old man went into the bedchamber and came staggering back looking broken-hearted, and saying he had expected to find that the boy had returned and laid down in there to rest, but it was not so.
Hendon had waited at the hut all day; hope of the King's return died out, then, and he departed upon the quest again.
"And old Sanctum Sanctorum _was_ truly sorry your highness came not back," said Hendon; "I saw it in his face".
"Marry I will never doubt _that_"!
said the King--and then told his own story; after which, Hendon was sorry he had not destroyed the archangel.
During the last day of the trip, Hendon's spirits were soaring.
His tongue ran constantly.
He talked about his old father, and his brother Arthur, and told of many things which illustrated their high and generous characters; he went into loving frenzies over his Edith, and was so glad-hearted that he was even able to say some gentle and
He dwelt a deal on the coming meeting at Hendon Hall; what a surprise it would be to everybody, and what an outburst of thanksgiving and delight there would be.
It was a fair region, dotted with cottages and orchards, and the road led through broad pasture lands whose receding expanses, marked with gentle elevations and depressions, suggested the swelling and subsiding undulations of the sea.
In the afternoon the returning prodigal made constant deflections from his course to see if by ascending some hillock he might not pierce the distance and catch a glimpse of his home.
At last he was successful, and cried out excitedly-- "There is the village, my Prince, and there is the Hall close by!
You may see the towers from here; and that wood there--that is my father's park.
Ah, _now_ thou'lt know what state and grandeur be!
A house with seventy rooms--think of that!
--and seven and twenty servants!
A brave lodging for such as we, is it not so?
Come, let us speed--my impatience will not brook further delay".
All possible hurry was made; still, it was after three o'clock before the village was reached.
The travellers scampered through it, Hendon's tongue going all the time.
"Here is the church--covered with the same ivy--none gone, none added".
"Yonder is the inn, the old Red Lion,--and yonder is the market-place".
"Here is the Maypole, and here the pump--nothing is altered; nothing but the people, at any rate; ten years make a change in people; some of these I seem to know, but none know me".
So his chat ran on.
The end of the village was soon reached; then the travellers struck into a crooked, narrow road, walled in with tall hedges, and hurried briskly along it for half a mile, then passed into a vast flower garden through an imposing gateway, whose huge stone
A noble mansion was before them.
"Welcome to Hendon Hall, my King"!
exclaimed Miles.
"Ah, 'tis a great day!
My father and my brother, and the Lady Edith will be so mad with joy that they will have eyes and tongue for none but me in the first transports of the meeting, and so thou'lt seem but coldly welcomed--but mind it not; 'twill soon seem otherwise; for
The next moment Hendon sprang to the ground before the great door, helped the King down, then took him by the hand and rushed within.
A few steps brought him to a spacious apartment; he entered, seated the King with more hurry than ceremony, then ran toward a young man who sat at a writing-table in front of a generous fire of logs.
"Embrace me, Hugh," he cried, "and say thou'rt glad I am come again!
and call our father, for home is not home till I shall touch his hand, and see his face, and hear his voice once more"!
But Hugh only drew back, after betraying a momentary surprise, and bent a grave stare upon the intruder--a stare which indicated somewhat of offended dignity, at first, then changed, in response to some inward thought or purpose, to an expression of
Presently he said, in a mild voice-- "Thy wits seem touched, poor stranger; doubtless thou hast suffered privations and rude buffetings at the world's hands; thy looks and dress betoken it.
Whom dost thou take me to be"?
"Take thee?
Prithee for whom else than whom thou art?
I take thee to be Hugh Hendon," said Miles, sharply.
The other continued, in the same soft tone-- "And whom dost thou imagine thyself to be"?
"Imagination hath nought to do with it!
Dost thou pretend thou knowest me not for thy brother Miles Hendon"?
An expression of pleased surprise flitted across Hugh's face, and he exclaimed-- "What!
thou art not jesting?
can the dead come to life?
God be praised if it be so!
Our poor lost boy restored to our arms after all these cruel years!
Ah, it seems too good to be true, it _is_ too good to be true--I charge thee, have pity, do not trifle with me!
Quick--come to the light--let me scan thee well"!
He seized Miles by the arm, dragged him to the window, and began to devour him from head to foot with his eyes, turning him this way and that, and stepping briskly around him and about him to prove him from all points of view; whilst the returned prodigal,
Scour and scan me to thy content, my good old Hugh--I am indeed thy old Miles, thy same old Miles, thy lost brother, is't not so?
Ah, 'tis a great day--I _said_ 'twas a great day!
Give me thy hand, give me thy cheek--lord, I am like to die of very joy"!
He was about to throw himself upon his brother; but Hugh put up his hand in dissent, then dropped his chin mournfully upon his breast, saying with emotion-- "Ah, God of his mercy give me strength to bear this grievous disappointment"!
Miles, amazed, could not speak for a moment; then he found his tongue, and cried out-- "_What_ disappointment?
Am I not thy brother"?
Hugh shook his head sadly, and said-- "I pray heaven it may prove so, and that other eyes may find the resemblances that are hid from mine.
Alack, I fear me the letter spoke but too truly".
"What letter"?
"One that came from over sea, some six or seven years ago.
It said my brother died in battle".
"It was a lie!
Call thy father--he will know me".
"One may not call the dead".
"Dead"?
Miles's voice was subdued, and his lips trembled.
"My father dead!
--oh, this is heavy news.
Half my new joy is withered now.
Prithee let me see my brother Arthur--he will know me; he will know me and console me".
"He, also, is dead".
"God be merciful to me, a stricken man!
Gone,--both gone--the worthy taken and the worthless spared, in me!
Ah!
I crave your mercy!
--do not say the Lady Edith--" "Is dead?
No, she lives".
"Then, God be praised, my joy is whole again!
Speed thee, brother--let her come to me!
An' _she_ say I am not myself--but she will not; no, no, _she_ will know me, I were a fool to doubt it.
Bring her--bring the old servants; they, too, will know me".
"All are gone but five--Peter, Halsey, David, Bernard, and Margaret".
So saying, Hugh left the room.
Miles stood musing a while, then began to walk the floor, muttering-- "The five arch-villains have survived the two-and-twenty leal and honest--'tis an odd thing".
He continued walking back and forth, muttering to himself; he had forgotten the King entirely.
By-and-by his Majesty said gravely, and with a touch of genuine compassion, though the words themselves were capable of being interpreted ironically-- "Mind not thy mischance, good man; there be others in the world whose identity is denied, and whose
Thou hast company".
"Ah, my King," cried Hendon, colouring slightly, "do not thou condemn me--wait, and thou shalt see.
I am no impostor--she will say it; you shall hear it from the sweetest lips in England.
I an impostor?
Why, I know this old hall, these pictures of my ancestors, and all these things that are about us, as a child knoweth its own nursery.
Here was I born and bred, my lord; I speak the truth; I would not deceive thee; and should none else believe, I pray thee do not _thou_ doubt me--I could not bear it".
"I do not doubt thee," said the King, with a childlike simplicity and faith.
"I thank thee out of my heart"!
exclaimed Hendon with a fervency which showed that he was touched.
The King added, with the same gentle simplicity-- "Dost thou doubt _me_"?
A guilty confusion seized upon Hendon, and he was grateful that the door opened to admit Hugh, at that moment, and saved him the necessity of replying.
A beautiful lady, richly clothed, followed Hugh, and after her came several liveried servants.
The lady walked slowly, with her head bowed and her eyes fixed upon the floor.
The face was unspeakably sad.
Miles Hendon sprang forward, crying out-- "Oh, my Edith, my darling--" But Hugh waved him back, gravely, and said to the lady-- "Look upon him.
Do you know him"?
At the sound of Miles's voice the woman had started slightly, and her cheeks had flushed; she was trembling now.
She stood still, during an impressive pause of several moments; then slowly lifted up her head and looked into Hendon's eyes with a stony and frightened gaze; the blood sank out of her face, drop by drop, till nothing remained but the grey pallor of
and turned, with a moan and a stifled sob, and tottered out of the room.
Miles Hendon sank into a chair and covered his face with his hands.
After a pause, his brother said to the servants-- "You have observed him.
Do you know him"?
They shook their heads; then the master said-- "The servants know you not, sir.
I fear there is some mistake.
You have seen that my wife knew you not".
"Thy _wife_"!
In an instant Hugh was pinned to the wall, with an iron grip about his throat.
"Oh, thou fox-hearted slave, I see it all!
Thou'st writ the lying letter thyself, and my stolen bride and goods are its fruit.
There--now get thee gone, lest I shame mine honourable soldiership with the slaying of so pitiful a mannikin"!
Hugh, red-faced, and almost suffocated, reeled to the nearest chair, and commanded the servants to seize and bind the murderous stranger.
They hesitated, and one of them said-- "He is armed, Sir Hugh, and we are weaponless".
"Armed!
What of it, and ye so many?
Upon him, I say"!
But Miles warned them to be careful what they did, and added-- "Ye know me of old--I have not changed; come on, an' it like you".
This reminder did not hearten the servants much; they still held back.
"Then go, ye paltry cowards, and arm yourselves and guard the doors, whilst I send one to fetch the watch"!
said Hugh.
He turned at the threshold, and said to Miles, "You'll find it to your advantage to offend not with useless endeavours at escape".
"Escape?
Spare thyself discomfort, an' that is all that troubles thee.
For Miles Hendon is master of Hendon Hall and all its belongings.
He will remain--doubt it not".
CHAPTER XXVI.
Disowned.
The King sat musing a few moments, then looked up and said-- "'Tis strange--most strange.
I cannot account for it".
"No, it is not strange, my liege.
I know him, and this conduct is but natural.
He was a rascal from his birth".
"Oh, I spake not of _him_, Sir Miles".
"Not of him?
Then of what?
What is it that is strange"?
"That the King is not missed".
"How?
Which?
I doubt I do not understand".
"Indeed?
Doth it not strike you as being passing strange that the land is not filled with couriers and proclamations describing my person and making search for me?
Is it no matter for commotion and distress that the Head of the State is gone; that I am vanished away and lost"?
"Most true, my King, I had forgot".
Then Hendon sighed, and muttered to himself, "Poor ruined mind--still busy with its pathetic dream".
"But I have a plan that shall right us both--I will write a paper, in three tongues--Latin, Greek and English--and thou shalt haste away with it to London in the morning.
Give it to none but my uncle, the Lord Hertford; when he shall see it, he will know and say I wrote it.
Then he will send for me".
"Might it not be best, my Prince, that we wait here until I prove myself and make my rights secure to my domains?
I should be so much the better able then to--" The King interrupted him imperiously-- "Peace!
What are thy paltry domains, thy trivial interests, contrasted with matters which concern the weal of a nation and the integrity of a throne"?
Then, he added, in a gentle voice, as if he were sorry for his severity, "Obey, and have no fear; I will right thee, I will make thee whole--yes, more than whole.
I shall remember, and requite".
So saying, he took the pen, and set himself to work.
Hendon contemplated him lovingly a while, then said to himself-- "An' it were dark, I should think it _was_ a king that spoke; there's no denying it, when the humour's upon on him he doth thunder and lighten like your true King; now where got he that
See him scribble and scratch away contentedly at his meaningless pot-hooks, fancying them to be Latin and Greek--and except my wit shall serve me with a lucky device for diverting him from his purpose, I shall be forced to pretend to post away to-morrow
The next moment Sir Miles's thoughts had gone back to the recent episode.
So absorbed was he in his musings, that when the King presently handed him the paper which he had been writing, he received it and pocketed it without being conscious of the act.
"How marvellous strange she acted," he muttered.
"I think she knew me--and I think she did _not_ know me.
These opinions do conflict, I perceive it plainly; I cannot reconcile them, neither can I, by argument, dismiss either of the two, or even persuade one to outweigh the other.
The matter standeth simply thus: she _must_ have known my face, my figure, my voice, for how could it be otherwise?
Yet she __said_ _she knew me not, and that is proof perfect, for she cannot lie.
But stop--I think I begin to see.
Peradventure he hath influenced her, commanded her, compelled her to lie.
That is the solution.
The riddle is unriddled.
She seemed dead with fear--yes, she was under his compulsion.
I will seek her; I will find her; now that he is away, she will speak her true mind.
She will remember the old times when we were little playfellows together, and this will soften her heart, and she will no more betray me, but will confess me.
There is no treacherous blood in her--no, she was always honest and true.
She has loved me, in those old days--this is my security; for whom one has loved, one cannot betray".
He stepped eagerly toward the door; at that moment it opened, and the Lady Edith entered.
She was very pale, but she walked with a firm step, and her carriage was full of grace and gentle dignity.
Her face was as sad as before.
Miles sprang forward, with a happy confidence, to meet her, but she checked him with a hardly perceptible gesture, and he stopped where he was.
She seated herself, and asked him to do likewise.
Thus simply did she take the sense of old comradeship out of him, and transform him into a stranger and a guest.
The surprise of it, the bewildering unexpectedness of it, made him begin to question, for a moment, if he _was_ the person he was pretending to be, after all.
The Lady Edith said-- "Sir, I have come to warn you.
The mad cannot be persuaded out of their delusions, perchance; but doubtless they may be persuaded to avoid perils.
I think this dream of yours hath the seeming of honest truth to you, and therefore is not criminal--but do not tarry here with it; for here it is dangerous".
She looked steadily into Miles's face a moment, then added, impressively, "It is the more dangerous for that you _are_ much like what our lost lad must have grown to be if he had lived".
"Heavens, madam, but I _am_ he"!
"I truly think you think it, sir.
I question not your honesty in that; I but warn you, that is all.
My husband is master in this region; his power hath hardly any limit; the people prosper or starve, as he wills.
If you resembled not the man whom you profess to be, my husband might bid you pleasure yourself with your dream in peace; but trust me, I know him well; I know what he will do; he will say to all that you are but a mad impostor, and straightway all will
She bent upon Miles that same steady look once more, and added: "If you _were_ Miles Hendon, and he knew it and all the region knew it--consider what I am saying, weigh it well--you would stand in the same peril, your punishment would be no less sure;
"Most truly I believe it," said Miles, bitterly.
"The power that can command one life-long friend to betray and disown another, and be obeyed, may well look to be obeyed in quarters where bread and life are on the stake and no cobweb ties of loyalty and honour are concerned".
A faint tinge appeared for a moment in the lady's cheek, and she dropped her eyes to the floor; but her voice betrayed no emotion when she proceeded-- "I have warned you--I must still warn you--to go hence.
This man will destroy you, else.
He is a tyrant who knows no pity.
I, who am his fettered slave, know this.
Poor Miles, and Arthur, and my dear guardian, Sir Richard, are free of him, and at rest: better that you were with them than that you bide here in the clutches of this miscreant.
Your pretensions are a menace to his title and possessions; you have assaulted him in his own house: you are ruined if you stay.
Go--do not hesitate.
If you lack money, take this purse, I beg of you, and bribe the servants to let you pass.
Oh, be warned, poor soul, and escape while you may".
Miles declined the purse with a gesture, and rose up and stood before her.
"Grant me one thing," he said.
"Let your eyes rest upon mine, so that I may see if they be steady.
There--now answer me.
Am I Miles Hendon"?
"No.
I know you not".
"Swear it"!
The answer was low, but distinct-- "I swear".
"Oh, this passes belief"!
"Fly!
Why will you waste the precious time?
Fly, and save yourself".
At that moment the officers burst into the room, and a violent struggle began; but Hendon was soon overpowered and dragged away.
The King was taken also, and both were bound and led to prison.
CHAPTER XXVII.
In Prison.
The cells were all crowded; so the two friends were chained in a large room where persons charged with trifling offences were commonly kept.
They had company, for there were some twenty manacled and fettered prisoners here, of both sexes and of varying ages,--an obscene and noisy gang.
The King chafed bitterly over the stupendous indignity thus put upon his royalty, but Hendon was moody and taciturn.
He was pretty thoroughly bewildered; he had come home, a jubilant prodigal, expecting to find everybody wild with joy over his return; and instead had got the cold shoulder and a jail.
The promise and the fulfilment differed so widely that the effect was stunning; he could not decide whether it was most tragic or most grotesque.
He felt much as a man might who had danced blithely out to enjoy a rainbow, and got struck by lightning.
But gradually his confused and tormenting thoughts settled down into some sort of order, and then his mind centred itself upon Edith.
He turned her conduct over, and examined it in all lights, but he could not make anything satisfactory out of it.
Did she know him--or didn't she know him?
It was a perplexing puzzle, and occupied him a long time; but he ended, finally, with the conviction that she did know him, and had repudiated him for interested reasons.
He wanted to load her name with curses now; but this name had so long been sacred to him that he found he could not bring his tongue to profane it.
Wrapped in prison blankets of a soiled and tattered condition, Hendon and the King passed a troubled night.
For a bribe the jailer had furnished liquor to some of the prisoners; singing of ribald songs, fighting, shouting, and carousing was the natural consequence.
At last, a while after midnight, a man attacked a woman and nearly killed her by beating her over the head with his manacles before the jailer could come to the rescue.
The jailer restored peace by giving the man a sound clubbing about the head and shoulders--then the carousing ceased; and after that, all had an opportunity to sleep who did not mind the annoyance of the moanings and groanings of the two wounded people.
During the ensuing week, the days and nights were of a monotonous sameness as to events; men whose faces Hendon remembered more or less distinctly, came, by day, to gaze at the 'impostor' and repudiate and insult him; and by night the carousing and
However, there was a change of incident at last.
The jailer brought in an old man, and said to him-- "The villain is in this room--cast thy old eyes about and see if thou canst say which is he".
Hendon glanced up, and experienced a pleasant sensation for the first time since he had been in the jail.
He said to himself, "This is Blake Andrews, a servant all his life in my father's family--a good honest soul, with a right heart in his breast.
That is, formerly.
But none are true now; all are liars.
This man will know me--and will deny me, too, like the rest".
The old man gazed around the room, glanced at each face in turn, and finally said-- "I see none here but paltry knaves, scum o' the streets.
Which is he"?
The jailer laughed.
"Here," he said; "scan this big animal, and grant me an opinion".
The old man approached, and looked Hendon over, long and earnestly, then shook his head and said-- "Marry, _this_ is no Hendon--nor ever was"!
"Right!
Thy old eyes are sound yet.
An' I were Sir Hugh, I would take the shabby carle and--" The jailer finished by lifting himself a-tip-toe with an imaginary halter, at the same time making a gurgling noise in his throat suggestive of suffocation.
The old man said, vindictively-- "Let him bless God an' he fare no worse.
An' _I_ had the handling o' the villain he should roast, or I am no true man"!
The jailer laughed a pleasant hyena laugh, and said-- "Give him a piece of thy mind, old man--they all do it.
Thou'lt find it good diversion".
Then he sauntered toward his ante-room and disappeared.
The old man dropped upon his knees and whispered-- "God be thanked, thou'rt come again, my master!
I believed thou wert dead these seven years, and lo, here thou art alive!
I knew thee the moment I saw thee; and main hard work it was to keep a stony countenance and seem to see none here but tuppenny knaves and rubbish o' the streets.
I am old and poor, Sir Miles; but say the word and I will go forth and proclaim the truth though I be strangled for it".
"No," said Hendon; "thou shalt not.
It would ruin thee, and yet help but little in my cause.
But I thank thee, for thou hast given me back somewhat of my lost faith in my kind".
The old servant became very valuable to Hendon and the King; for he dropped in several times a day to 'abuse' the former, and always smuggled in a few delicacies to help out the prison bill of fare; he also furnished the current news.
Hendon reserved the dainties for the King; without them his Majesty might not have survived, for he was not able to eat the coarse and wretched food provided by the jailer.
Andrews was obliged to confine himself to brief visits, in order to avoid suspicion; but he managed to impart a fair degree of information each time--information delivered in a low voice, for Hendon's benefit, and interlarded with insulting epithets
So, little by little, the story of the family came out.
Arthur had been dead six years.
This loss, with the absence of news from Hendon, impaired the father's health; he believed he was going to die, and he wished to see Hugh and Edith settled in life before he passed away; but Edith begged hard for delay, hoping for Miles's return; then
It had not proved a happy one.
It was whispered about the country that shortly after the nuptials the bride found among her husband's papers several rough and incomplete drafts of the fatal letter, and had accused him of precipitating the marriage--and Sir Richard's death, too--by a
Tales of cruelty to the Lady Edith and the servants were to be heard on all hands; and since the father's death Sir Hugh had thrown off all soft disguises and become a pitiless master toward all who in any way depended upon him and his domains for bread.
There was a bit of Andrew's gossip which the King listened to with a lively interest-- "There is rumour that the King is mad.
But in charity forbear to say _I_ mentioned it, for 'tis death to speak of it, they say".
His Majesty glared at the old man and said-- "The King is _not_ mad, good man--and thou'lt find it to thy advantage to busy thyself with matters that nearer concern thee than this seditious prattle".
"What doth the lad mean"?
said Andrews, surprised at this brisk assault from such an unexpected quarter.
Hendon gave him a sign, and he did not pursue his question, but went on with his budget-- "The late King is to be buried at Windsor in a day or two--the 16th of the month--and the new King will be crowned at Westminster the 20th".
"Methinks they must needs find him first," muttered his Majesty; then added, confidently, "but they will look to that--and so also shall I." "In the name of--" But the old man got no further--a warning sign from Hendon checked his remark.
He resumed the thread of his gossip-- "Sir Hugh goeth to the coronation--and with grand hopes.
He confidently looketh to come back a peer, for he is high in favour with the Lord Protector".
"What Lord Protector"?
asked his Majesty.
"His Grace the Duke of Somerset".
"What Duke of Somerset"?
"Marry, there is but one--Seymour, Earl of Hertford".
The King asked sharply-- "Since when is _he_ a duke, and Lord Protector"?
"Since the last day of January".
"And prithee who made him so"?
"Himself and the Great Council--with help of the King".
His Majesty started violently.
"The _King_"!
he cried.
"_What_ king, good sir"?
"What king, indeed!
(God-a-mercy, what aileth the boy?
) Sith we have but one, 'tis not difficult to answer--his most sacred Majesty King Edward the Sixth--whom God preserve!
Yea, and a dear and gracious little urchin is he, too; and whether he be mad or no--and they say he mendeth daily--his praises are on all men's lips; and all bless him, likewise, and offer prayers that he may be spared to reign long in England; for he
This news struck his Majesty dumb with amazement, and plunged him into so deep and dismal a reverie that he heard no more of the old man's gossip.
He wondered if the 'little urchin' was the beggar-boy whom he left dressed in his own garments in the palace.
It did not seem possible that this could be, for surely his manners and speech would betray him if he pretended to be the Prince of Wales--then he would be driven out, and search made for the true prince.
Could it be that the Court had set up some sprig of the nobility in his place?
No, for his uncle would not allow that--he was all-powerful and could and would crush such a movement, of course.
The boy's musings profited him nothing; the more he tried to unriddle the mystery the more perplexed he became, the more his head ached, and the worse he slept.
His impatience to get to London grew hourly, and his captivity became almost unendurable.
Hendon's arts all failed with the King--he could not be comforted; but a couple of women who were chained near him succeeded better.
Under their gentle ministrations he found peace and learned a degree of patience.
He was very grateful, and came to love them dearly and to delight in the sweet and soothing influence of their presence.
He asked them why they were in prison, and when they said they were Baptists, he smiled, and inquired-- "Is that a crime to be shut up for in a prison?
Now I grieve, for I shall lose ye--they will not keep ye long for such a little thing".
They did not answer; and something in their faces made him uneasy.
He said, eagerly-- "You do not speak; be good to me, and tell me--there will be no other punishment?
Prithee tell me there is no fear of that".
They tried to change the topic, but his fears were aroused, and he pursued it-- "Will they scourge thee?
No, no, they would not be so cruel!
Say they would not.
Come, they _will_ not, will they"?
The women betrayed confusion and distress, but there was no avoiding an answer, so one of them said, in a voice choked with emotion-- "Oh, thou'lt break our hearts, thou gentle spirit!
--God will help us to bear our--" "It is a confession"!
the King broke in.
"Then they _will_ scourge thee, the stony-hearted wretches!
But oh, thou must not weep, I cannot bear it.
Keep up thy courage--I shall come to my own in time to save thee from this bitter thing, and I will do it"!
When the King awoke in the morning, the women were gone.
"They are saved"!
he said, joyfully; then added, despondently, "but woe is me!
--for they were my comforters".
Each of them had left a shred of ribbon pinned to his clothing, in token of remembrance.
He said he would keep these things always; and that soon he would seek out these dear good friends of his and take them under his protection.
Just then the jailer came in with some subordinates, and commanded that the prisoners be conducted to the jail-yard.
The King was overjoyed--it would be a blessed thing to see the blue sky and breathe the fresh air once more.
He fretted and chafed at the slowness of the officers, but his turn came at last, and he was released from his staple and ordered to follow the other prisoners with Hendon.
The court or quadrangle was stone-paved, and open to the sky.
The prisoners entered it through a massive archway of masonry, and were placed in file, standing, with their backs against the wall.
A rope was stretched in front of them, and they were also guarded by their officers.
It was a chill and lowering morning, and a light snow which had fallen during the night whitened the great empty space and added to the general dismalness of its aspect.
Now and then a wintry wind shivered through the place and sent the snow eddying hither and thither.
In the centre of the court stood two women, chained to posts.
A glance showed the King that these were his good friends.
He shuddered, and said to himself, "Alack, they are not gone free, as I had thought.
To think that such as these should know the lash!
--in England!
Ay, there's the shame of it--not in Heathennesse, Christian England!
They will be scourged; and I, whom they have comforted and kindly entreated, must look on and see the great wrong done; it is strange, so strange, that I, the very source of power in this broad realm, am helpless to protect them.
But let these miscreants look well to themselves, for there is a day coming when I will require of them a heavy reckoning for this work.
For every blow they strike now, they shall feel a hundred then".
A great gate swung open, and a crowd of citizens poured in.
They flocked around the two women, and hid them from the King's view.
A clergyman entered and passed through the crowd, and he also was hidden.
The King now heard talking, back and forth, as if questions were being asked and answered, but he could not make out what was said.
Next there was a deal of bustle and preparation, and much passing and repassing of officials through that part of the crowd that stood on the further side of the women; and whilst this proceeded a deep hush gradually fell upon the people.
Now, by command, the masses parted and fell aside, and the King saw a spectacle that froze the marrow in his bones.
Faggots had been piled about the two women, and a kneeling man was lighting them!
The women bowed their heads, and covered their faces with their hands; the yellow flames began to climb upward among the snapping and crackling faggots, and wreaths of blue smoke to stream away on the wind; the clergyman lifted his hands and began a
Instantly they were torn away by the officers, and one of them was kept in a tight grip, but the other broke loose, saying she would die with her mother; and before she could be stopped she had flung her arms about her mother's neck again.
She was torn away once more, and with her gown on fire.
Two or three men held her, and the burning portion of her gown was snatched off and thrown flaming aside, she struggling all the while to free herself, and saying she would be alone in the world, now; and begging to be allowed to die with her mother.
Both the girls screamed continually, and fought for freedom; but suddenly this tumult was drowned under a volley of heart-piercing shrieks of mortal agony--the King glanced from the frantic girls to the stake, then turned away and leaned his ashen face
He said, "That which I have seen, in that one little moment, will never go out from my memory, but will abide there; and I shall see it all the days, and dream of it all the nights, till I die.
Would God I had been blind"!
Hendon was watching the King.
He said to himself, with satisfaction, "His disorder mendeth; he hath changed, and groweth gentler.
If he had followed his wont, he would have stormed at these varlets, and said he was King, and commanded that the women be turned loose unscathed.
Soon his delusion will pass away and be forgotten, and his poor mind will be whole again.
God speed the day"!
That same day several prisoners were brought in to remain over night, who were being conveyed, under guard, to various places in the kingdom, to undergo punishment for crimes committed.
The King conversed with these--he had made it a point, from the beginning, to instruct himself for the kingly office by questioning prisoners whenever the opportunity offered--and the tale of their woes wrung his heart.
One of them was a poor half-witted woman who had stolen a yard or two of cloth from a weaver--she was to be hanged for it.
Another was a man who had been accused of stealing a horse; he said the proof had failed, and he had imagined that he was safe from the halter; but no--he was hardly free before he was arraigned for killing a deer in the King's park; this was proved
There was a tradesman's apprentice whose case particularly distressed the King; this youth said he found a hawk, one evening, that had escaped from its owner, and he took it home with him, imagining himself entitled to it; but the court convicted him of
The King was furious over these inhumanities, and wanted Hendon to break jail and fly with him to Westminster, so that he could mount his throne and hold out his sceptre in mercy over these unfortunate people and save their lives.
"Poor child," sighed Hendon, "these woeful tales have brought his malady upon him again; alack, but for this evil hap, he would have been well in a little time".
Among these prisoners was an old lawyer--a man with a strong face and a dauntless mien.
Three years past, he had written a pamphlet against the Lord Chancellor, accusing him of injustice, and had been punished for it by the loss of his ears in the pillory, and degradation from the bar, and in addition had been fined 3,000 pounds and
Lately he had repeated his offence; and in consequence was now under sentence to lose _what remained of his ears_, pay a fine of 5,000 pounds, be branded on both cheeks, and remain in prison for life.
"These be honourable scars," he said, and turned back his grey hair and showed the mutilated stubs of what had once been his ears.
The King's eye burned with passion.
He said-- "None believe in me--neither wilt thou.
But no matter--within the compass of a month thou shalt be free; and more, the laws that have dishonoured thee, and shamed the English name, shall be swept from the statute books.
The world is made wrong; kings should go to school to their own laws, at times, and so learn mercy".
{1} CHAPTER XXVIII.
The sacrifice.
Meantime Miles was growing sufficiently tired of confinement and inaction.
But now his trial came on, to his great gratification, and he thought he could welcome any sentence provided a further imprisonment should not be a part of it.
But he was mistaken about that.
He was in a fine fury when he found himself described as a 'sturdy vagabond' and sentenced to sit two hours in the stocks for bearing that character and for assaulting the master of Hendon Hall.
His pretensions as to brothership with his prosecutor, and rightful heirship to the Hendon honours and estates, were left contemptuously unnoticed, as being not even worth examination.
He raged and threatened on his way to punishment, but it did no good; he was snatched roughly along by the officers, and got an occasional cuff, besides, for his irreverent conduct.
The King could not pierce through the rabble that swarmed behind; so he was obliged to follow in the rear, remote from his good friend and servant.
The King had been nearly condemned to the stocks himself for being in such bad company, but had been let off with a lecture and a warning, in consideration of his youth.
When the crowd at last halted, he flitted feverishly from point to point around its outer rim, hunting a place to get through; and at last, after a deal of difficulty and delay, succeeded.
There sat his poor henchman in the degrading stocks, the sport and butt of a dirty mob--he, the body servant of the King of England!
Edward had heard the sentence pronounced, but he had not realised the half that it meant.
His anger began to rise as the sense of this new indignity which had been put upon him sank home; it jumped to summer heat, the next moment, when he saw an egg sail through the air and crush itself against Hendon's cheek, and heard the crowd roar its
He sprang across the open circle and confronted the officer in charge, crying-- "For shame!
This is my servant--set him free!
I am the--" "Oh, peace"!
exclaimed Hendon, in a panic, "thou'lt destroy thyself.
Mind him not, officer, he is mad".
"Give thyself no trouble as to the matter of minding him, good man, I have small mind to mind him; but as to teaching him somewhat, to that I am well inclined".
He turned to a subordinate and said, "Give the little fool a taste or two of the lash, to mend his manners".
"Half a dozen will better serve his turn," suggested Sir Hugh, who had ridden up, a moment before, to take a passing glance at the proceedings.
The King was seized.
He did not even struggle, so paralysed was he with the mere thought of the monstrous outrage that was proposed to be inflicted upon his sacred person.
History was already defiled with the record of the scourging of an English king with whips--it was an intolerable reflection that he must furnish a duplicate of that shameful page.
He was in the toils, there was no help for him; he must either take this punishment or beg for its remission.
Hard conditions; he would take the stripes--a king might do that, but a king could not beg.
But meantime, Miles Hendon was resolving the difficulty.
"Let the child go," said he; "ye heartless dogs, do ye not see how young and frail he is?
Let him go--I will take his lashes".
"Marry, a good thought--and thanks for it," said Sir Hugh, his face lighting with a sardonic satisfaction.
"Let the little beggar go, and give this fellow a dozen in his place--an honest dozen, well laid on".
The King was in the act of entering a fierce protest, but Sir Hugh silenced him with the potent remark, "Yes, speak up, do, and free thy mind--only, mark ye, that for each word you utter he shall get six strokes the more".
Hendon was removed from the stocks, and his back laid bare; and whilst the lash was applied the poor little King turned away his face and allowed unroyal tears to channel his cheeks unchecked.
"Ah, brave good heart," he said to himself, "this loyal deed shall never perish out of my memory.
I will not forget it--and neither shall _they_"!
he added, with passion.
Whilst he mused, his appreciation of Hendon's magnanimous conduct grew to greater and still greater dimensions in his mind, and so also did his gratefulness for it.
Presently he said to himself, "Who saves his prince from wounds and possible death--and this he did for me--performs high service; but it is little--it is nothing--oh, less than nothing!
--when 'tis weighed against the act of him who saves his prince from _shame_"!
Hendon made no outcry under the scourge, but bore the heavy blows with soldierly fortitude.
This, together with his redeeming the boy by taking his stripes for him, compelled the respect of even that forlorn and degraded mob that was gathered there; and its gibes and hootings died away, and no sound remained but the sound of the falling blows.
The stillness that pervaded the place, when Hendon found himself once more in the stocks, was in strong contrast with the insulting clamour which had prevailed there so little a while before.
The King came softly to Hendon's side, and whispered in his ear-- "Kings cannot ennoble thee, thou good, great soul, for One who is higher than kings hath done that for thee; but a king can confirm thy nobility to men".
He picked up the scourge from the ground, touched Hendon's bleeding shoulders lightly with it, and whispered, "Edward of England dubs thee Earl"!
Hendon was touched.
The water welled to his eyes, yet at the same time the grisly humour of the situation and circumstances so undermined his gravity that it was all he could do to keep some sign of his inward mirth from showing outside.
To be suddenly hoisted, naked and gory, from the common stocks to the Alpine altitude and splendour of an Earldom, seemed to him the last possibility in the line of the grotesque.
He said to himself, "Now am I finely tinselled, indeed!
The spectre-knight of the Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows is become a spectre-earl--a dizzy flight for a callow wing!
An' this go on, I shall presently be hung like a very maypole with fantastic gauds and make-believe honours.
But I shall value them, all valueless as they are, for the love that doth bestow them.
Better these poor mock dignities of mine, that come unasked, from a clean hand and a right spirit, than real ones bought by servility from grudging and interested power".
The dreaded Sir Hugh wheeled his horse about, and as he spurred away, the living wall divided silently to let him pass, and as silently closed together again.
And so remained; nobody went so far as to venture a remark in favour of the prisoner, or in compliment to him; but no matter--the absence of abuse was a sufficient homage in itself.
A late comer who was not posted as to the present circumstances, and who delivered a sneer at the 'impostor,' and was in the act of following it with a dead cat, was promptly knocked down and kicked out, without any words, and then the deep quiet resumed
CHAPTER XXIX.
To London.
When Hendon's term of service in the stocks was finished, he was released and ordered to quit the region and come back no more.
His sword was restored to him, and also his mule and his donkey.
He mounted and rode off, followed by the King, the crowd opening with quiet respectfulness to let them pass, and then dispersing when they were gone.
Hendon was soon absorbed in thought.
There were questions of high import to be answered.
What should he do?
Whither should he go?
Powerful help must be found somewhere, or he must relinquish his inheritance and remain under the imputation of being an impostor besides.
Where could he hope to find this powerful help?
Where, indeed!
It was a knotty question.
By-and-by a thought occurred to him which pointed to a possibility--the slenderest of slender possibilities, certainly, but still worth considering, for lack of any other that promised anything at all.
He remembered what old Andrews had said about the young King's goodness and his generous championship of the wronged and unfortunate.
Why not go and try to get speech of him and beg for justice?
Ah, yes, but could so fantastic a pauper get admission to the august presence of a monarch?
Never mind--let that matter take care of itself; it was a bridge that would not need to be crossed till he should come to it.
He was an old campaigner, and used to inventing shifts and expedients: no doubt he would be able to find a way.
Yes, he would strike for the capital.
Maybe his father's old friend Sir Humphrey Marlow would help him--'good old Sir Humphrey, Head Lieutenant of the late King's kitchen, or stables, or something'--Miles could not remember just what or which.
Now that he had something to turn his energies to, a distinctly defined object to accomplish, the fog of humiliation and depression which had settled down upon his spirits lifted and blew away, and he raised his head and looked about him.
He was surprised to see how far he had come; the village was away behind him.
The King was jogging along in his wake, with his head bowed; for he, too, was deep in plans and thinkings.
A sorrowful misgiving clouded Hendon's new-born cheerfulness: would the boy be willing to go again to a city where, during all his brief life, he had never known anything but ill-usage and pinching want?
But the question must be asked; it could not be avoided; so Hendon reined up, and called out-- "I had forgotten to inquire whither we are bound.
Thy commands, my liege"!
"To London"!
Hendon moved on again, mightily contented with the answer--but astounded at it too.
The whole journey was made without an adventure of importance.
But it ended with one.
About ten o'clock on the night of the 19th of February they stepped upon London Bridge, in the midst of a writhing, struggling jam of howling and hurrahing people, whose beer-jolly faces stood out strongly in the glare from manifold torches--and at that
So evanescent and unstable are men's works in this world!
--the late good King is but three weeks dead and three days in his grave, and already the adornments which he took such pains to select from prominent people for his noble bridge are falling.
A citizen stumbled over that head, and drove his own head into the back of somebody in front of him, who turned and knocked down the first person that came handy, and was promptly laid out himself by that person's friend.
It was the right ripe time for a free fight, for the festivities of the morrow--Coronation Day--were already beginning; everybody was full of strong drink and patriotism; within five minutes the free fight was occupying a good deal of ground; within ten
By this time Hendon and the King were hopelessly separated from each other and lost in the rush and turmoil of the roaring masses of humanity.
And so we leave them.
CHAPTER XXX.
Tom's progress.
Whilst the true King wandered about the land poorly clad, poorly fed, cuffed and derided by tramps one while, herding with thieves and murderers in a jail another, and called idiot and impostor by all impartially, the mock King Tom Canty enjoyed quite a
When we saw him last, royalty was just beginning to have a bright side for him.
This bright side went on brightening more and more every day: in a very little while it was become almost all sunshine and delightfulness.
He lost his fears; his misgivings faded out and died; his embarrassments departed, and gave place to an easy and confident bearing.
He worked the whipping-boy mine to ever-increasing profit.
He ordered my Lady Elizabeth and my Lady Jane Grey into his presence when he wanted to play or talk, and dismissed them when he was done with them, with the air of one familiarly accustomed to such performances.
It no longer confused him to have these lofty personages kiss his hand at parting.
He came to enjoy being conducted to bed in state at night, and dressed with intricate and solemn ceremony in the morning.
It came to be a proud pleasure to march to dinner attended by a glittering procession of officers of state and gentlemen-at-arms; insomuch, indeed, that he doubled his guard of gentlemen-at-arms, and made them a hundred.
He liked to hear the bugles sounding down the long corridors, and the distant voices responding, "Way for the King"!
He even learned to enjoy sitting in throned state in council, and seeming to be something more than the Lord Protector's mouthpiece.
He liked to receive great ambassadors and their gorgeous trains, and listen to the affectionate messages they brought from illustrious monarchs who called him brother.
O happy Tom Canty, late of Offal Court!
He enjoyed his splendid clothes, and ordered more: he found his four hundred servants too few for his proper grandeur, and trebled them.
The adulation of salaaming courtiers came to be sweet music to his ears.
He remained kind and gentle, and a sturdy and determined champion of all that were oppressed, and he made tireless war upon unjust laws: yet upon occasion, being offended, he could turn upon an earl, or even a duke, and give him a look that would make
Once, when his royal 'sister,' the grimly holy Lady Mary, set herself to reason with him against the wisdom of his course in pardoning so many people who would otherwise be jailed, or hanged, or burned, and reminded him that their august late father's
Did Tom Canty never feel troubled about the poor little rightful prince who had treated him so kindly, and flown out with such hot zeal to avenge him upon the insolent sentinel at the palace-gate?
Yes; his first royal days and nights were pretty well sprinkled with painful thoughts about the lost prince, and with sincere longings for his return, and happy restoration to his native rights and splendours.
But as time wore on, and the prince did not come, Tom's mind became more and more occupied with his new and enchanting experiences, and by little and little the vanished monarch faded almost out of his thoughts; and finally, when he did intrude upon them
Tom's poor mother and sisters travelled the same road out of his mind.
At first he pined for them, sorrowed for them, longed to see them, but later, the thought of their coming some day in their rags and dirt, and betraying him with their kisses, and pulling him down from his lofty place, and dragging him back to penury and
At last they ceased to trouble his thoughts almost wholly.
And he was content, even glad: for, whenever their mournful and accusing faces did rise before him now, they made him feel more despicable than the worms that crawl.
At midnight of the 19th of February, Tom Canty was sinking to sleep in his rich bed in the palace, guarded by his loyal vassals, and surrounded by the pomps of royalty, a happy boy; for tomorrow was the day appointed for his solemn crowning as King of
At that same hour, Edward, the true king, hungry and thirsty, soiled and draggled, worn with travel, and clothed in rags and shreds--his share of the results of the riot--was wedged in among a crowd of people who were watching with deep interest certain
CHAPTER XXXI.
The Recognition procession.
When Tom Canty awoke the next morning, the air was heavy with a thunderous murmur: all the distances were charged with it.
It was music to him; for it meant that the English world was out in its strength to give loyal welcome to the great day.
Presently Tom found himself once more the chief figure in a wonderful floating pageant on the Thames; for by ancient custom the 'recognition procession' through London must start from the Tower, and he was bound thither.
When he arrived there, the sides of the venerable fortress seemed suddenly rent in a thousand places, and from every rent leaped a red tongue of flame and a white gush of smoke; a deafening explosion followed, which drowned the shoutings of the multitude,
Tom Canty, splendidly arrayed, mounted a prancing war-steed, whose rich trappings almost reached to the ground; his 'uncle,' the Lord Protector Somerset, similarly mounted, took place in his rear; the King's Guard formed in single ranks on either side,
Also in the procession, as a special guard of honour through the city, was the Ancient and Honourable Artillery Company--an organisation already three hundred years old at that time, and the only military body in England possessing the privilege (which
It was a brilliant spectacle, and was hailed with acclamations all along the line, as it took its stately way through the packed multitudes of citizens.
The chronicler says, 'The King, as he entered the city, was received by the people with prayers, welcomings, cries, and tender words, and all signs which argue an earnest love of subjects toward their sovereign; and the King, by holding up his glad
To all that wished him well, he gave thanks.
To such as bade "God save his Grace," he said in return, "God save you all"!
and added that "he thanked them with all his heart".
Wonderfully transported were the people with the loving answers and gestures of their King.
' In Fenchurch Street a 'fair child, in costly apparel,' stood on a stage to welcome his Majesty to the city.
The last verse of his greeting was in these words-- 'Welcome, O King!
as much as hearts can think; Welcome, again, as much as tongue can tell,--Welcome to joyous tongues, and hearts that will not shrink: God thee preserve, we pray, and wish thee ever well.
' The people burst forth in a glad shout, repeating with one voice what the child had said.
Tom Canty gazed abroad over the surging sea of eager faces, and his heart swelled with exultation; and he felt that the one thing worth living for in this world was to be a king, and a nation's idol.
Presently he caught sight, at a distance, of a couple of his ragged Offal Court comrades--one of them the lord high admiral in his late mimic court, the other the first lord of the bedchamber in the same pretentious fiction; and his pride swelled higher
Oh, if they could only recognise him now!
What unspeakable glory it would be, if they could recognise him, and realise that the derided mock king of the slums and back alleys was become a real King, with illustrious dukes and princes for his humble menials, and the English world at his feet!
But he had to deny himself, and choke down his desire, for such a recognition might cost more than it would come to: so he turned away his head, and left the two soiled lads to go on with their shoutings and glad adulations, unsuspicious of whom it was
Every now and then rose the cry, "A largess!
a largess"!
and Tom responded by scattering a handful of bright new coins abroad for the multitude to scramble for.
The chronicler says, 'At the upper end of Gracechurch Street, before the sign of the Eagle, the city had erected a gorgeous arch, beneath which was a stage, which stretched from one side of the street to the other.
This was an historical pageant, representing the King's immediate progenitors.
There sat Elizabeth of York in the midst of an immense white rose, whose petals formed elaborate furbelows around her; by her side was Henry VII.
, issuing out of a vast red rose, disposed in the same manner: the hands of the royal pair were locked together, and the wedding-ring ostentatiously displayed.
From the red and white roses proceeded a stem, which reached up to a second stage, occupied by Henry VIII.
, issuing from a red and white rose, with the effigy of the new King's mother, Jane Seymour, represented by his side.
One branch sprang from this pair, which mounted to a third stage, where sat the effigy of Edward VI.
himself, enthroned in royal majesty; and the whole pageant was framed with wreaths of roses, red and white.
' This quaint and gaudy spectacle so wrought upon the rejoicing people, that their acclamations utterly smothered the small voice of the child whose business it was to explain the thing in eulogistic rhymes.
But Tom Canty was not sorry; for this loyal uproar was sweeter music to him than any poetry, no matter what its quality might be.
Whithersoever Tom turned his happy young face, the people recognised the exactness of his effigy's likeness to himself, the flesh and blood counterpart; and new whirlwinds of applause burst forth.
The great pageant moved on, and still on, under one triumphal arch after another, and past a bewildering succession of spectacular and symbolical tableaux, each of which typified and exalted some virtue, or talent, or merit, of the little King's.
'Throughout the whole of Cheapside, from every penthouse and window, hung banners and streamers; and the richest carpets, stuffs, and cloth-of-gold tapestried the streets--specimens of the great wealth of the stores within; and the splendour of this
' "And all these wonders and these marvels are to welcome me--me"!
murmured Tom Canty.
The mock King's cheeks were flushed with excitement, his eyes were flashing, his senses swam in a delirium of pleasure.
At this point, just as he was raising his hand to fling another rich largess, he caught sight of a pale, astounded face, which was strained forward out of the second rank of the crowd, its intense eyes riveted upon him.
A sickening consternation struck through him; he recognised his mother!
and up flew his hand, palm outward, before his eyes--that old involuntary gesture, born of a forgotten episode, and perpetuated by habit.
In an instant more she had torn her way out of the press, and past the guards, and was at his side.
She embraced his leg, she covered it with kisses, she cried, "O my child, my darling"!
lifting toward him a face that was transfigured with joy and love.
The same instant an officer of the King's Guard snatched her away with a curse, and sent her reeling back whence she came with a vigorous impulse from his strong arm.
The words "I do not know you, woman"!
were falling from Tom Canty's lips when this piteous thing occurred; but it smote him to the heart to see her treated so; and as she turned for a last glimpse of him, whilst the crowd was swallowing her from his sight, she seemed so wounded, so
His grandeurs were stricken valueless: they seemed to fall away from him like rotten rags.
The procession moved on, and still on, through ever augmenting splendours and ever augmenting tempests of welcome; but to Tom Canty they were as if they had not been.
He neither saw nor heard.
Royalty had lost its grace and sweetness; its pomps were become a reproach.
Remorse was eating his heart out.
He said, "Would God I were free of my captivity"!
He had unconsciously dropped back into the phraseology of the first days of his compulsory greatness.
The shining pageant still went winding like a radiant and interminable serpent down the crooked lanes of the quaint old city, and through the huzzaing hosts; but still the King rode with bowed head and vacant eyes, seeing only his mother's face and that
"Largess, largess"!
The cry fell upon an unheeding ear.
"Long live Edward of England"!
It seemed as if the earth shook with the explosion; but there was no response from the King.
He heard it only as one hears the thunder of the surf when it is blown to the ear out of a great distance, for it was smothered under another sound which was still nearer, in his own breast, in his accusing conscience--a voice which kept repeating those
The words smote upon the King's soul as the strokes of a funeral bell smite upon the soul of a surviving friend when they remind him of secret treacheries suffered at his hands by him that is gone.
New glories were unfolded at every turning; new wonders, new marvels, sprang into view; the pent clamours of waiting batteries were released; new raptures poured from the throats of the waiting multitudes: but the King gave no sign, and the accusing
By-and-by the gladness in the faces of the populace changed a little, and became touched with a something like solicitude or anxiety: an abatement in the volume of the applause was observable too.
The Lord Protector was quick to notice these things: he was as quick to detect the cause.
He spurred to the King's side, bent low in his saddle, uncovered, and said-- "My liege, it is an ill time for dreaming.
The people observe thy downcast head, thy clouded mien, and they take it for an omen.
Be advised: unveil the sun of royalty, and let it shine upon these boding vapours, and disperse them.
Lift up thy face, and smile upon the people".
So saying, the Duke scattered a handful of coins to right and left, then retired to his place.
The mock King did mechanically as he had been bidden.
His smile had no heart in it, but few eyes were near enough or sharp enough to detect that.
The noddings of his plumed head as he saluted his subjects were full of grace and graciousness; the largess which he delivered from his hand was royally liberal: so the people's anxiety vanished, and the acclamations burst forth again in as mighty a
Still once more, a little before the progress was ended, the Duke was obliged to ride forward, and make remonstrance.
He whispered-- "O dread sovereign!
shake off these fatal humours; the eyes of the world are upon thee".
Then he added with sharp annoyance, "Perdition catch that crazy pauper!
'twas she that hath disturbed your Highness".
The gorgeous figure turned a lustreless eye upon the Duke, and said in a dead voice-- "She was my mother"!
"My God"!
groaned the Protector as he reined his horse backward to his post, "the omen was pregnant with prophecy.
He is gone mad again"!
CHAPTER XXXII.
Coronation Day.
Let us go backward a few hours, and place ourselves in Westminster Abbey, at four o'clock in the morning of this memorable Coronation Day.
We are not without company; for although it is still night, we find the torch-lighted galleries already filling up with people who are well content to sit still and wait seven or eight hours till the time shall come for them to see what they may not hope
Yes, London and Westminster have been astir ever since the warning guns boomed at three o'clock, and already crowds of untitled rich folk who have bought the privilege of trying to find sitting-room in the galleries are flocking in at the entrances
The hours drag along tediously enough.
All stir has ceased for some time, for every gallery has long ago been packed.
We may sit, now, and look and think at our leisure.
We have glimpses, here and there and yonder, through the dim cathedral twilight, of portions of many galleries and balconies, wedged full with other people, the other portions of these galleries and balconies being cut off from sight by intervening
We have in view the whole of the great north transept--empty, and waiting for England's privileged ones.
We see also the ample area or platform, carpeted with rich stuffs, whereon the throne stands.
The throne occupies the centre of the platform, and is raised above it upon an elevation of four steps.
Within the seat of the throne is enclosed a rough flat rock--the stone of Scone--which many generations of Scottish kings sat on to be crowned, and so it in time became holy enough to answer a like purpose for English monarchs.
Both the throne and its footstool are covered with cloth of gold.
Stillness reigns, the torches blink dully, the time drags heavily.
But at last the lagging daylight asserts itself, the torches are extinguished, and a mellow radiance suffuses the great spaces.
All features of the noble building are distinct now, but soft and dreamy, for the sun is lightly veiled with clouds.
At seven o'clock the first break in the drowsy monotony occurs; for on the stroke of this hour the first peeress enters the transept, clothed like Solomon for splendour, and is conducted to her appointed place by an official clad in satins and velvets,
He then places her footstool according to her desire, after which he puts her coronet where it will be convenient to her hand when the time for the simultaneous coroneting of the nobles shall arrive.
By this time the peeresses are flowing in in a glittering stream, and the satin-clad officials are flitting and glinting everywhere, seating them and making them comfortable.
The scene is animated enough now.
There is stir and life, and shifting colour everywhere.
After a time, quiet reigns again; for the peeresses are all come and are all in their places, a solid acre or such a matter, of human flowers, resplendent in variegated colours, and frosted like a Milky Way with diamonds.
There are all ages here: brown, wrinkled, white-haired dowagers who are able to go back, and still back, down the stream of time, and recall the crowning of Richard III.
and the troublous days of that old forgotten age; and there are handsome middle-aged dames; and lovely and gracious young matrons; and gentle and beautiful young girls, with beaming eyes and fresh complexions, who may possibly put on their jewelled
Still, this may not happen, for the hair of all these ladies has been arranged with a special view to the swift and successful lodging of the crown in its place when the signal comes.
We have seen that this massed array of peeresses is sown thick with diamonds, and we also see that it is a marvellous spectacle--but now we are about to be astonished in earnest.
About nine, the clouds suddenly break away and a shaft of sunshine cleaves the mellow atmosphere, and drifts slowly along the ranks of ladies; and every rank it touches flames into a dazzling splendour of many-coloured fires, and we tingle to our
Presently a special envoy from some distant corner of the Orient, marching with the general body of foreign ambassadors, crosses this bar of sunshine, and we catch our breath, the glory that streams and flashes and palpitates about him is so
Let us change the tense for convenience.
The time drifted along--one hour--two hours--two hours and a half; then the deep booming of artillery told that the King and his grand procession had arrived at last; so the waiting multitude rejoiced.
All knew that a further delay must follow, for the King must be prepared and robed for the solemn ceremony; but this delay would be pleasantly occupied by the assembling of the peers of the realm in their stately robes.
These were conducted ceremoniously to their seats, and their coronets placed conveniently at hand; and meanwhile the multitude in the galleries were alive with interest, for most of them were beholding for the first time, dukes, earls, and barons, whose
When all were finally seated, the spectacle from the galleries and all coigns of vantage was complete; a gorgeous one to look upon and to remember.
Now the robed and mitred great heads of the church, and their attendants, filed in upon the platform and took their appointed places; these were followed by the Lord Protector and other great officials, and these again by a steel-clad detachment of the
There was a waiting pause; then, at a signal, a triumphant peal of music burst forth, and Tom Canty, clothed in a long robe of cloth of gold, appeared at a door, and stepped upon the platform.
The entire multitude rose, and the ceremony of the Recognition ensued.
Then a noble anthem swept the Abbey with its rich waves of sound; and thus heralded and welcomed, Tom Canty was conducted to the throne.
The ancient ceremonies went on, with impressive solemnity, whilst the audience gazed; and as they drew nearer and nearer to completion, Tom Canty grew pale, and still paler, and a deep and steadily deepening woe and despondency settled down upon his
At last the final act was at hand.
The Archbishop of Canterbury lifted up the crown of England from its cushion and held it out over the trembling mock-King's head.
In the same instant a rainbow-radiance flashed along the spacious transept; for with one impulse every individual in the great concourse of nobles lifted a coronet and poised it over his or her head--and paused in that attitude.
A deep hush pervaded the Abbey.
At this impressive moment, a startling apparition intruded upon the scene--an apparition observed by none in the absorbed multitude, until it suddenly appeared, moving up the great central aisle.
It was a boy, bareheaded, ill shod, and clothed in coarse plebeian garments that were falling to rags.
He raised his hand with a solemnity which ill comported with his soiled and sorry aspect, and delivered this note of warning-- "I forbid you to set the crown of England upon that forfeited head.
I am the King"!
In an instant several indignant hands were laid upon the boy; but in the same instant Tom Canty, in his regal vestments, made a swift step forward, and cried out in a ringing voice-- "Loose him and forbear!
He _is_ the King"!
A sort of panic of astonishment swept the assemblage, and they partly rose in their places and stared in a bewildered way at one another and at the chief figures in this scene, like persons who wondered whether they were awake and in their senses, or
The Lord Protector was as amazed as the rest, but quickly recovered himself, and exclaimed in a voice of authority-- "Mind not his Majesty, his malady is upon him again--seize the vagabond"!
He would have been obeyed, but the mock-King stamped his foot and cried out-- "On your peril!
Touch him not, he is the King"!
The hands were withheld; a paralysis fell upon the house; no one moved, no one spoke; indeed, no one knew how to act or what to say, in so strange and surprising an emergency.
While all minds were struggling to right themselves, the boy still moved steadily forward, with high port and confident mien; he had never halted from the beginning; and while the tangled minds still floundered helplessly, he stepped upon the platform,
'" The Lord Protector's eye fell sternly upon the new-comer's face; but straightway the sternness vanished away, and gave place to an expression of wondering surprise.
This thing happened also to the other great officers.
They glanced at each other, and retreated a step by a common and unconscious impulse.
The thought in each mind was the same: "What a strange resemblance"!
The Lord Protector reflected a moment or two in perplexity, then he said, with grave respectfulness-- "By your favour, sir, I desire to ask certain questions which--" "I will answer them, my lord".
The Duke asked him many questions about the Court, the late King, the prince, the princesses--the boy answered them correctly and without hesitating.
He described the rooms of state in the palace, the late King's apartments, and those of the Prince of Wales.
It was strange; it was wonderful; yes, it was unaccountable--so all said that heard it.
The tide was beginning to turn, and Tom Canty's hopes to run high, when the Lord Protector shook his head and said-- "It is true it is most wonderful--but it is no more than our lord the King likewise can do".
This remark, and this reference to himself as still the King, saddened Tom Canty, and he felt his hopes crumbling from under him.
"These are not _proofs_," added the Protector.
The tide was turning very fast now, very fast indeed--but in the wrong direction; it was leaving poor Tom Canty stranded on the throne, and sweeping the other out to sea.
The Lord Protector communed with himself--shook his head--the thought forced itself upon him, "It is perilous to the State and to us all, to entertain so fateful a riddle as this; it could divide the nation and undermine the throne".
He turned and said-- "Sir Thomas, arrest this--No, hold"!
His face lighted, and he confronted the ragged candidate with this question-- "Where lieth the Great Seal?
Answer me this truly, and the riddle is unriddled; for only he that was Prince of Wales _can_ so answer!
On so trivial a thing hang a throne and a dynasty"!
It was a lucky thought, a happy thought.
That it was so considered by the great officials was manifested by the silent applause that shot from eye to eye around their circle in the form of bright approving glances.
Yes, none but the true prince could dissolve the stubborn mystery of the vanished Great Seal--this forlorn little impostor had been taught his lesson well, but here his teachings must fail, for his teacher himself could not answer _that_ question--ah, very
And so they nodded invisibly and smiled inwardly with satisfaction, and looked to see this foolish lad stricken with a palsy of guilty confusion.
How surprised they were, then, to see nothing of the sort happen--how they marvelled to hear him answer up promptly, in a confident and untroubled voice, and say-- "There is nought in this riddle that is difficult".
Then, without so much as a by-your-leave to anybody, he turned and gave this command, with the easy manner of one accustomed to doing such things: "My Lord St. John, go you to my private cabinet in the palace--for none knoweth the place better than
The first thing that falleth under your eye will be the Great Seal--fetch it hither".
All the company wondered at this speech, and wondered still more to see the little mendicant pick out this peer without hesitancy or apparent fear of mistake, and call him by name with such a placidly convincing air of having known him all his life.
The peer was almost surprised into obeying.
He even made a movement as if to go, but quickly recovered his tranquil attitude and confessed his blunder with a blush.
Tom Canty turned upon him and said, sharply-- "Why dost thou hesitate?
Hast not heard the King's command?
Go"!
The Lord St. John made a deep obeisance--and it was observed that it was a significantly cautious and non-committal one, it not being delivered at either of the kings, but at the neutral ground about half-way between the two--and took his leave.
Now began a movement of the gorgeous particles of that official group which was slow, scarcely perceptible, and yet steady and persistent--a movement such as is observed in a kaleidoscope that is turned slowly, whereby the components of one splendid
Tom Canty stood almost alone.
Now ensued a brief season of deep suspense and waiting--during which even the few faint hearts still remaining near Tom Canty gradually scraped together courage enough to glide, one by one, over to the majority.
So at last Tom Canty, in his royal robes and jewels, stood wholly alone and isolated from the world, a conspicuous figure, occupying an eloquent vacancy.
Now the Lord St. John was seen returning.
As he advanced up the mid-aisle the interest was so intense that the low murmur of conversation in the great assemblage died out and was succeeded by a profound hush, a breathless stillness, through which his footfalls pulsed with a dull and distant
Every eye was fastened upon him as he moved along.
He reached the platform, paused a moment, then moved toward Tom Canty with a deep obeisance, and said-- "Sire, the Seal is not there"!
A mob does not melt away from the presence of a plague-patient with more haste than the band of pallid and terrified courtiers melted away from the presence of the shabby little claimant of the Crown.
In a moment he stood all alone, without friend or supporter, a target upon which was concentrated a bitter fire of scornful and angry looks.
The Lord Protector called out fiercely-- "Cast the beggar into the street, and scourge him through the town--the paltry knave is worth no more consideration"!
Officers of the guard sprang forward to obey, but Tom Canty waved them off and said-- "Back!
Whoso touches him perils his life"!
The Lord Protector was perplexed in the last degree.
He said to the Lord St. John-- "Searched you well?
--but it boots not to ask that.
It doth seem passing strange.
Little things, trifles, slip out of one's ken, and one does not think it matter for surprise; but how so bulky a thing as the Seal of England can vanish away and no man be able to get track of it again--a massy golden disk--" Tom Canty, with beaming
Was it round?
--and thick?
--and had it letters and devices graved upon it?
--yes?
Oh, _now_ I know what this Great Seal is that there's been such worry and pother about.
An' ye had described it to me, ye could have had it three weeks ago.
Right well I know where it lies; but it was not I that put it there--first".
"Who, then, my liege"?
asked the Lord Protector.
"He that stands there--the rightful King of England.
And he shall tell you himself where it lies--then you will believe he knew it of his own knowledge.
Bethink thee, my King--spur thy memory--it was the last, the very _last_ thing thou didst that day before thou didst rush forth from the palace, clothed in my rags, to punish the soldier that insulted me".
A silence ensued, undisturbed by a movement or a whisper, and all eyes were fixed upon the new-comer, who stood, with bent head and corrugated brow, groping in his memory among a thronging multitude of valueless recollections for one single little elusive
Moment after moment passed--the moments built themselves into minutes--still the boy struggled silently on, and gave no sign.
But at last he heaved a sigh, shook his head slowly, and said, with a trembling lip and in a despondent voice-- "I call the scene back--all of it--but the Seal hath no place in it".
He paused, then looked up, and said with gentle dignity, "My lords and gentlemen, if ye will rob your rightful sovereign of his own for lack of this evidence which he is not able to furnish, I may not stay ye, being powerless.
But--" "Oh, folly, oh, madness, my King"!
cried Tom Canty, in a panic, "wait!
--think!
Do not give up!
--the cause is not lost!
Nor _shall_ be, neither!
List to what I say--follow every word--I am going to bring that morning back again, every hap just as it happened.
We talked--I told you of my sisters, Nan and Bet--ah, yes, you remember that; and about mine old grandam--and the rough games of the lads of Offal Court--yes, you remember these things also; very well, follow me still, you shall recall everything.
You gave me food and drink, and did with princely courtesy send away the servants, so that my low breeding might not shame me before them--ah, yes, this also you remember".
As Tom checked off his details, and the other boy nodded his head in recognition of them, the great audience and the officials stared in puzzled wonderment; the tale sounded like true history, yet how could this impossible conjunction between a prince and
Never was a company of people so perplexed, so interested, and so stupefied, before.
"For a jest, my prince, we did exchange garments.
Then we stood before a mirror; and so alike were we that both said it seemed as if there had been no change made--yes, you remember that.
Then you noticed that the soldier had hurt my hand--look!
here it is, I cannot yet even write with it, the fingers are so stiff.
At this your Highness sprang up, vowing vengeance upon that soldier, and ran towards the door--you passed a table--that thing you call the Seal lay on that table--you snatched it up and looked eagerly about, as if for a place to hide it--your eye caught
--and the good God be thanked"!
exclaimed the ragged claimant, in a mighty excitement.
"Go, my good St. John--in an arm-piece of the Milanese armour that hangs on the wall, thou'lt find the Seal"!
"Right, my King!
right"!
cried Tom Canty; "_Now_ the sceptre of England is thine own; and it were better for him that would dispute it that he had been born dumb!
Go, my Lord St. John, give thy feet wings"!
The whole assemblage was on its feet now, and well-nigh out of its mind with uneasiness, apprehension, and consuming excitement.
On the floor and on the platform a deafening buzz of frantic conversation burst forth, and for some time nobody knew anything or heard anything or was interested in anything but what his neighbour was shouting into his ear, or he was shouting into his
Time--nobody knew how much of it--swept by unheeded and unnoted.
At last a sudden hush fell upon the house, and in the same moment St. John appeared upon the platform, and held the Great Seal aloft in his hand.
Then such a shout went up-- "Long live the true King"!
For five minutes the air quaked with shouts and the crash of musical instruments, and was white with a storm of waving handkerchiefs; and through it all a ragged lad, the most conspicuous figure in England, stood, flushed and happy and proud, in the centre
Then all rose, and Tom Canty cried out-- "Now, O my King, take these regal garments back, and give poor Tom, thy servant, his shreds and remnants again".
The Lord Protector spoke up-- "Let the small varlet be stripped and flung into the Tower".
But the new King, the true King, said-- "I will not have it so.
But for him I had not got my crown again--none shall lay a hand upon him to harm him.
And as for thee, my good uncle, my Lord Protector, this conduct of thine is not grateful toward this poor lad, for I hear he hath made thee a duke"--the Protector blushed--"yet he was not a king; wherefore what is thy fine title worth now?
To-morrow you shall sue to me, _through him_, for its confirmation, else no duke, but a simple earl, shalt thou remain".
Under this rebuke, his Grace the Duke of Somerset retired a little from the front for the moment.
The King turned to Tom, and said kindly--"My poor boy, how was it that you could remember where I hid the Seal when I could not remember it myself"?
"Ah, my King, that was easy, since I used it divers days".
"Used it--yet could not explain where it was"?
"I did not know it was _that_ they wanted.
They did not describe it, your Majesty".
"Then how used you it"?
The red blood began to steal up into Tom's cheeks, and he dropped his eyes and was silent.
"Speak up, good lad, and fear nothing," said the King.
"How used you the Great Seal of England"?
Tom stammered a moment, in a pathetic confusion, then got it out-- "To crack nuts with"!
Poor child, the avalanche of laughter that greeted this nearly swept him off his feet.
But if a doubt remained in any mind that Tom Canty was not the King of England and familiar with the august appurtenances of royalty, this reply disposed of it utterly.
Meantime the sumptuous robe of state had been removed from Tom's shoulders to the King's, whose rags were effectually hidden from sight under it.
Then the coronation ceremonies were resumed; the true King was anointed and the crown set upon his head, whilst cannon thundered the news to the city, and all London seemed to rock with applause.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
Edward as King.
Miles Hendon was picturesque enough before he got into the riot on London Bridge--he was more so when he got out of it.
He had but little money when he got in, none at all when he got out.
The pickpockets had stripped him of his last farthing.
But no matter, so he found his boy.
Being a soldier, he did not go at his task in a random way, but set to work, first of all, to arrange his campaign.
What would the boy naturally do?
Where would he naturally go?
Well--argued Miles--he would naturally go to his former haunts, for that is the instinct of unsound minds, when homeless and forsaken, as well as of sound ones.
Whereabouts were his former haunts?
His rags, taken together with the low villain who seemed to know him and who even claimed to be his father, indicated that his home was in one or another of the poorest and meanest districts of London.
Would the search for him be difficult, or long?
No, it was likely to be easy and brief.
He would not hunt for the boy, he would hunt for a crowd; in the centre of a big crowd or a little one, sooner or later, he should find his poor little friend, sure; and the mangy mob would be entertaining itself with pestering and aggravating the boy,
Then Miles Hendon would cripple some of those people, and carry off his little ward, and comfort and cheer him with loving words, and the two would never be separated any more.
So Miles started on his quest.
Hour after hour he tramped through back alleys and squalid streets, seeking groups and crowds, and finding no end of them, but never any sign of the boy.
This greatly surprised him, but did not discourage him.
To his notion, there was nothing the matter with his plan of campaign; the only miscalculation about it was that the campaign was becoming a lengthy one, whereas he had expected it to be short.
When daylight arrived, at last, he had made many a mile, and canvassed many a crowd, but the only result was that he was tolerably tired, rather hungry and very sleepy.
He wanted some breakfast, but there was no way to get it.
To beg for it did not occur to him; as to pawning his sword, he would as soon have thought of parting with his honour; he could spare some of his clothes--yes, but one could as easily find a customer for a disease as for such clothes.
At noon he was still tramping--among the rabble which followed after the royal procession, now; for he argued that this regal display would attract his little lunatic powerfully.
He followed the pageant through all its devious windings about London, and all the way to Westminster and the Abbey.
He drifted here and there amongst the multitudes that were massed in the vicinity for a weary long time, baffled and perplexed, and finally wandered off, thinking, and trying to contrive some way to better his plan of campaign.
By-and-by, when he came to himself out of his musings, he discovered that the town was far behind him and that the day was growing old.
He was near the river, and in the country; it was a region of fine rural seats--not the sort of district to welcome clothes like his.
It was not at all cold; so he stretched himself on the ground in the lee of a hedge to rest and think.
Drowsiness presently began to settle upon his senses; the faint and far-off boom of cannon was wafted to his ear, and he said to himself, "The new King is crowned," and straightway fell asleep.
He had not slept or rested, before, for more than thirty hours.
He did not wake again until near the middle of the next morning.
He got up, lame, stiff, and half famished, washed himself in the river, stayed his stomach with a pint or two of water, and trudged off toward Westminster, grumbling at himself for having wasted so much time.
Hunger helped him to a new plan, now; he would try to get speech with old Sir Humphrey Marlow and borrow a few marks, and--but that was enough of a plan for the present; it would be time enough to enlarge it when this first stage should be accomplished.
Toward eleven o'clock he approached the palace; and although a host of showy people were about him, moving in the same direction, he was not inconspicuous--his costume took care of that.
He watched these people's faces narrowly, hoping to find a charitable one whose possessor might be willing to carry his name to the old lieutenant--as to trying to get into the palace himself, that was simply out of the question.
Presently our whipping-boy passed him, then wheeled about and scanned his figure well, saying to himself, "An' that is not the very vagabond his Majesty is in such a worry about, then am I an ass--though belike I was that before.
He answereth the description to a rag--that God should make two such would be to cheapen miracles by wasteful repetition.
I would I could contrive an excuse to speak with him".
Miles Hendon saved him the trouble; for he turned about, then, as a man generally will when somebody mesmerises him by gazing hard at him from behind; and observing a strong interest in the boy's eyes, he stepped toward him and said-- "You have just come
"Yes, your worship".
"Know you Sir Humphrey Marlow"?
The boy started, and said to himself, "Lord!
mine old departed father"!
Then he answered aloud, "Right well, your worship".
"Good--is he within"?
"Yes," said the boy; and added, to himself, "within his grave".
"Might I crave your favour to carry my name to him, and say I beg to say a word in his ear"?
"I will despatch the business right willingly, fair sir".
"Then say Miles Hendon, son of Sir Richard, is here without--I shall be greatly bounden to you, my good lad".
The boy looked disappointed.
"The King did not name him so," he said to himself; "but it mattereth not, this is his twin brother, and can give his Majesty news of t'other Sir-Odds-and-Ends, I warrant".
So he said to Miles, "Step in there a moment, good sir, and wait till I bring you word".
Hendon retired to the place indicated--it was a recess sunk in the palace wall, with a stone bench in it--a shelter for sentinels in bad weather.
He had hardly seated himself when some halberdiers, in charge of an officer, passed by.
The officer saw him, halted his men, and commanded Hendon to come forth.
He obeyed, and was promptly arrested as a suspicious character prowling within the precincts of the palace.
Things began to look ugly.
Poor Miles was going to explain, but the officer roughly silenced him, and ordered his men to disarm him and search him.
"God of his mercy grant that they find somewhat," said poor Miles; "I have searched enow, and failed, yet is my need greater than theirs".
Nothing was found but a document.
The officer tore it open, and Hendon smiled when he recognised the 'pot-hooks' made by his lost little friend that black day at Hendon Hall.
The officer's face grew dark as he read the English paragraph, and Miles blenched to the opposite colour as he listened.
"Another new claimant of the Crown"!
cried the officer.
"Verily they breed like rabbits, to-day.
Seize the rascal, men, and see ye keep him fast whilst I convey this precious paper within and send it to the King".
He hurried away, leaving the prisoner in the grip of the halberdiers.
"Now is my evil luck ended at last," muttered Hendon, "for I shall dangle at a rope's end for a certainty, by reason of that bit of writing.
And what will become of my poor lad!
--ah, only the good God knoweth".
By-and-by he saw the officer coming again, in a great hurry; so he plucked his courage together, purposing to meet his trouble as became a man.
The officer ordered the men to loose the prisoner and return his sword to him; then bowed respectfully, and said-- "Please you, sir, to follow me".
Hendon followed, saying to himself, "An' I were not travelling to death and judgment, and so must needs economise in sin, I would throttle this knave for his mock courtesy".
The two traversed a populous court, and arrived at the grand entrance of the palace, where the officer, with another bow, delivered Hendon into the hands of a gorgeous official, who received him with profound respect and led him forward through a great
Miles Hendon was entirely bewildered.
There sat the young King, under a canopy of state, five steps away, with his head bent down and aside, speaking with a sort of human bird of paradise--a duke, maybe.
Hendon observed to himself that it was hard enough to be sentenced to death in the full vigour of life, without having this peculiarly public humiliation added.
He wished the King would hurry about it--some of the gaudy people near by were becoming pretty offensive.
At this moment the King raised his head slightly, and Hendon caught a good view of his face.
The sight nearly took his breath away!
--He stood gazing at the fair young face like one transfixed; then presently ejaculated-- "Lo, the Lord of the Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows on his throne"!
He muttered some broken sentences, still gazing and marvelling; then turned his eyes around and about, scanning the gorgeous throng and the splendid saloon, murmuring, "But these are _real_--verily these are _real_--surely it is not a dream".
He stared at the King again--and thought, "_Is_ it a dream .
.
.
or _is_ he the veritable Sovereign of England, and not the friendless poor Tom o' Bedlam I took him for--who shall solve me this riddle"?
A sudden idea flashed in his eye, and he strode to the wall, gathered up a chair, brought it back, planted it on the floor, and sat down in it!
A buzz of indignation broke out, a rough hand was laid upon him and a voice exclaimed-- "Up, thou mannerless clown!
would'st sit in the presence of the King"?
The disturbance attracted his Majesty's attention, who stretched forth his hand and cried out-- "Touch him not, it is his right"!
The throng fell back, stupefied.
The King went on-- "Learn ye all, ladies, lords, and gentlemen, that this is my trusty and well-beloved servant, Miles Hendon, who interposed his good sword and saved his prince from bodily harm and possible death--and for this he is a knight, by the
Also learn, that for a higher service, in that he saved his sovereign stripes and shame, taking these upon himself, he is a peer of England, Earl of Kent, and shall have gold and lands meet for the dignity.
More--the privilege which he hath just exercised is his by royal grant; for we have ordained that the chiefs of his line shall have and hold the right to sit in the presence of the Majesty of England henceforth, age after age, so long as the crown shall
Molest him not".
Two persons, who, through delay, had only arrived from the country during this morning, and had now been in this room only five minutes, stood listening to these words and looking at the King, then at the scarecrow, then at the King again, in a sort of
These were Sir Hugh and the Lady Edith.
But the new Earl did not see them.
He was still staring at the monarch, in a dazed way, and muttering-- "Oh, body o' me!
_this_ my pauper!
This my lunatic!
This is he whom _I_ would show what grandeur was, in my house of seventy rooms and seven-and-twenty servants!
This is he who had never known aught but rags for raiment, kicks for comfort, and offal for diet!
This is he whom _I_ adopted and would make respectable!
Would God I had a bag to hide my head in"!
Then his manners suddenly came back to him, and he dropped upon his knees, with his hands between the King's, and swore allegiance and did homage for his lands and titles.
Then he rose and stood respectfully aside, a mark still for all eyes--and much envy, too.
Now the King discovered Sir Hugh, and spoke out with wrathful voice and kindling eye-- "Strip this robber of his false show and stolen estates, and put him under lock and key till I have need of him".
The late Sir Hugh was led away.
There was a stir at the other end of the room, now; the assemblage fell apart, and Tom Canty, quaintly but richly clothed, marched down, between these living walls, preceded by an usher.
He knelt before the King, who said-- "I have learned the story of these past few weeks, and am well pleased with thee.
Thou hast governed the realm with right royal gentleness and mercy.
Thou hast found thy mother and thy sisters again?
Good; they shall be cared for--and thy father shall hang, if thou desire it and the law consent.
Know, all ye that hear my voice, that from this day, they that abide in the shelter of Christ's Hospital and share the King's bounty shall have their minds and hearts fed, as well as their baser parts; and this boy shall dwell there, and hold the chief
And for that he hath been a king, it is meet that other than common observance shall be his due; wherefore note this his dress of state, for by it he shall be known, and none shall copy it; and wheresoever he shall come, it shall remind the people that
He hath the throne's protection, he hath the crown's support, he shall be known and called by the honourable title of the King's Ward".
The proud and happy Tom Canty rose and kissed the King's hand, and was conducted from the presence.
He did not waste any time, but flew to his mother, to tell her and Nan and Bet all about it and get them to help him enjoy the great news.
{1} Conclusion.
Justice and retribution.
When the mysteries were all cleared up, it came out, by confession of Hugh Hendon, that his wife had repudiated Miles by his command, that day at Hendon Hall--a command assisted and supported by the perfectly trustworthy promise that if she did not deny
--she did not value it--and she would not repudiate Miles; then the husband said he would spare her life but have Miles assassinated!
This was a different matter; so she gave her word and kept it.
Hugh was not prosecuted for his threats or for stealing his brother's estates and title, because the wife and brother would not testify against him--and the former would not have been allowed to do it, even if she had wanted to.
Hugh deserted his wife and went over to the continent, where he presently died; and by-and-by the Earl of Kent married his relict.
There were grand times and rejoicings at Hendon village when the couple paid their first visit to the Hall.
Tom Canty's father was never heard of again.
The King sought out the farmer who had been branded and sold as a slave, and reclaimed him from his evil life with the Ruffler's gang, and put him in the way of a comfortable livelihood.
He also took that old lawyer out of prison and remitted his fine.
He provided good homes for the daughters of the two Baptist women whom he saw burned at the stake, and roundly punished the official who laid the undeserved stripes upon Miles Hendon's back.
He saved from the gallows the boy who had captured the stray falcon, and also the woman who had stolen a remnant of cloth from a weaver; but he was too late to save the man who had been convicted of killing a deer in the royal forest.
He showed favour to the justice who had pitied him when he was supposed to have stolen a pig, and he had the gratification of seeing him grow in the public esteem and become a great and honoured man.
As long as the King lived he was fond of telling the story of his adventures, all through, from the hour that the sentinel cuffed him away from the palace gate till the final midnight when he deftly mixed himself into a gang of hurrying workmen and so
He said that the frequent rehearsing of the precious lesson kept him strong in his purpose to make its teachings yield benefits to his people; and so, whilst his life was spared he should continue to tell the story, and thus keep its sorrowful spectacles
Miles Hendon and Tom Canty were favourites of the King, all through his brief reign, and his sincere mourners when he died.
The good Earl of Kent had too much sense to abuse his peculiar privilege; but he exercised it twice after the instance we have seen of it before he was called from this world--once at the accession of Queen Mary, and once at the accession of Queen
A descendant of his exercised it at the accession of James I. Before this one's son chose to use the privilege, near a quarter of a century had elapsed, and the 'privilege of the Kents' had faded out of most people's memories; so, when the Kent of that
But the matter was soon explained, and the right confirmed.
The last Earl of the line fell in the wars of the Commonwealth fighting for the King, and the odd privilege ended with him.
Tom Canty lived to be a very old man, a handsome, white-haired old fellow, of grave and benignant aspect.
As long as he lasted he was honoured; and he was also reverenced, for his striking and peculiar costume kept the people reminded that 'in his time he had been royal;' so, wherever he appeared the crowd fell apart, making way for him, and whispering, one
--and so they saluted, and got his kindly smile in return--and they valued it, too, for his was an honourable history.
Yes, King Edward VI.
lived only a few years, poor boy, but he lived them worthily.
More than once, when some great dignitary, some gilded vassal of the crown, made argument against his leniency, and urged that some law which he was bent upon amending was gentle enough for its purpose, and wrought no suffering or oppression which any
I and my people know, but not thou".
The reign of Edward VI.
was a singularly merciful one for those harsh times.
Now that we are taking leave of him, let us try to keep this in our minds, to his credit.
FOOTNOTES AND TWAIN'S NOTES {1} For Mark Twain's note see below under the relevant chapter heading.
{2} He refers to the order of baronets, or baronettes; the barones minores, as distinct from the parliamentary barons--not, it need hardly be said, to the baronets of later creation.
{3} The lords of Kingsale, descendants of De Courcy, still enjoy this curious privilege.
{4} Hume.
{5} Ib.
{6} Leigh Hunt's 'The Town,' p.
408, quotation from an early tourist.
{7} Canting terms for various kinds of thieves, beggars and vagabonds, and their female companions.
{8} From 'The English Rogue.
' London, 1665.
{9} Hume's England.
{10} See Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p.
11.
NOTE 1, Chapter IV.
Christ's Hospital Costume.
It is most reasonable to regard the dress as copied from the costume of the citizens of London of that period, when long blue coats were the common habit of apprentices and serving-men, and yellow stockings were generally worn; the coat fits closely to the
--Timbs' Curiosities of London.
NOTE 2, Chapter IV.
It appears that Christ's Hospital was not originally founded as a _school_; its object was to rescue children from the streets, to shelter, feed, clothe them.
--Timbs' Curiosities of London.
NOTE 3, Chapter V. The Duke of Norfolk's Condemnation commanded.
The King was now approaching fast towards his end; and fearing lest Norfolk should escape him, he sent a message to the Commons, by which he desired them to hasten the Bill, on pretence that Norfolk enjoyed the dignity of Earl Marshal, and it was necessary
--Hume's History of England, vol.
iii.
p.
307.
NOTE 4, Chapter VII.
It was not till the end of this reign (Henry VIII.
) that any salads, carrots, turnips, or other edible roots were produced in England.
The little of these vegetables that was used was formerly imported from Holland and Flanders.
Queen Catherine, when she wanted a salad, was obliged to despatch a messenger thither on purpose.
--Hume's History of England, vol.
iii.
p.
314.
NOTE 5, Chapter VIII.
Attainder of Norfolk.
The House of Peers, without examining the prisoner, without trial or evidence, passed a Bill of Attainder against him and sent it down to the Commons .
.
.
The obsequious Commons obeyed his (the King's) directions; and the King, having affixed the Royal assent to the Bill by commissioners, issued orders for the execution of Norfolk on the morning of January 29 (the next day).
--Hume's History of England, vol iii.
p 306.
NOTE 6, Chapter X. The Loving-cup.
The loving-cup, and the peculiar ceremonies observed in drinking from it, are older than English history.
It is thought that both are Danish importations.
As far back as knowledge goes, the loving-cup has always been drunk at English banquets.
Tradition explains the ceremonies in this way.
In the rude ancient times it was deemed a wise precaution to have both hands of both drinkers employed, lest while the pledger pledged his love and fidelity to the pledgee, the pledgee take that opportunity to slip a dirk into him!
NOTE 7, Chapter XI.
The Duke of Norfolk's narrow Escape.
Had Henry VIII.
survived a few hours longer, his order for the duke's execution would have been carried into effect.
'But news being carried to the Tower that the King himself had expired that night, the lieutenant deferred obeying the warrant; and it was not thought advisable by the Council to begin a new reign by the death of the greatest nobleman in the kingdom, who
'--Hume's History of England, vol.
iii, p.
307.
NOTE 8, Chapter XIV.
The Whipping-boy.
James I. and Charles II.
had whipping-boys, when they were little fellows, to take their punishment for them when they fell short in their lessons; so I have ventured to furnish my small prince with one, for my own purposes.
NOTES to Chapter XV.
Character of Hertford.
The young King discovered an extreme attachment to his uncle, who was, in the main, a man of moderation and probity.
--Hume's History of England, vol.
iii, p324.
But if he (the Protector) gave offence by assuming too much state, he deserves great praise on account of the laws passed this session, by which the rigour of former statutes was much mitigated, and some security given to the freedom of the constitution.
All laws were repealed which extended the crime of treason beyond the statute of the twenty-fifth of Edward III.
; all laws enacted during the late reign extending the crime of felony; all the former laws against Lollardy or heresy, together with the statute of the Six Articles.
None were to be accused for words, but within a month after they were spoken.
By these repeals several of the most rigorous laws that ever had passed in England were annulled; and some dawn, both of civil and religious liberty, began to appear to the people.
A repeal also passed of that law, the destruction of all laws, by which the King's proclamation was made of equal force with a statute.
--Ibid.
vol.
iii.
p.
339.
Boiling to Death.
In the reign of Henry VIII.
poisoners were, by Act of Parliament, condemned to be _boiled to death_.
This Act was repealed in the following reign.
In Germany, even in the seventeenth century, this horrible punishment was inflicted on coiners and counterfeiters.
Taylor, the Water Poet, describes an execution he witnessed in Hamburg in 1616.
The judgment pronounced against a coiner of false money was that he should '_be boiled to death in oil_; not thrown into the vessel at once, but with a pulley or rope to be hanged under the armpits, and then let down into the oil _by degrees_; first the
'--Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p.
13.
The Famous Stocking Case.
A woman and her daughter, _nine years old_, were hanged in Huntingdon for selling their souls to the devil, and raising a storm by pulling off their stockings!
--Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p.
20.
NOTE 10, Chapter XVII.
Enslaving.
So young a King and so ignorant a peasant were likely to make mistakes; and this is an instance in point.
This peasant was suffering from this law _by anticipation_; the King was venting his indignation against a law which was not yet in existence; for this hideous statute was to have birth in this little King's _own reign_.
However, we know, from the humanity of his character, that it could never have been suggested by him.
NOTES to Chapter XXIII.
Death for Trifling Larcenies.
When Connecticut and New Haven were framing their first codes, larceny above the value of twelve pence was a capital crime in England--as it had been since the time of Henry I.--Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p.
17.
The curious old book called The English Rogue makes the limit thirteen pence ha'penny: death being the portion of any who steal a thing 'above the value of thirteen pence ha'penny.
' NOTES to Chapter XXVII.
From many descriptions of larceny the law expressly took away the benefit of clergy: to steal a horse, or a _hawk_, or woollen cloth from the weaver, was a hanging matter.
So it was to kill a deer from the King's forest, or to export sheep from the kingdom.
--Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p.
13.
William Prynne, a learned barrister, was sentenced (long after Edward VI.
's time) to lose both his ears in the pillory, to degradation from the bar, a fine of 3,000 pounds, and imprisonment for life.
Three years afterwards he gave new offence to Laud by publishing a pamphlet against the hierarchy.
He was again prosecuted, and was sentenced to lose _what remained of his ears_, to pay a fine of 5,000 pounds, to be _branded on both his cheeks_ with the letters S. L. (for Seditious Libeller), and to remain in prison for life.
The severity of this sentence was equalled by the savage rigour of its execution.
--Ibid.
p.
12.
NOTES to Chapter XXXIII.
Christ's Hospital, or Bluecoat School, 'the noblest institution in the world.
' The ground on which the Priory of the Grey Friars stood was conferred by Henry VIII.
on the Corporation of London (who caused the institution there of a home for poor boys and girls).
Subsequently, Edward VI.
caused the old Priory to be properly repaired, and founded within it that noble establishment called the Bluecoat School, or Christ's Hospital, for the _education_ and maintenance of orphans and the children of indigent persons .
.
.
Edward would not let him (Bishop Ridley) depart till the letter was written (to the Lord Mayor), and then charged him to deliver it himself, and signify his special request and commandment that no time might be lost in proposing what was convenient, and
The work was zealously undertaken, Ridley himself engaging in it; and the result was the founding of Christ's Hospital for the education of poor children.
(The King endowed several other charities at the same time.
) "Lord God," said he, "I yield Thee most hearty thanks that Thou hast given me life thus long to finish this work to the glory of Thy name"!
That innocent and most exemplary life was drawing rapidly to its close, and in a few days he rendered up his spirit to his Creator, praying God to defend the realm from Papistry.
--J.
Heneage Jesse's London: its Celebrated Characters and Places.
In the Great Hall hangs a large picture of King Edward VI.
seated on his throne, in a scarlet and ermined robe, holding the sceptre in his left hand, and presenting with the other the Charter to the kneeling Lord Mayor.
By his side stands the Chancellor, holding the seals, and next to him are other officers of state.
Bishop Ridley kneels before him with uplifted hands, as if supplicating a blessing on the event; whilst the Aldermen, etc.
, with the Lord Mayor, kneel on both sides, occupying the middle ground of the picture; and lastly, in front, are a double row of boys on one side and girls on the other, from the master and matron down to the boy and girl who have stepped forward from
--Timbs' Curiosities of London, p.
98.
Christ's Hospital, by ancient custom, possesses the privilege of addressing the Sovereign on the occasion of his or her coming into the City to partake of the hospitality of the Corporation of London.
--Ibid.
The Dining Hall, with its lobby and organ-gallery, occupies the entire storey, which is 187 feet long, 51 feet wide, and 47 feet high; it is lit by nine large windows, filled with stained glass on the south side; and is, next to Westminster Hall, the
Here the boys, now about 800 in number, dine; and here are held the 'Suppings in Public,' to which visitors are admitted by tickets issued by the Treasurer and by the Governors of Christ's Hospital.
The tables are laid with cheese in wooden bowls, beer in wooden piggins, poured from leathern jacks, and bread brought in large baskets.
The official company enter; the Lord Mayor, or President, takes his seat in a state chair made of oak from St. Catherine's Church, by the Tower; a hymn is sung, accompanied by the organ; a 'Grecian,' or head boy, reads the prayers from the pulpit,
After prayer the supper commences, and the visitors walk between the tables.
At its close the 'trade-boys' take up the baskets, bowls, jacks, piggins, and candlesticks, and pass in procession, the bowing to the Governors being curiously formal.
This spectacle was witnessed by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert in 1845.
Among the more eminent Bluecoat boys are Joshua Barnes, editor of Anacreon and Euripides; Jeremiah Markland, the eminent critic, particularly in Greek Literature; Camden, the antiquary; Bishop Stillingfleet; Samuel Richardson, the novelist; Thomas
No boy is admitted before he is seven years old, or after he is nine; and no boy can remain in the school after he is fifteen, King's boys and 'Grecians' alone excepted.
There are about 500 Governors, at the head of whom are the Sovereign and the Prince of Wales.
The qualification for a Governor is payment of 500 pounds.
--Ibid.
GENERAL NOTE.
One hears much about the 'hideous Blue Laws of Connecticut,' and is accustomed to shudder piously when they are mentioned.
There are people in America--and even in England!
--who imagine that they were a very monument of malignity, pitilessness, and inhumanity; whereas in reality they were about the first _sweeping departure from judicial atrocity_ which the 'civilised' world had seen.
This humane and kindly Blue Law Code, of two hundred and forty years ago, stands all by itself, with ages of bloody law on the further side of it, and a century and three-quarters of bloody English law on _this_ side of it.
There has never been a time--under the Blue Laws or any other--when above _fourteen_ crimes were punishable by death in Connecticut.
But in England, within the memory of men who are still hale in body and mind, _two hundred and twenty-three_ crimes were punishable by death!
{10} These facts are worth knowing--and worth thinking about, too.